AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Shetland
Islands
■’MM
Orkney
Islands
Duncansby
Head
Cape Wrath
Land over 400 m
Rivers
Loch Ness Cairngorm
Mts- A 1,311m
Boundaries
between countries
Ben Nevis
<1,343 m
Lammermuir
Hills
Tweed
Cheviot
Hills/'
Arran
Sperrin
Mountains
Cumbrian
Scafell tPike
A 978 m
Mountains
imborough Head
Yorkshire
Wolds
Morecambe
Bay
Anglesey
Lincolnshire
Wolds
Cheshire
Plain
Snowdon
1,085 m
Chiltern
Hills
A255 m
A Brecon
Beacons
Berkshire
Downs
North Forela'
North
Kennet
Hampshire
Downs
Downs
Bristol Channel
Mendip
Hills ,
Lundy
Hardand 1
Salisbury
Plain
294 m The Weald
Downs
N. Dorset
Downs
Dartmoor
Bodmin
Moor
English Channel
0 20 40 60 miles
Edinburgh
Tyneside
lottingham
Leicester
West'
Midlam
Coventry
Luton
Aldershot
Population density
and major urban areas
Population density
(persons per sq km)
over 750
450-749
250-449
150-249
75-149
under 75
Major urban areas
over 500,000
population
200,000-499,000
population
100,000-199,000
population
(as of 1981 census)
Orkney
Islands
Shetland
Islands
Glasgow
eesside
Belfast
Hull
®
Blackpool® %es?n
^Southend
Swanse
breater
London
®
Bournemouth
Medway Towns
The density of population is shown by county
for England and Wales, by region for Scotland
and by Education and Library Board areas for
Northern Ireland.
Urban areas are defined as continuous
built-up sites; they include transport
and mining and quarrying areas and
any areas completely surrounded
by built-up sites. Most of the
named urban areas are
designated by the
largest town
within them. Whif
vPlymouth
Southampton
® j
Portsmouth Bri9h,on
20 40 60 miles
AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
luarMM
AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Prepared by the Central Office of Information
LONDON: HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
HMSO
BOOKS
HMSO publications are available from:
HMSO Publications Centre
(Mail and telephone orders only)
PO Box 276, London SW8 5DT
Telephone orders 01-873 9090
General enquiries 01-873 0011
(queuing system in operation for both numbers)
HMSO Bookshops
49 High Holborn, London, WC1V 6HB 01-873 0011 (Counter service only)
258 Broad Street, Birmingham, B1 2HE 021-643 3740
Southey House, 33 Wine Street, Bristol, BS1 2BQ (0272) 264306
$-21 Princess Street, Manchester, M60 8AS 061-834 7201
80 Chichester Street, Belfast, BT1 4JY (0232) 238451
71 Lothian Road, Edinburgh, EH3 9AZ 031-228 4181
HMSO's Accredited Agents
(see Yellow Pages)
and through good booksellers
United States of America & Canada
UNIPUB, 4611/F Assembly Drive
Lanham, MD 20706-4391
© Crown copyright 1989
First published 1989
h R y
-<V ' ^
ISBN 0 11 70138 70
Contents
Page
Introduction Viii
1 Land and People 1
Introduction 1
The Four Lands 5
The Social Framework 20
2 Government 33
The Monarchy 33
Parliament 37
The Privy Council 4g
Her Majesty’s Government 49
Government Departments 52
The Civil Service 50
Local Government g3
Fire Services 70
3 Overseas Relations 73
Membership of the European Community 75
The Commonwealth g3
International Peace and Security g7
Britain and the United Nations 9 \
Other International Organisations 93
Development Co-operation 94
4 Defence 99
Defence Procurement 106
Civil Defence !07
5 Justice and the Law 109
The Law 109
Criminal Justice 109
Civil Justice 129
Administration of the Law 133
6 Social Welfare 137
National Health Service 137
Personal Social Services 151
Voluntary Social Services 155
Social Security 137
7 Education lg7
The Youth Service 1 gg
8 The Environment Igg
Planning lg9
Inner Cities 102
Housing 196
Conservation 202
Control of Pollution 208
9 Religion 215
10 National Economy
221
11 Framework of Industry
231
12 Manufacturing and Service Industries
Manufacturing
Construction
Service Industries
255
255
273
275
13 Energy and Natural Resources
Energy
Non-fuel Minerals
Water
283
283
299
301
14 Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
Agriculture
Fisheries
Forestry
305
305
315
317
15 Transport and Communications
Inland Transport
Ports
Shipping
Civil Aviation
Communications
319
319
329
331
333
337
16 Employment
17 Public Finance
18 Banking and Financial Institutions
19 Overseas Trade
20 Promotion of Science and Technology
343
361
373
387
397
21 Promotion of the Arts
22 The Press 425
23 Television and Radio 435
24 Sport and Recreation 445
Appendix 1 461
Currency 461
Metric Conversions for British Weights and Measures 461
Thermometrical Table 462
Bank and Public Holidays in Britain, 1989 462
Appendix 2 463
Guide to Sources 463
Index
465
Diagrams
Availability of Certain Durable Goods 27
The Royal Family 34
Planned Receipts and Expenditure of General Government 1988-89 369
Geographical Distribution of Trade 1987 389
Maps
Physical features
Population density and major urban areas
Major conservation and recreation areas
Motorways and major trunk roads
Britain
The European Community
Urban Policy Initiatives
The Assisted Areas
Oil
Gas
Coal
Electricity
Some Minerals Produced in Britain
Main Railway Passenger Routes
>. endpapers
6
75
194-5
251
286
289
292
294
300
326
between pp 40 and 41
between pp 136 and 137
between pp 296 and 297
between pp 392 and 393
Photographs
The Monarchy
Britain’s Uplands
Natural History
Pollution Control
Urban Regeneration
Conservation and Restoration
The Channel Tunnel
Developments in Aerospace
Computers in Manufacturing
Advances in Health Care
Overseas Construction and Aid
Science and Technology
Acknowledgments for use of photographs appear on p 484.
Introduction
Britain 1989 is the fortieth official handbook in the series; it has been
prepared by the Central Office of Information on behalf of the Foreign
and Commonwealth Office. The handbook is widely known as an
established work of reference and is the mainstay of the reference
facilities provided by British information services in many countries. It
is sold by Her Majesty’s Stationery Office throughout the world.
Britain 1989 describes many features in the life of the country,
including the workings of the Government and other major institu¬
tions. It does not attempt an analytical approach to current events.
Care should be taken when studying British statistics to note whether
they refer to England, to England and Wales (considered together for
many administrative and other purposes), to Great Britain, which
comprises England, Wales and Scotland, or to the United Kingdom
(which is the same as Britain, that is, Great Britain and Northern
Ireland) as a whole.
The factual and statistical information in Britain 1989 is compiled with
the co-operation of other government departments and agencies, and of
many other organisations. Sources of more detailed and more topical
information (including statistics) are mentioned in the text and a guide
to official sources is given in Appendix 2.
The text, generally, is based on information available up to August/
September 1988.
Reference Services
Overseas Publications and Foreign Languages
Central Office of Information, London.
1 Land and People
Physical
Features
Introduction
Britain comprises Great Britain (England, Wales and Scotland) and Northern
Ireland, and is one of the 12 member states of the European Community. Its full
name is the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Britain constitutes the greater part of the British Isles, a geographical term for a
group of islands lying off the north-west coast of mainland Europe. The largest
of the islands is Great Britain (the mainlands of England, Wales and Scotland).
The next largest comprises Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic. Off the
southern coast of England is the Isle of Wight and off the extreme south west are
the Isles of Scilly; off north Wales is Anglesey. Western Scotland is fringed by the
large archipelago known as the Hebrides and to the north east of the Scottish
mainland are Orkney and Shetland. All these have administrative ties with the
mainland, but the Isle of Man in the Irish Sea and the Channel Islands between
Great Britain and France are largely self-governing, and are not part of the
United Kingdom.
With an area of some 244,100 sq km (94,250 sq miles), Britain is about the
same size as the Federal Republic of Germany, New Zealand or Uganda, and half
the size of France. It is just under 1,000 km (some 600 miles) from the south
coast to the extreme north of Scotland and just under 500 km (some 300 miles)
across in the widest part. No place in Britain is more than 120 km (75 miles)
from tidal water. The prime meridian of 0° passes through the old observatory at
Greenwich (London).
The seas surrounding the British Isles are shallow, usually less than 90 m (50
fathoms or 300 ft), because the islands lie on the continental shelf. To the north
west along the edge of the shelf the sea floor plunges abruptly from 180 m (some
600 ft) to 900 m (about 3,000 ft). The shallow waters are important because
they provide breeding grounds for fish. The warming effect on the air of the
North Atlantic current is magnified as its water spreads across the shelf.
The climate is generally mild and temperate. The prevailing winds are
south-westerly and the weather from day to day is mainly influenced by
depressions moving eastwards across the Atlantic. It is subject to frequent
changes but to few extremes of temperature. It is rarely above 32°C (90°F) or
below -10°C (14°F). Near sea-level in the west the mean annual temperature
ranges from 8 C (46 F) in the Hebrides to 11°C (52°F) in the extreme south west
of England; latitude for latitude it is slightly lower in the east. The mean monthly
temperature in the extreme north, at Lerwick (Shetland), ranges from 3°C (37°F)
during the winter (December, January and February) to 1 TC (52°F) during the
summer (June, July and August); the corresponding figures for the Isle of
Wight, in the extreme south, are 5°C (41°F) and 16°C (61°F). The average annual
rainfall is more than 1,600 mm (over 60 inches) in the mountainous areas of the
west and north but less than 800 mm (30 inches) over central and eastern parts.
Rain is fairly well distributed throughout the year, but, on average, March to
2
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Historical
Outline
England and
Wales
June are the driest months and September to January the wettest. The
distribution of sunshine shows a general decrease from south to north, a
decrease from the coast inland, and a decrease with altitude. During May, June
and July (the months of longest daylight) the mean daily duration of sunshine
varies from five hours in northern Scotland to eight hours in the Isle of Wight;
during the months of shortest daylight (November, December and January)
sunshine is at a minimum, with an average of an hour a day in northern
Scotland and two hours a day on the south coast of England.
The word Britain derives from Greek and Latin names probably stemming from
a Celtic original, which is also reflected in the name of the region of
north-western France (‘Brittany’ in English) settled by migrants from Britain in
the fifth and sixth centuries ad. Although, in the prehistoric time-scale, the
Celts were relatively late arrivals in the British Isles (following cultures which
had produced such notable monuments as the stone circles of Avebury and
Stonehenge) it is only with them that Britain emerges into recorded history, and
the term Celtic is often used rather generally to distinguish the early inhabitants
of the British Isles from the later Anglo-Saxon invaders.
Following sorties by Julius Caesar in 55 and 54 bc, Britain was occupied by
the Romans in the first century ad and an ordered civilisation was established
under their rule for two or three hundred years except in the territory north of
Hadrian’s Wall (the wall across northern England built on the orders of Hadrian,
Roman Emperor from ad 117 to 138) and in some western areas. Christian
missionaries arrived not only in Roman Britain but also in Scotland and Ireland.
The final Roman withdrawal in the fifth century, however, followed a long period
of increasing disorder during which there began raids on the island from
northern Europe—mainly by peoples traditionally described as Angles (from
Schleswig), Saxons and Jutes. It is from the Angles that the name England
derives. In the following two centuries the raids turned into settlement and the
establishment of a number of small kingdoms (with the Britons, or Celts,
maintaining an independent existence in the areas now known as Wales and
Cornwall). Among these kingdoms, more powerful ones which claimed over¬
lordship over the whole country were established, first in the north (North¬
umbria), then in the central area (Mercia) and finally in the south (Wessex).
However, further raids and settlement by the Vikings from Scandinavia
occurred, although in the tenth century the Wessex dynasty defeated the
invading Danes and established a wide-ranging authority in England. A second
wave of Danish invasions, however, led to the establishment of a Danish dynasty
in England between 1017 and 1042, when the Wessex line was restored.
The last successful invasion of England took place following a disputed
succession when Duke William of Normandy (a duchy established by the Vikings
and owing only nominal allegiance to the French king) enforced his claims by
defeating the English at the Battle of Hastings in 1066. There was considerable
settlement by Normans and others from France, French became the language of
the nobility for the next three centuries and the legal and, to some extent, social
structure was influenced by that which prevailed across the Channel. The
monarchy established by William and his successors was, in general, more
effective than its predecessors and it began to establish its authority over
increasingly wide areas of the British Isles.
Wales had remained a Celtic stronghold, although often within the English
sphere of influence. Conflict was frequent within Wales between the various
princes and unity was achieved only temporarily. However, with the death in
battle in 1282 of Prince Llywelyn, Edward I launched a successful campaign to
bring Wales under English rule, with Wales being placed under the same laws as
LAND AND PEOPLE
3
Scotland
Ireland
England for the most part, and Edward’s heir being created Prince of Wales in
1301, a title which has subsequently been bestowed upon the eldest son of the
Sovereign. Continued strong Welsh national feeling was indicated by the rising
led by Owain Glyndwr at the beginning of the fifteenth century, but a new
dimension to the situation was provided by the accession to the English throne
in 1485 of Henry VII of the Welsh House of Tudor. The Acts of Union of 1536 and
1542 united England and Wales administratively, politically and legally.
Hadrian’s Wall had not proved to be an insurmountable barrier between the
Romans and their northern neighbours, and expeditions both by the Romans
into Scotland and by the Scottish people known as Piets into England took
place. In the sixth century the Scots from Ireland or ‘Scotia’ settled in the area of
Scotland now known as Argyll. Lothian was English in population, and Welsh
Britons moved north from the invading English into Strathclyde. A united
kingdom emerged in the ninth century while Scotland, like England, was
endeavouring to defend itself against the Vikings. The establishment of a
powerful monarchy in England, however, especially after the Norman Conquest
in the eleventh centuiy, was to pose an intermittent but considerable threat to
Scottish independence throughout the Middle Ages and well into the sixteenth
century.
The eventual unification of the crowns reflected the fact that, as a result of the
Reformation (see p 5), old national antagonisms had become less important
than religious differences. Elizabeth 1 died in 1603 and as she had no children
was succeeded by the next in line to the throne, the Protestant James Stuart,
James VI of Scotland, who ascended the English throne as James I of England.
England, Wales and Scotland were henceforth known as Great Britain. Apart
from the union of the monarchies, however, England and Scotland remained
separate during the seventeenth century, except for an enforced unification by
Oliver Cromwell early in the period of the Commonwealth (1649-60) after he had
defeated royalist forces in Scotland. By the beginning of the following century
political and economic arguments for a closer union were apparent in both
countries. Eventually, in 1707, both sides agreed on the formation of a single
parliament for Great Britain although Scotland retained its own system of law
and church settlement. The Union was put under strain when Queen Anne died
in 1714 and George, Elector of Hanover (descended from a daughter of James I),
succeeded the Stuarts on the British throne. ‘Jacobite’ rebellions, aiming to
restore the Stuarts to the British throne, took place in 1715 and 1745 but were
unsuccessful.
In Ireland, out of a patchwork of Celtic and pre-Celtic peoples similar to that in
Britain, a number of kingdoms had emerged before the Christian era; any
supremacy established by one over the others in the following 1,000 years was of
a temporary nature. Ireland, however, did not escape the incursions of the
Vikings, who dominated the country during the tenth century.
In 1169 Henry II of England launched an invasion of Ireland, the overlordship
of which he had been granted by the Pope, who was anxious to bring the Irish
church into full obedience to Rome. Although a large part of the country came
under the control of Anglo-Norman magnates, little direct authority was
exercised from England during the Middle Ages.
The Tudor monarchs showed a much greater tendency to intervene in Ireland.
Henry VIII’s assumption of the title of King of Ireland in 1541 arose from his
desire to apply the Reformation settlement and thereafter the religious issue was
to produce far-reaching consequences. The determination to establish royal
authority in Ireland was strengthened during the reign of Elizabeth I by the fear
that the country might be used by Philip of Spain in his efforts to subjugate
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
England, and a series of campaigns was waged against Irish insurgents. The
main focus of the resistance was the northern province of Ulster and, with its
collapse in 1607, Ulster became an area of settlement by immigrants from
Scotland and England. (There was settlement by immigrants elsewhere in
Ireland, though on a lesser scale.)
The English civil war of 1642 to 1652 led to further risings in Ireland which
were crushed by Cromwell. The restoration of the monarchy in 1660 was
followed by the accession of the Roman Catholic James II to the throne in 1685,
and there was more fighting after his deposition three years later in favour of his
nephew and son-in-law, the Protestant William of Orange and his wife Mary.
During most of the eighteenth century there was an uneasy peace and towards
its end various efforts were made by British governments to achieve stability. In
1782 the Irish Parliament (dating from medieval times) was given legislative
independence; the only constitutional tie with Great Britain was the Crown. The
Parliament represented, however, only the privileged Anglo-Irish minority, who
had obtained possession of most of the agricultural land, and Catholics were
excluded from it. Against the background of an abortive rebellion in 1798 and
the prospect of intervention by France (with which Great Britain was at war
between 1793 and 1815) the Irish Parliament was induced to vote for union with
what, from 1801, was to be the Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Ireland.
The ‘Irish question’ continued as one of the major problems of British politics
during the nineteenth century. In 1886 the Liberal Government introduced a
Home Rule Bill which would have given an Irish Parliament authority over most
internal matters while reserving to Britain control over external affairs. This led
to a split in the Liberal Party and the failure of the Bill. It was not until 1914 that
Home Rule was enacted by the Government of Ireland Act. Its implementation
was, however, prevented both by the threat of armed resistance on the part of
the Protestant majority in Ulster and by the outbreak of the first world war.
A nationalist uprising in Dublin in 1916 was suppressed, but with the end of
the first world war a guerrilla force known as the Irish Republican Army (IRA)
began operations against the British administration. In 1921 a settlement was
reached under which six of the nine counties of the province of Ulster received
their own Parliament, but remained represented in and subject to the supreme
authority of the British Parliament, while the remainder of Ireland as the Irish
Free State (later to become the Irish Republic) became a self-governing state
outside the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Channel Islands Although the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man are not part of the United
and Isle of Man Kingdom, they have a special relationship with it because of the antiquity of
their connection with the Crown. The Channel Islands were integrated into the
Duchy of Normandy in the tenth and eleventh centuries and have been
dependent territories of the Crown since the Norman Conquest. The Isle of Man
was under the nominal sovereignty of Norway until 1266 when it was ceded to
Scotland, subsequently passing to the Earls of Derby for a period but eventually
coming under the direct administration of the Crown in 1765. Today the
territories have their own legislative assemblies and systems of local administra¬
tion and of law, and their own courts. The British Government is responsible
for their defence, their international relations and, ultimately, their good
government.
The position of the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man in the European
Community is broadly that the islands remain outside the Community except
for customs purposes and for certain aspects of the Common Agricultural Policy.
The residents benefit from Community provisions relating to the free movement
of people or services only if they have close ties with Britain.
LAND AND PEOPLE
5
ENGLAND
The Four Lands
In the following pages there are brief descriptions of a number of aspects of
social, economic and political life for each of the four countries, England, Wales,
Scotland and Northern Ireland, with some additional material on the political
situation in Northern Ireland. (Statistics on the four lands are contained in
Table 1.)
Table 1: General Statistics
England Wales Scotland
Northern
Ireland
United
Kingdom
Population
(’000, mid-1987 estimate)
Area
(sq km)
Population density
(persons per sq km)
Gross domestic product
(£ per head, 1986)
Employees in
employment
(’000, June 1987)
Percentage of
employees in:
(June 1987)
agriculture, forestry and
fishing
energy and water supply
manufacturing
construction
service industries
Unemployment rate
(per cent, seasonally
adjusted, June 1988)
47,407 2,836 5,112
130,439 20,768 78,772
363
18,568
1- 4
2- 2
23-9
4-3
68-2
7-7
137
5,741 4,795
863
2- 4
3- 8
23-9
4- 9
650
10-9
65
5,234
1,886
1-6
2-4
20-9
7-3
67-8
11-5
1,575
14,121
112
3,889
485
40
1-8
20-7
51
68-5
16-7
56,930
244,100
233
5,597
21,802
1- 5
2- 3
23-6
4-6
68-1
8-4
England is predominantly a lowland country. There are upland regions in the
north (the Pennine Chain, the Cumbrian mountains and the Yorkshire
moorlands) and in the south west in Devon and Cornwall. For the most part,
however, the country is undulating or flat and, in the south, crossed by low
ranges of hills including the Cotswolds and the Kent and Sussex Downs. The
greatest concentrations of population are in the London and Thames estuary
areas, the West Yorkshire and north-west industrial cities, the Midlands
conurbation around Birmingham, the north-east conurbations on the rivers
Tyne and Tees, and along the Channel coast.
The Church of England, which was separated from the Roman Catholic
Church at the Reformation, is the Established Church in England; the
Sovereign must always be a member of the Church and appoints its two
archbishops and 42 other diocesan bishops.
The English language is descended from the German tongue spoken by the
Britain
Shetland Islands
Orkney Islands
SCOTLAND''
50
100 150 km
50
100 miles
International boundaries
Country boundaries
County boundaries
(regional boundaries
in Scotland)
' Tyne ana Wear
* •••
North Sea
Durham
North Yorkshire
ENGLAND
• Humberside
d
a*An>'Vm.
Lancashire West -
Yorkshire '' •
;:Yorkshire'
. Greater Manchester
2. Nottinghamshire
3. Shropshire
4. West Midlands
5. Warwickshire
6. Northamptonshire
7. Bedfordshire
8. Hertfordshire
9. Buckinghamshire
10. Greater London
11. West Glamorgan
12. Mid Glamorgan
13. South Glamorgan
, S Cheshire . •..Derbyshire^: Lincolnshire
Clwyd \ ..." L j 2 :
Gwynedd ••..... .' '• ■
< ••.'.Staffordshire .••"•.
"••••) /;•••
C* 3 '.• •..•••. Leices,er .A’.'” ••'
v '•••. •••• •.
WALES .••’:••... .••'‘Cambridge'-’.
;•• Powys .•• 6 e.
■ . Hereford and 5 ." 7 '••• ... i' ..
Dyfed / “ y "'t 9 8 \l Essex
.•"V«.....•"•'.•'Gwent |Gloucestershire/ Oxford,'••:..
’ 12 ~ iff';"’ 1°
a aJ : Berkshire ..•' '•,..
Avon : Wiltshire •••• •••;
..•: Surrey....;.. Kent
c . .. • Hampshire   '' "':•"••••.,
Somerse. .. ?••.. . ... .. / yyesl ;•• East
’’'•■••.. ....': *1" ’ ’ h.. Jf Sussex m Sussex^ . P
Devon Dorset :• ^
Isles of Scilt
! of Wight
English Channel
BELGIU
m
A
Channel Islands
FR A I
FRANCE
LAND AND PEOPLE
7
Government
The Economy
Anglo-Saxons in the fifth and sixth centuries, subsequently being influenced by
Latin and Norse vocabulary, and then transformed with the settlement by the
Normans from France. English is spoken throughout Britain and in many other
countries. A recent study suggests that it is used as an official language in over
60 countries, more than any other international language.
England has no government minister or department exclusively responsible for
its central administration of domestic affairs, in contrast to Wales, Scotland and
Northern Ireland. Instead, responsibility is shared among a number of
government departments, whose responsibilities in some cases also cover
aspects of affairs in Wales and Scotland. There are 523 Members of Parliament
for England in the House of Commons, and arrangements are made for the
discussion of regional affairs. Of the two major political parties, the Conserva¬
tives find their support chiefly in suburban and rural areas and have a large
majority of the parliamentary seats in the southern half of England and in East
Anglia, while the Labour Party derives its main support from urban industrial¬
ised areas. As at August 1988 England has 357 Conservative Members of
Parliament, 155 Labour, 7 Social and Liberal Democrat, 3 Social Democrat and
the Speaker of the House of Commons.
Local government is administered through a two-tier system of counties
subdivided into districts, except in London, where local government is the
responsibility of 32 borough councils and the Corporation of the City of London.
A major reorganisation of local government was implemented in 1986 when the
Greater London Council and the metropolitan county councils of Greater
Manchester, Merseyside, South Yorkshire, Tyne and Wear, West Midlands and
West Yorkshire were abolished and most of their functions transferred to
London borough and metropolitan district councils.
Eight ‘standard regions in England are delimited principally for statistical
purposes: South East, East Anglia, South West, West Midlands, East Midlands,
Yorkshire and Humberside, North West and North. They play no part in local
government and frequently do not coincide with the regional units adopted by
central government departments.
The legal system of England comprises on the one hand a historic body of
conventions, known as ‘common law’ and ‘equity’, and on the other, parliamen¬
tary and European Community legislation. Common law stems from the work of
the king’s judges after the Norman Conquest of 1066, who sought to bring
together into a single body of legal principles the various local customs of the
Anglo-Saxons. Great reliance was placed on precedent, and the practice of
reporting on cases began in the thirteenth century. Equity law derives from the
practice of petitioning the king s Chancellor in cases not covered by common
law. The English legal system is therefore distinct from many of those of Western
Europe which have codes deriving from Roman law. The Habeas Corpus Act
1679 is a fundamental statute forbidding imprisonment without trial.
Up to the eighteenth century the English economy was mainly agrarian and the
chief manufacture was wool cloth. London as the capital city, and a major port
and mercantile centre, and the textile areas (East Anglia, south-western
England and West Yorkshire) were the most populous and prosperous regions.
In the late eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, however, rapid growth took
place in the Midlands, the north west. West Yorkshire and the north east, where
the coalfields and iron ore deposits permitted Britain to become the first
industrialised nation, basing its wealth on coalmining, on the manufacture of
iron and steel, heavy machinery and textiles, on shipbuilding and on trade.
London enhanced its position with the growing strength of the economy but
East Anglia and the West Country, remote from areas of industrial development,
8
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
were affected by agricultural depression, and entered a period of relative decline.
In the twentieth century the second period of industrialisation, based on new
sources of energy, new manufacturing industries and new forms of transport,
has continued to change the broad pattern of regional and industrial develop¬
ment in England. In the 1920s and 1930s the northern industrial centres saw
their traditional industries weakened owing to fluctuations in world trade and
competition from other industrialising countries and, in some cases, from
substitute products. London, its surrounding counties and the West Midlands
generally benefited from the newer, more mobile, industries. These included
chemicals (such as pharmaceuticals, dyes, plastics and artificial fibres),
electrical and electronic engineering, vehicle manufacture, aircraft building,
instrument engineering, aluminium and rubber manufacture and a wide range
of consumer goods, including processed food, drink and tobacco products as
well as durables.
In the second half of the century economic trends and population growth have
tended to favour smaller towns and rural areas, particularly those in parts of
southern England and East Anglia. A number of industrial areas (in the North,
the North West, Yorkshire and Humberside and the West Midlands) have
suffered as a result of the decline in manufacturing employment. Through its
regional industrial policy the Government aims to reduce regional disparities in
employment opportunities by making investment incentives available in the
areas of greatest need, especially those which have been dependent on declining
industries. Policies to encourage enterprise have been intensified under the
Enterprise Initiative, launched in January 1988. The objective of this initiative,
which is particularly aimed at small- and medium-sized businesses, is to
increase competitiveness in connection with the establishment of the single
European market in 1992.
Employment in service industries has accounted for an increasing share of
total employment in recent years, expansion being particularly marked in
financial and business services. New businesses in the service sector are being
created at a rapid rate, and this growth is linked to a marked rise in
self-employment. New forms of service activity have been developing rapidly; for
example, franchising, under which an operator pays a franchisor a fee in
exchange for a complete ‘business package’, now accounts for 2 per cent of retail
sales in Britain.
London is one the world’s leading centres of banking, insurance and other
financial services. Decentralisation of some office services from the capital and
improvements in road systems such as the M4 and M25 motorways have led to
an expansion in the service sector and high technology industries in the
surrounding regions; there has been an increase in retailing activity with the
trend towards large shopping developments on the outskirts of towns, designed
for shoppers with cars. London and the neighbouring counties account for
much advertising and market research activity, half of central government
services and a significant proportion of non-food wholesale distribution in
England. After London and the South East (where nearly 75 per cent of
employees are engaged in the service sector), the South West has the next most
important concentration of service industries. The economy of the North West
now depends as much on its fast-growing service sector as its manufacturing
industries: after London, Manchester is one of Britain’s most important
financial centres.
East Anglia has been the fastest-growing English region in both population
and employment since the 1960s. Although largely agricultural, in recent years
high-technology industry has developed throughout the region. One significant
example is the Cambridge Science Park containing a number of science-based
companies and research organisations with close collaborative links with the
LAND AND PEOPLE
9
University. Food processing, diesel engines, electronics and instrument en¬
gineering are the strongest industries. Other particular growth points have been
Peterborough and the east coast ports, which benefit from their relative
proximity to the northern European Community countries and from recent
improvements to the road and rail network. The service sector has been growing
in Cambridge, Ipswich and Norwich.
Greater London and the industrial cities of the West Midlands, the North West,
Yorkshire and Humberside and the North continue to represent the largest
concentrations of manufacturing industry. London is an important area for
products of all kinds including food and drink (especially brewing), instrument
engineering, electrical and electronic engineering, clothing, furniture and
printing. Of importance in the surrounding south-eastern counties are oil
refining (along the Thames and near Southampton), pharmaceuticals, pumps,
valves and compressors, instrument engineering, micro-electronics and compu¬
ter hardware and software (particularly along the ‘M4 corridor’ in Berkshire, in
Hertfordshire, and around Chelmsford), motor vehicles, aerospace, building
materials, timber, paper and plastics products. There is diversity, too, in the
North West, with significant activity in food processing (especially grain milling,
bread, flour confectioneiy and biscuits), chemicals, textile machinery, insulated
wires and cables, computers (Manchester being one of the largest centres in the
country), motor vehicles, aerospace, clothing, glass making (with the world's
largest flat glass maker, Pilkington, in St Helens), paper and rubber products.
Lancashire is the centre of the cotton and allied textile industries.
The characteristic manufactures of the West Midlands are metals (steel tubes,
iron castings and non-ferrous metals), machine tools, electrical engineering,
motor vehicles, carpets, pottery (with about 70 per cent of Britain’s ceramics
industry located in Staffordshire) and rubber production. Of the other regions,
Yorkshire and Humberside has important shares of cocoa, chocolate and
confectionery production, iron and steel, machine tools, textile machinery,
woollen and worsted goods (producing about two-thirds of Britain’s wool
textiles), carpets, clothing and glass containers. The North has general
chemicals, iron and steel, process plant, marine engineering, and clothing; the
East Midlands has steel tubes, iron castings, about two-thirds of Britain’s
hosiery and knitted goods industry, and footwear; and the South West has food
and drink processing, aerospace, a range of engineering industries and paper
products.
In agriculture, the number of mixed holdings has been falling, as part of a
general tendency towards greater specialisation. Dairying is most common in
the west of England, where the wetter climate encourages the growth of good
grass; sheep and cattle are reared in the hilly and moorland areas of northern
and south-western England; and arable farming, pig and poultry farming and
horticulture are concentrated in the east and south. Horticulture is also
important in the West Midlands. Forestry is mainly found in the North, South
East and South West regions. The principal fishing ports are on the east coast
and in the South West.
England has plentiful energy resources in its coalfields and has access to
offshore oil and gas reserves. About 65 per cent of Britain’s deep-mined coal is
produced in the Midlands and Yorkshire coalfields, the latter being the most
productive in the country. The world’s first large-scale nuclear power station was
established at Calder Hall in Cumbria in 1956, while substantial investment in
reprocessrng capacity is being undertaken nearby. Other nuclear power stations
are on coastal sites, including eight around the coasts of southern England.
Important mineral deposits in England include aggregates for the construction
industry (sand, gravel and crushed rock), industrial minerals (including clay,
salt from the North West and china clay from Cornwall), tin ore, also from
10
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Cultural and
Social Life
Cornwall, and iron ore from the East Midlands and Humberside. Water
resources include the Kielder Reservoir (Northumberland), one of Europe's
largest man-made lakes.
A motorway network has been constructed in England since the 1950s and
comprises four long-distance arterial routes linking London and the cities of the
Midlands, the North and North West and the South West, the London orbital
route (completed in 1986), and over 30 shorter motorways. Inter-city travel has
been improved by the introduction of high-speed rail services which are among
the best in the world in speed, frequency and comfort. Many ports have been
equipped to deal with new developments in shipping (such as container ships)
and to take account of changes in the nature of trade brought about by the
increase in oil traffic through North Sea ports and the growing proportion of
trade with the continent of Europe. In 1986 the British and French governments
jointly announced their decision to facilitate the construction of a fixed link
across the Channel in the form of twin single-track rail tunnels to carry through
rail services, linking Britain directly with the European rail system, and a
drive-on, drive-off vehicle shuttle service using specially designed shuttle trains.
Construction began in early 1988 and services through the tunnel are planned
to start in 1993. The major airports are Heathrow (the busiest international
airport in the world) and Gatwick, both serving London, and Manchester, Luton
and Birmingham. Construction has begun of a new passenger terminal in
connection with the first phase of the development of Stansted as London’s third
airport.
Tourism, catering and the leisure industries have expanded considerably in
recent years. Over half of expenditure by overseas visitors in Britain takes place
in London, although areas outside London are becoming increasingly popular
with overseas tourists, while the South West is the most popular region for
domestic tourism. Each region has its own particular attraction for tourists. For
example, a number of areas including Northumberland and Cumbria (whose
peaks include Scafell, England’s highest point, at 978 m, 3,210 ft) have hills
and lakes which attract walkers, climbers and riders.
Cultural life in England takes so many forms that a brief summary can only
attempt to suggest its variety. London alone has over 100 theatres, including
some 50 in the ‘West End’, together with fringe and suburban theatres, about a
dozen major centres for music concerts, ballet and opera, four major art
galleries, a dozen major museums (with over 80 smaller galleries and museums),
and over 140 West End, local and independent cinemas; other leisure facilities
include discotheques, bingo halls, amusement arcades, ice and roller skating
rinks, and sports or leisure centres. With its ceremonial occasions, palaces,
other historic buildings and shops, London is also one of the world's leading
tourist centres. About 15 attractions (Westminster Abbey, the Tower of London,
St Paul’s Cathedral, Madame Tussaud’s—an exhibition of waxworks of famous
people—the London Zoo, Kew Gardens and the major museums and art
galleries) each receive more than a million visitors a year.
Because of its size and its position as the capital city, London is not
representative of the rest of England, but much the same broad range of cultural
interests is reflected in many other cities and towns. The Museums Association
lists some 1,600 art galleries, museums and similar institutions in the rest of
England. Social clubs and working men’s clubs, non-profit-making clubs which
attract well-known entertainers, are found in most cities and towns. In addition,
many rural or outdoor recreations are strongly supported and there is active
interest in numerous games and sports, many of which were devised in Britain.
The English love of gardens and landscapes is associated with a tradition of
sightseeing visits to the many country houses, gardens and unspoilt rural and
LAND AND PEOPLE
11
WALES
Government
coastal areas. There are seven national parks, six forest parks, 34 designated
‘areas of outstanding natural beauty’, ten environmentally sensitive areas, about
197 country parks approved by the Countryside Commission, over 6,000
conservation areas, 800 km (500 miles) of designated heritage coastline and
about 2,000 historic buildings and gardens listed by the English Tourist Board.
Newer developments include the opening of safari and wildlife parks and of
‘theme’ parks devoted, for example, to maritime history, which offer a diversity
of entertainments as well. Many regions and towns have associations with the
great English writers and artists, such as William Shakespeare, William
Wordsworth, Arnold Bennett, Charles Dickens, the Bronte sisters, Thomas
Hardy, Thomas Gainsborough and John Constable.
Wales is a country of hills and mountains with extensive tracts of high plateau
and shorter stretches of mountain ranges deeply dissected by river valleys. The
highest mountains are in Snowdonia in the north west; the highest peak is
Snowdon (1,085 m, 3,560 ft). The lower-lying ground is largely confined to the
relatively narrow coastal belt and the lower parts of the river valleys. The main
areas of settlement are in the southern valleys and coastal areas, where
two-thirds of the population live. The chief urban centres are Cardiff, Swansea,
Newport and Wrexham. Wales is a principality; Prince Charles, the heir to the
throne, was invested by the Queen with the title of Prince of Wales at Caernarfon
Castle in 1969 when he was 20.
The country has its own Welsh language, spoken (according to the 1981
census) by 19 per cent of the population, chiefly in the rural north and west. The
Welsh name of the country is Cymru. Measures adopted since the 1960s have
helped to revive the use of the language, which is of Celtic origin and closely
resembles Breton, spoken in Brittany in France. They include recognising the
equal validity of Welsh with English in law courts, the encouragement of
bilingual education in schools, and the extended use of Welsh for official
purposes and in broadcasting. Welsh-language television programmes are
transmitted in Wales by Sianel 4 Cymru (Channel 4 Wales). In July 1988 it was
announced that the Government is to establish a Welsh Language Board to
advise on matters relating to the Welsh language.
There is no established church in Wales, the Anglican church having been
disestablished in 1920 following decades of pressure from adherents of the more
evangelical Methodist and Baptist persuasions. Methodism in particular had
spread rapidly in Wales in the eighteenth century, assuming the nature of a
popular movement among Welsh speakers and finding strong support later in
industrial communities.
The country returns 38 Members of Parliament and there are special arrange¬
ments for the discussion of Welsh affairs. For the last 60 years the industrial
communities of Wales have tended to support the Labour Party in elections,
ensuring a Labour majority in Wales. Wales has 24 Labour Members of
Parliament, 8 Conservative, 3 Plaid Cymru (Welsh Nationalist) and 3 Social and
Liberal Democrat. Substantial administrative autonomy is centred on the
Secretary of State for Wales, who is a member of the Cabinet and has
wide-ranging responsibilities relating to the economy, welfare services and the
provision of amenities. The headquarters of the administration is the Welsh
Office in Cardiff, which also has an office in London. In 1979 proposals for the
establishment of an elected Welsh assembly in Cardiff to take over policymaking
and executive powers from central government were rejected in a referendum
held in Wales. Local government is exercised through a system of elected
authorities similar to that in England, and the legal system is identical with the
English one.
12
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Economy
Cultural and
Social Life
The south Wales coalfield was developed during the latter part of the industrial
revolution in the middle of the nineteenth century, creating populous urban
centres which drew labour from the rural areas and from England and Ireland.
However, the economy was narrowly based, mainly on coal, iron, steel and
tinplate, and contracted sharply during the 1920s and 1930s, resulting in
severe employment problems and substantial emigration.
Notable features of the past three decades have been the continuing
contraction of coalmining and iron and steel production (although Wales still
accounts for about one-third of Britain’s steel production), the advent of a more
diverse range of manufacturing industries and the growth of service industries.
Wales is developing as an important centre for electronics in Britain and several
new high-technology businesses in electronics and related industries have been
established. Inward investment by overseas companies (especially Japanese and
United States high-technology concerns) has been considerable, and there are
over 240 overseas-owned or associated firms in Wales, employing about 44,000
people and accounting for around one in five jobs in the manufacturing sector.
South Wales remains the principal industrial area but new industries and firms
have also been introduced on the smaller coalfield in north-east Wales, around
Wrexham and Deeside, again to offset the decline in the older, basic industries
which previously dominated the area. Light industry has also been attracted to
the towns in the rural areas in mid- and north Wales and an important refinery
complex has developed around Milford Haven, one of Britain’s major oil ports. A
development corporation was set up in 1987 to stimulate the regeneration of the
Cardiff Bay area, and in 1988 the Government announced a three-year
programme of action designed to improve economic, environmental and social
conditions in the south Wales valleys.
Agriculture occupies about 80 per cent of the land area, the main activities
being sheep and cattle rearing in the hill regions and dairy farming in the
lowlands. Wales accounts for about 11 per cent of forest area in Britain and over
20 per cent of Forestry Commission timber production.
Wales produces about 8 per cent of Britain’s deep-mined coal and 14 per cent
of opencast production, including all of its anthracite. The biggest pumped-
storage power station in Europe is at Dinorwig, while there are nuclear power
stations at Wylfa and Trawsfynydd. Wales exports about half of its water supply
to England.
Good communications exist in the south with motorway links across the
Severn Bridge to southern England and the Midlands, and high-speed rail
services to a number of destinations in England. The main road along the north
Wales coast is being upgraded and a second crossing of the Severn is planned.
There has been expansion in financial and business services, in the tourist
and catering trades and in some areas of public administration. With its coastal
resorts, and the attractions of three national parks (Snowdonia, the Brecon
Beacons and the Pembrokeshire Coast), as well as other areas of picturesque
hill, lake and mountain country, Wales attracts many tourists, especially for
outdoor holidays.
There is much literary, musical and dramatic activity in Wales and there is a
National Library and National Museum. Welsh literature is one of the oldest in
Europe. The country is well known for its choral singing and the Welsh National
Opera has an international reputation. The special festivals of Wales, known as
eisteddfodau, encourage Welsh literature and music. The largest is the Royal
National Eisteddfod of Wales, held annually, entirely in Welsh, and consisting of
competitions in music, singing, prose and poetry. The town of Llangollen has
extended its eisteddfod to include artists from all over the world in the annual
International Musical Eisteddfod. Famous modern Welsh artists have included
LAND AND PEOPLE
13
the opera singers Sir Geraint Evans and Dame Gwyneth Jones and the poet
Dylan Thomas. An active local press includes a number of Welsh language
publications. Great interest is aroused by the annual rugby football competition
in which sides from Wales. England. Scotland, Ireland and France take part.
Health services are provided mainly under the National Health Service,
administered by the Welsh Office, while personal social services and education
(except at university level) are provided mainly through the local authorities.
Educational provision is similar to that in England except for the use of Welsh in
some schools, particularly in the Welsh-speaking, largely rural, areas. The
collegiate University of Wales, founded in 1893, comprises six member
institutions.
SCOTLAND
Government
Scotland may be divided broadly into three areas: the sparsely populated
highlands and islands in the north, accounting for just over half the total area of
the country; the central lowlands, containing three-quarters of the population
and most of the industrial centres and cultivated farmland; and the southern
uplands, containing a number of hill ranges, which border on England. The
highest mountains are the Grampians in the central highlands, with Ben Nevis
(1,343 m, 4,406 ft) the highest peak. The chief cities are the capital Edinburgh,
the main industrial centre Glasgow, and the two regional centres Aberdeen and
Dundee.
The period from 1750 onwards has seen considerable and continuous
emigration of Scots to England and overseas. However, the rate slowed markedly
in the 1970s as the offshore oil and gas industries developed and there was
inward migration to the north east of Scotland, although the large outflow of
people from Strathclyde has continued, but at a lower level. In the mid¬
nineteenth century, as Scotland industrialised rapidly, there was large-scale
immigration from Ireland.
The period from 1750 until the beginning of the twentieth century was also
one of stability and economic progress and of achievements in many fields.
Among the famous people to emerge were David Hume, Robert Burns, Sir Walter
Scott, Adam Smith, Robert Adam, James Watt, John MacAdam, Lord Kelvin,
Alexander Graham Bell, James Clerk Maxwell and Marie Stopes.
The Church of Scotland, which became the established church in 1690, has
complete freedom in all matters of doctrine, order and discipline. It is a
Protestant church which is Presbyterian in form, being governed by a hierarchy
of church courts, each of which includes lay people.
There are special arrangements for the conduct of Scottish affairs within the
British system of government and separate Acts of Parliament are passed for
Scotland where appropriate. The 72 Scottish seats in the House of Commons are
represented by 50 Labour Members of Parliament, 10 Conservative, 9 Social and
Liberal Democrat and 3 Scottish National. Since 1959 Scotland, like Wales, has
had a majority of Labour Members of Parliament. Administrative tasks relating
to a wide range of economic and social functions are the responsibility of the
Secretary of State for Scotland, a member of the Cabinet, working through the
Scottish Office, with its administrative headquarters in Edinburgh and an office
in London. A proposal for an elected assembly for Scotland, on which a
referendum was held in 1979, failed to gain the support of the required 40 per
cent of the electorate, even though a majority of those voting gave it their
approval.
Local government generally operates on a two-tier basis broadly similar to that
in England and Wales but established by separate legislation. The three islands
councils (for Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles) are single-tier authorities.
The principles and procedures of the Scottish legal system (particularly in civil
14
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Economy
law) differ in many respects from those of England and Wales, stemming, in
part, from the adoption of elements of other European legal systems, based on
Roman law, during the sixteenth century.
Scotland has experienced the same pressure on its traditional industries as the
north of England and Wales. The regional policies of successive governments,
the work of the Scottish Development Agency and the Highlands and Islands
Development Board, and investment by overseas companies have made signifi¬
cant contributions to the growth of modern, technologically based industries,
and Scotland's economic structure is now broadly similar to that of Britain as a
whole.
Engineering remains a major industry, accounting for over a quarter of the
manufacturing workforce, but there has been a significant trend towards lighter
engineering products and rapid expansion in electronics (including micro¬
electronics). By mid-1987 about 250 plants were employing some 43,000
workers, one of the biggest concentrations of the electronics industry in Western
Europe. Scotland accounts for over 50 per cent of Britain’s output of integrated
circuits and for over 15 per cent of European output.
Since the early 1970s the Scottish economy has also benefited from the
growth of offshore-related industries following the discovery of oil and gas under
the northern North Sea. In the 1980s up to about 100,000 jobs have arisen
directly or indirectly as a result of North Sea activities. Many of these jobs reflect
overseas investment solely related to the exploration and development of North
Sea resources, but oil and gas developments have stimulated other industries
including engineering and petrochemicals; a major new ethylene plant at
Mossmorran (Fife) came onstream in 1985, reinforcing Scotland's position in
the chemicals industry.
Traditional industries, such as coal, steel and shipbuilding, have experienced
a long-term decline in employment, but are still important contributors to the
Scottish economy. Other traditional manufactures, such as high-quality tweeds
and other textiles, and food and drink products, remain important. There are
over 100 whisky distilleries in Scotland and the industry is a major export
earner.
Northern and north-east Scotland (particularly Aberdeen) have benefited most
from offshore developments. In 1984 the Grampian region had a gross domestic
product per head of population second only to that of Greater London, at an
estimated £5,924, 28 per cent more than for Britain as a whole. However,
Strathclyde, by far the most populous region, has experienced serious industrial
decline and population loss, particularly in Glasgow. In the remainder of the
central belt and in the five new towns (East Kilbride, Glenrothes, Livingston,
Irvine and Cumbernauld) trends have been generally more favourable. In
Lothian the large concentration of financial and other service industries centred
on Edinburgh has been a helpful influence.
Scotland has about one-third of Britain’s total agricultural land, but 70 per
cent of it consists of hill grazing for cattle and sheep. About 11 per cent of the
agricultural area is used for crops, and 63 per cent of this is under barley.
Scotland accounts for nearly half of Britain’s forest area and for over 40 per cent
of public sector timber production; the bulk of new planting in Britain takes
place in Scotland, most of it in the upland and mountain areas. Fishing remains
an important activity; more than 75 per cent of total landings of fish in Britain
are made at Scottish ports.
Despite the advent of cheaper natural gas, Scotland still depends heavily on
electricity; nuclear and hydro-electric generation supply a higher proportion of
energy than in any other part of Britain. Since Scotland’s fifth nuclear power
station—the 1,400-MW Advanced Gas-cooled Reactor at Torness (Lothian)—
LAND AND PEOPLE
15
became operational in 1988, about 60 per cent of Scotland’s electricity
requirements are met by nuclear power. Large supplies of unpolluted water form
a major resource.
Communications, both domestic and international, have improved in many
areas, particularly in the north and north east, owing to the stimulus of the
offshore oil industry and to road- and bridge-building programmes. The offshore
oil industry has also encouraged expansion in financial and business services
which have been traditionally strong in Scotland.
Tourism, which makes a significant contribution to the economy and to
employment in Scotland as a whole, is estimated to generate, both directly and
indirectly, nearly 130,000 jobs. In 1988 the Glasgow Garden Festival was held,
providing a major incentive for the long-term development of part of the city.
Scotland's cultural and historic associations, its varied scenic beauty, and the
opportunities for sport and recreation are particular attractions. Golf originated
in Scotland, and courses at St Andrews, Gleneagles, Turnberry, Muirfield, Troon
and Prestwick are internationally renowned. Skiing is growing in importance,
with centres at Aviemore, Glenshee, Glen Coe and the Lecht, and further
developments are planned.
Cultural and
Social Life
A vigorous cultural life in Scotland has as its highlight the annual Edinburgh
International Festival, one of the world’s leading cultural events. Notable
performing arts bodies are the Scottish National Orchestra, Scottish Opera,
Scottish Ballet, Scottish Chamber Orchestra, Scottish Baroque Ensemble and
the BBC Scottish Symphony Orchestra. Scotland possesses excellent collections
of the fine and applied arts, notably in the National Galleries of Scotland, the
Royal Museums of Scotland and the City of Glasgow Museum and Art Galleries
(including the Burrell collection, opened in 1983). Glasgow has been designated
as European City of Culture for 1990.
A language of ancient Celtic origin, Scots Gaelic is spoken by some 80,000
people mainly in the islands and north west of Scotland. It is the indigenous
language, with its own literary background. Scottish people in the lowlands have
for centuries spoken Scots (or Lallans), a derivative of the Northumbrian dialect
of Old English, which has its own recognised literary tradition and has seen a
revival in poetry in recent times.
An active press includes six national daily morning newspapers, six local
evening newspapers and four national Sunday newspapers. There are also some
110 local weekly newspapers published in Scotland. Articles in some papers are
printed in Gaelic. Television programmes are produced by BBC (Scotland) and
by three independent companies, covering the highland, lowland and border
regions. BBC Radio Scotland covers most of the population and there are
five community services in the highlands and islands, two of them mainly in
Gaelic, and two in the borders, together with a number of independent radio
stations.
Local authorities are responsible for the provision of most education, except at
university level; secondary education in Scotland is almost completely organised
on comprehensive lines. There are eight universities, of which four (St Andrews,
Glasgow, Aberdeen and Edinburgh) were established in the fifteenth and
sixteenth centuries, while the other four have been established since 1964. The
educational tradition has been particularly strong in Scotland, helping many
Scots to positions of eminence in the arts and sciences.
Over 50 per cent of Scotland’s housing has been built since 1945, only
Northern Ireland having a larger percentage. Scotland has a high proportion of
housing rented from public authorities (some 50 per cent compared with a
national average of about 30 per cent), although in recent years there has been a
noticeable growth in owner-occupied housing as in the rest of Britain.
16
NORTHERN
IRELAND
Government
Background to
Civil
Disturbances
Direct Rule
and Political
Initiatives
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Northern Ireland is at its nearest point only 21 km (13 miles) from Scotland. It
has a 488-km (303-mile) border in the south and west with the Irish Republic. At
its centre lies Lough Neagh, Britain’s largest freshwater lake (381 sq km,
147 sq miles). Many of the principal towns lie in valleys leading from the Lough,
including the capital, Belfast, which stands at the mouth of the river Lagan. The
Mourne Mountains, rising sharply in the south east, include Slieve Donard,
Northern Ireland’s highest peak (852 m, 2,796 ft).
Just under two-thirds of Northern Ireland’s population are descendants of
Scots or English settlers who crossed to north-eastern Ireland mainly in the
seventeenth century; most belong to the Protestant faith, and have a traditional
loyalty to the maintenance of the union with Great Britain. The remainder, over
a third, are Irish in origin and mainly Roman Catholic; many of them are
nationalist in political opinion, favouring union with the Irish Republic.
Northern Ireland is part of the United Kingdom, but for 50 years from 1921 it
had its own devolved Parliament in which the mainly Protestant Unionists
consistently formed the majority and therefore constituted the Government after
successive elections. Nationalists, who are predominantly Roman Catholic,
resented this domination and their effective exclusion from political office.
Although substantial advances for the whole population were achieved in social
welfare and economic development, an active and articulate civil rights
movement emerged during the late 1960s. Reforms were made but sectarian
disturbances developed, which required the introduction of the Army in 1969 to
support the police in keeping the peace. Subsequently, sectarian divisions were
exploited by the actions of terrorists from both sides, but most notably by the
Provisional Irish Republican Army who claimed to be protecting the Roman
Catholic minority. From 1969 the Northern Ireland Government enacted
reforms to ensure the minority’s right to an effective voice in public bodies. A
police authority representative of all sections of the community was created and
commissioners became responsible for investigating complaints of maladminis¬
tration, including discrimination, against government departments and local
authorities. A central housing executive became responsible for all public sector
house-building and the allocation of houses according to need. Local govern¬
ment was restructured and electoral law, including the franchise and the
arrangements for reviewing electoral boundaries, was reformed.
Despite this reform programme, the inter-communal violence continued and the
United Kingdom Government concluded that the best hope of ending terrorism
and achieving political progress would be for the United Kingdom Parliament
and Government to take over responsibility for law and order in Northern
Ireland. The Northern Ireland Government felt unable to accept this and
resigned, and in 1972 direct rule began, with a United Kingdom Cabinet
minister becoming responsible for the functions previously exercised by the
Northern Ireland Government.
Several attempts have been made to secure a stable and effective devolved
government supported by both sides of the community. A new constitution
which devolved powers to an elected legislative assembly, and a ‘power-sharing’
executive representing all sections of the community, encountered Protestant
‘loyalist’ opposition culminating in a general strike in 1974; in 1976 an elected
constitutional convention failed to agree on a system of government that would
command widespread acceptance; in 1978 a planned framework for a form of
devolution to consolidate common ground among the political parties was
rejected; and in 1980 there was a political conference and extensive discussions.
In 1981 the appointment of a Northern Ireland Council to advise the Secretary of
State was proposed but rejected by the political parties in Northern Ireland.
LAND AND PEOPLE
17
The
Anglo-Irish
Agreement
Human Rights
and Security
Policy
In 1982 a new 78-member Assembly was elected and given responsibility for
making proposals for devolving powers on a basis which would command
widespread acceptance throughout the community. In the meantime, it
performed scrutinising and consultative functions, commenting upon draft
legislation and initiating reports on such matters as industry and education.
Some members refused to take their seats on election. The unionist parties, who
had a majority in the Assembly, decided not to fulfil the Assembly’s statutory
functions in March 1986 in protest at the Anglo-Irish Agreement (see below),
and in June the Government decided that the Assembly should be dissolved but
at the same time expressed the hope that a future Assembly would play a
responsible part in Northern Ireland.
The Government’s policy continues to be based on two fundamental prin¬
ciples. First, that there will be no change in Northern Ireland’s constitutional
status as part of the United Kingdom without the consent of a majority of people
in Northern Ireland. This is in accordance with internationally accepted
principles of democracy. A ‘border poll’ in 1973 showed that a clear majority
wished Northern Ireland to remain part of the United Kingdom, and in
subsequent elections parties which support that position have continued to
receive the majority of votes. Secondly, the Government continues to believe that
a devolved form of administration would best meet Northern Ireland’s needs
provided that it is acceptable to both parts of the community.
Northern Ireland returns 17 members to the United Kingdom Parliament. In
the last general election in 1987 the seats were distributed as follows: Ulster
Unionist 9, Democratic Unionist 3, Ulster Popular Unionist 1, Social Democratic
and Labour 3, and Sinn Fein 1 (although the last-mentioned member has not
taken his seat).
In November 1985 the United Kingdom and the Irish Republic concluded an
Agreement aimed at promoting peace and stability in Northern Ireland. The
Agreement has two main features. First, it affirms that no change in the status
of Northern Ireland would come about except by the consent of a majority of its
people—which is recognised not to exist at present; but that, if at some time a
majority formally consented to a united Ireland, both parties would support
legislation to that effect. Secondly, it establishes an Intergovernmental Confer¬
ence, through which the Irish Government can put forward views and proposals
on specified matters affecting Northern Ireland affairs (so far as they are not the
responsibility of a devolved administration). The Conference has met frequently
and discussed a wide range of issues affecting Northern Ireland. The Conference
also acts as a forum for promoting cross-border co-operation, in particular on
security. The Conference has no executive role or decision-making powers, and
the Agreement makes clear that there is no derogation from the sovereignty of
either the United Kingdom Government or the Irish Government; each retains
full responsibility for the decisions about administration of government within
its own jurisdiction.
The Agreement was generally welcomed by the minority community but there
is considerable antipathy among Unionists, who believe that it gives the Irish
Republic undue influence in the affairs of Northern Ireland. In the Government’s
view, the Agreement offers benefits to both traditions in Northern Ireland
without detracting from the rights of either.
The Government is committed to the protection of human rights in Northern
Ireland. The United Kingdom is a signatory to the European Convention on
Human Rights and allows the right of individual petition. Legislation passed in
1973 outlaws discrimination by public bodies, including the Government, on
the grounds of religious belief or political opinion. Discrimination in employ-
18
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Economy
ment by both public and private employers is also illegal and the Fair
Employment Agency was established to investigate complaints and enforce fair
practices. The Government is proposing to introduce legislation which will,
among other things, strengthen the statutory duty on employers to practice
equality of opportunity, and require employers to submit annual returns on the
religious composition of their workforce. Resources allocated for the enforce¬
ment of the law are being considerably increased. The independent Standing
Advisory Commission on Human Rights advises the Government on the
effectiveness of anti-discrimination legislation and on other human rights
issues.
While terrorism continues, certain emergency powers are in force. Under
legislation first introduced in 1973, these include special powers of arrest in
respect of certain serious crimes; non-jury courts to try those offences; and the
proscription of organisations involved in terrorism. There has been much
concern to reconcile these powers as far as possible with respect for individual
liberties and the powers are balanced by specific safeguards; the measures are
temporary, need annual renewal by Parliament and have been subject to
independent review. Following the most recent review, completed in 1984, a
number of amendments to the legislation have been made by Parliament. Most
traditional rights, including freedom from persecution, freedom of speech and
the right to prosecute the security forces if they exceed their authority, remain
in force. There is also an independent police complaints commission to
supervise police investigations into the more serious complaints and, at its
discretion, the investigation of others. Northern Ireland’s legal system, and the
safeguards it enshrines, is broadly similar to that in England and Wales.
The use of violence as a means of overcoming political differences has been
condemned by the overwhelming majority of people living in Northern Ireland
and, although terrorism continues, the overall level of violence is much lower
than in the early 1970s. The police take the primary role in maintaining order;
the Army’s task is one of assisting the civil authorities, and the number of
soldiers on service has been considerably reduced. Security policy rests on the
principle of fair and effective enforcement of the law by bringing terrorists to
justice through the courts. They are tried for criminal offences and not for
political beliefs. At the heart of the policy is a determination to reduce the level of
terrorism and to develop the effectiveness of the police to the point where
military involvement in the maintenance of law and order is no longer needed.
Situated on the western edge of Europe and having a small domestic market,
Northern Ireland has always had strong trading links with the rest of the United
Kingdom. Population and industry are concentrated on the eastern seaboard
while the rest of the country remains predominantly rural in character and
reliant mainly upon agriculture for its livelihood. Since the end of the second
world war two dominant trends have been apparent in the economy. First,
employment in the traditionally important industries (shipbuilding, linen and
agriculture) has declined. Secondly, there has been fast growth in the numbers
seeking work, reflecting the relatively high rate of natural increase of the
population which is only partly offset by emigration from the province. These
trends have combined to produce an unemployment rate in Northern Ireland
persistently higher than that found in any other region in Britain. In 1987
unemployment in Northern Ireland averaged 18-4 per cent; some eight
percentage points above that for Great Britain.
In Northern Ireland, as with other developed economies, there has been a
switch in emphasis from agriculture and manufacturing towards services.
However, agriculture (predominantly livestock and livestock products) is still an
important industry, accounting for 8 per cent of civil employment, over three
LAND AND PEOPLE
19
Cultural and
Social Life
times the proportion in Britain as a whole. Belfast has Britain’s largest
shipyard, and aerospace engineering is one of Northern Ireland’s biggest
manufacturing industries. Other well-established industrial activities include
the manufacture of textile machinery and a wide range of engineering products,
tobacco and clothing. There has also been extensive development in vehicle
components, oil-well equipment, electronics, telecommunications equipment,
carpets, synthetic rubber, and food processing and packaging. The linen
industry is currently enjoying a revival (farms are experimenting with growing
flax).
To meet the special problem of unemployment successive governments have
offered more generous incentives than are available in the rest of the country to
encourage new investment both from within Britain and from overseas. In
1986-87 the province’s Industrial Development Board promoted 4,187 new jobs
with an associated investment of £311 million while the Local Enterprise
Development Unit attracted some £47 million and the prospect of around 4,200
new jobs in manufacturing, crafts and services. Government also provides
financial assistance to mitigate high energy costs although the recent discover¬
ies of deposits of lignite in commercially exploitable quantities around Lough
Neagh and at Ballymoney offers the prospect of cheaper electricity for industrial
and other users. The establishment of ‘enterprise zones’ in Belfast and
Londonderry and the designation of Aldergrove airport as a ‘freeport’ serve as
additional incentives to investment.
The modern diversification of the economy has helped to stimulate output,
productivity and incomes, and has assisted in narrowing the gap between living
standards in Northern Ireland and those in the rest of the United Kingdom.
Manufacturing output increased by 4 per cent between 1982 and 1986 while
manufacturing output per head has risen by 28 per cent between 1979 and
1986. Gross domestic product per person, which tends to be depressed in
Northern Ireland relative to the country as a whole, has none the less risen from
just under two-thirds of the British average in 1963 to around 70 per cent in
1986. Average earnings are more than nine-tenths of the national average.
The principle underlying Northern Ireland’s financial relations with the rest of
the country is that it has parity, both of taxation and services, with England,
Scotland and Wales. To maintain social services at the level of those in Great
Britain, to meet the cost of security measures, and to compensate for the natural
disadvantages of geography and lack of resources, the United Kingdom
Government’s subvention to Northern Ireland in 1987-88 was £1,569 million.
The Anglo-Irish Agreement expressed the intention of both signatories to
promote the economic and social development of those areas which had suffered
from the instability of recent years and to try to secure international support for
this work. In 1986 the British and Irish Governments signed a treaty setting up
the International Fund for Ireland and donations have been received from the
United States, Canada and New Zealand. By the end of 1987 the Fund had
committed over £8 million to specific projects to cover agriculture and fisheries,
urban development, industrial promotion, and science and technology. Two
investment companies, one on each side of the border, provide venture capital to
new businesses. Three-quarters of the Fund is to be spent in Northern Ireland
and the rest in the Irish Republic’s border counties.
In day-to-day social life Northern Ireland is in many ways similar to the rest of
the United Kingdom. For thousands of visitors (about 940,000 in 1987), as well
as for local people, Northern Ireland’s landscape and natural features, its
cultural traditions and festivals continue to offer special attractions. For many
North Americans the land from which their forebears emigrated (a number of
United States presidents have been descended from Northern Ireland families)
20
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
POPULATION
has a unique interest. The story of this contribution to American life, the history
of Northern Ireland, and aspects of its culture—from the dialects and strong
literary tradition (poets like Louis MacNeice and Seamus Heaney have inter¬
national reputations) to the songs and dances and folk art—are recorded in the
Ulster-American Folk Park, the Ulster Museum and the Ulster Folk and
Transport Museum.
The Government provides financial support for arts and cultural activities
related to the Irish language. Some 20,000 secondary school pupils currently
study Irish and full degree courses are available at Northern Ireland’s two
universities.
The Arts Council of Northern Ireland is a major contributor to cultural life,
which encompasses classical and traditional music, opera, literature and
poetry, drama, ballet and the visual arts. The annual Belfast Festival at Queen’s
University is the second largest international festival in Britain. Among
musicians who have achieved international distinction are the flautist James
Galway, the soprano Heather Harper and the pianist Barry Douglas, winner of
the International Tchaikovsky Competition in Moscow in 1986.
The National Health Service provides both hospital and practitioner services,
and health and personal social services correspond fairly closely to those in the
rest of the United Kingdom, although the administrative framework is different.
While publicly maintained schools are open to children of all religions, in
practice, Protestants and Roman Catholics are for the most part educated in
separate schools, although there is one publicly maintained integrated school
and a small number of independent integrated schools. Contrary to develop¬
ments in the rest of the United Kingdom, emphasis on the comprehensive
principle in secondary schools has been very small. Links between the two
universities and industry are well developed. Considerable progress has been
made in improving housing and the urban environment, notably in Belfast; in
the last ten years the housing stock in Northern Ireland has increased by about
12 per cent and owner-occupation from 51 per cent to 60 per cent. Major new
town centre developments are taking place in Belfast, Londonderry and other
towns which provide greatly improved shopping facilities. Planning and
conservation arrangements are much like those in the rest of the country.
Distinctive local programmes are broadcast and there is a local press; national
radio and television networks are received, however, and the national press is
sold widely. Sport has an important role in the community, and many
world-class sportsmen and sportswomen have come from Northern Ireland,
including the boxer Barry McGuigan and the snooker player Dennis Taylor.
The Social Framework
The way of life of the people of Britain has been changing rapidly in the second
half of the twentieth century. As in many other countries, underlying causes
include a lower birth rate, longer expectation of life, a higher divorce rate,
widening educational opportunities, technical progress and a higher standard
of living.
With 56-9 million people in 1987, Britain ranks about fifteenth in the world in
terms of population. This compares with 38-2 million in 1901, about 9 million at
the end of the seventeenth century and some 2 million at the end of the eleventh
century. Early figures are based on contemporary estimates, but from the
beginning of the nineteenth century relatively plentiful and reliable information
is available. Most of it comes from two main sources: the regular flow since 1837
of statistical information based on compulsory registration of births, marriages
LAND AND PEOPLE
21
Birth Rates
Mortality
and deaths, and the censuses taken regularly eveiy ten years since 1801
(because of war there was no census in 1941). The most recent was in 1981.
After 1975 the population fell slightly for about three years, for the first time
(other than in war) since records began, reflecting a temporary decline in the
birth rate. Since then the upward trend has been resumed, except for a slight
decline in 1982. Projections suggest that population growth will continue at a
low rate. Britain’s total population is expected, on mid-1985 projections, to be
57-5 million in 1991, 59 million in 2001 and 59-4 million in 2011.
In 1987 there were 775,600 live births in Britain, 20,600 more than in 1986,
which outnumbered deaths (644,300) by 131,300. The total period fertility rate
(an indication of the average size of family) remains below the level of 21
required for the replacement of the population, although it is projected to
increase from 1-8 in 1987 to 2 in the early twenty-first century.
Several factors may have contributed to the relatively low birth rate (13-6 live
births per 1,000 population in 1987). Contraception has become more
widespread and effective, making it easier to plan families, and voluntary
sterilisation of men and women has also become more common. Of all
pregnancies in 1987, 35-6 per cent were conceived outside marriage and of these
over one-third were terminated by legal abortion.
The postponement of conception within marriage coupled with a trend
towards later marriage has led to an increase, to 27, in the average age at which
women have their first child in marriage. Another feature is the current
preference for smaller families than in the past, especially two-children families,
which has led to a significant decline in the proportion of families with four or
more children.
At birth the expectation of life for a man is about 72 years and for a woman 78
years compared with 49 years for men and 52 years for women in 1901. The
improving health of the population has mainly had the effect of increasing
young people’s chances of reaching the older age groups. Life expectancy in the
older age groups has increased relatively little.
The general death rate has remained about the same for the past 40 years, at
about 12 per 1,000 population. However, there has been a considerable decline
in mortality at most ages, particularly among children and young adults. The
infant mortality rate (deaths of infants under one year old per 1,000 live births)
was 91 in 1987; neonatal mortality (deaths of infants under four weeks old per
1,000 live births) was 5 in 1987; and maternal mortality is about 0 06 per 1,000
live births.
The causes of the decline in mortality include better nutrition, rising
standards of living, the advance of medical science, the growth of medical
facilities, improved health measures, better working conditions, education in
personal hygiene, and the smaller size of families. Deaths resulting from
infectious diseases (notably tuberculosis) have virtually disappeared, although
as in other countries the spread of the disease AIDS (Acquired Immune
Deficiency Syndrome) is causing concern; by the end of August 1988, 1,730
cases of AIDS had been reported, of which 949 had resulted in the patient’s
death. Deaths caused by circulatory diseases (including heart attacks and
strokes) now account for nearly half of all deaths, the next largest cause of death
being cancer (responsible for nearly one-quarter of deaths). Cigarette smoking is
the greatest preventable cause of illness and death in Britain, accounting for
some 100,000 premature deaths a year, but there has been a significant decline
in the incidence of smoking, with 35 per cent of adult males and 31 per cent of
adult females smoking cigarettes in 1986, as against 52 and 41 per cent
respectively in 1972.
22
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Marriage and
Divorce
Age and Sex
Structure
Distribution
of Population
During the last 20 years there has been a marked change in the pattern of
marriage. In 1972 there were 480,300 marriages in Britain, but by 1982 the
number had declined to 387,000, with a subsequent increase to 398,000 in
1987. Of the population aged 16 or over in England and Wales in 1986, 60 per
cent were married, 26 per cent single, 9 per cent widowed and 5 per cent
divorced. The trend of the 1960s towards earlier marriage was reversed at the
beginning of the 1970s, since when there has been a slow increase in the
average age for first marriages, which in England and Wales is now 26 for men
and 24 for women. In 1987 remarriages (of one or both parties) accounted for
about 35 per cent of all marriages in Britain, compared with about 20 per cent in
1971 and 14 per cent in 1961. Some 12 per cent of all marriages in 1987 were
remarriages where both partners had been divorced.
The divorce rate has been increasing steadily and in 1987 about 13 decrees of
divorce were made absolute for every 1,000 married couples in England and
Wales, compared with two per 1,000 in 1961. The rates are lower in Scotland
and Northern Ireland. In 1987 about 151,000 divorces were granted in England
and Wales; the proportion granted to wives was about 71 per cent. The average
age of people at the time of divorce in England and Wales is now about 38 for
men and 35 for women.
Another feature, common to many other Western European countries, has
been a considerable increase in cohabitation. Over one-quarter of women in
Great Britain marrying during the period 1980 to 1984 where the marriage was
the first for both parties had lived with their husbands before marriage
(compared with 7 per cent for those married in the early 1970s) and about 19 per
cent of non-married women aged 18 to 49 were cohabiting during 1987.
Cohabitation occurs more frequently for separated or divorced women than for
single women. There is some evidence of a growing number of stable
non-married relationships in that two-thirds of illegitimate births (which now
account for 23 per cent of live births in Britain compared with 6 per cent in
1961) are registered by both parents.
Although the total population has remained relatively stable in the last decade,
there have been noticeable changes in the age and sex structure, including a
decline in the proportion of young people under 16 and an increase in the
proportion of elderly people, especially those aged 85 and over. The estimated
age distribution of the British population in mid-1987 was roughly as follows:
under 16 years, nearly 20 per cent; 16—64, 64 per cent; and 65 and over, 16 per
cent. Some 18 per cent of the population were over the normal retirement ages
(65 for men and 60 for women), compared with 15 per cent in 1961.
In mid-1987 there were an estimated 29-2 million females and 27-7 million
males in Britain, representing a ratio of over 105 females to every 100 males.
There are about 5 per cent more male than female births every year. Because of
the higher mortality of men at all ages, however, there is a turning point, at
about 48 years of age, at which the number of women exceeds the number of
men. This imbalance increases with age so that there is a preponderance of
women among the elderly.
The population density is about 233 per sq km, which is relatively high in
comparison with most other countries. England is the most densely populated
with 363 people per sq km (with Greater London having a density of 4,285
people per sq km), and Scotland the least densely populated with 65 people per
sq km, while Wales and Northern Ireland have 137 and 112 people per sq km
respectively.
Table 2 gives figures for some of Britain’s largest urban areas. About half of
the population lives in a belt across England, with south Lancashire and West
LAND AND PEOPLE
23
Table 2: Size and Population of the Main Urban Areas, Mid-1987
Greater London
Birmingham
Glasgow
Leeds
Sheffield
Liverpool
Bradford
Manchester
Edinburgh
Bristol
Coventry
Belfast
Cardiff
1,580
264
198
562
368
113
370
116
261
110
97
140
120
609-7
102-0
76-3
217-0
141- 9
43- 6
142- 9
44- 9
100-6
42-3
37-3
54-0
46-3
6,770-4
998-2
715-6
709-0
532-3
476-0
462-5
450-1
438-7
384-4
308-9
303-8
281-5
Yorkshire at one end, the London area at the other, and the industrialised
Midlands at its centre. Other areas with large populations are: the central
lowlands of Scotland; north-east England from north of the river Tyne down to
the river Tees; south-east Wales; the Bristol area; and the English Channel coast
from Poole, in Dorset, eastwards. Less densely populated areas are the eastern
fringes of England between the Wash and the Thames estuary, and the far south
west. Most of the mountainous parts, including much of Scotland, Wales and
Northern Ireland and the central Pennines, are very sparsely populated.
Since the nineteenth century there has been a general trend, especially in
London, for people to move away from the congested urban centres into the
suburbs. The 1981 census recorded that only in the remoter rural areas had the
rate of population growth been higher in the 1970s than in the 1960s. There has
also been a geographical redistribution of the population from Scotland and the
northern regions of England to East Anglia, the South West and the East
Midlands. Another feature has been an increase in the rate of retirement
migration, the main recipient areas (where in some towns the elderly can form
over one-third of the population) being the south coast of England and East
Anglia.
Traditionally, there is a net population loss from Britain due to migration to the
rest of the world, but since 1983 this tendency has been reversed, and in 1987
there was a net gain of 2,000.1 Between 1983 and 1987 some 946,000 people left
Britain to live abroad and about 1 • 1 million came from overseas to live in
Britain, so that net immigration increased the population by about 152,000. Of
the 210,000 departing residents in 1987, 28 per cent left for Australia, Canada
or New Zealand, 10 per cent for other Commonwealth countries, 28 per cent for
other European Community countries, 16 per cent for the United States and 6
per cent for the Middle East. Of the 212,000 new residents, 15 per cent came
from Australia, Canada or New Zealand, 20 per cent from other Commonwealth
countries and 26 per cent from other European Community countries. About
half of those coming into Britain, and over half of those going abroad, are British
citizens.
International migration statistics used here exclude movements to and from the Irish Republic.
24
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Nationality
Immigration
Nationality legislation is embodied in the British Nationality Act 1981, which
came into force on 1 January 1983. Under this Act, citizenship of the United
Kingdom and Colonies was replaced by three citizenships: British citizenship
for people closely connected with Britain, the Channel Islands, and the Isle of
Man; British Dependent Territories citizenship for people connected with the
dependencies: and British Overseas citizenship for those citizens of the United
Kingdom and Colonies who did not acquire either of the other citizenships. With
one small exception, citizens of the United Kingdom and Colonies who had the
right of abode in Britain when the Act came into force acquired British
citizenship.
British citizenship is acquired automatically at birth by a child born in Britain
if his or her father or mother is a British citizen or is settled in Britain. A child
adopted in Britain by a British citizen is a British citizen. A child born abroad to
a British citizen born, adopted, naturalised or registered in Britain is a British
citizen by descent. The Act safeguards the citizenship of a child born abroad to a
British citizen in Crown service, certain related services, or in service under a
European Community institution. British citizenship may also be acquired by
registration by certain children born in Britain who do not automatically
acquire such citizenship at birth or born abroad to a parent who is a citizen by
descent; by British Dependent Territories citizens, British Overseas citizens,
British subjects under the Act (three very limited categories) and British
protected persons after five years' residence in Britain (except for people from
Gibraltar, who may be registered without residence); and by naturalisation for
Commonwealth citizens, citizens of the Irish Republic, and foreign nationals.
The British Nationality (Falkland Islands) Act 1983 conferred British citizenship
(with effect from 1 January 1983) on those Falkland Islanders who did not
acquire it under the 1981 Act. For naturalisation, which is at the Home
Secretary’s discretion, five years’ residence, good character and sufficient
knowledge of English, Welsh or Scottish Gaelic are required except for the
spouse of a British citizen, who needs only three years’ residence and no
language qualification. Certain entitlements to registration (including those for
Commonwealth citizens and Irish citizens settled in Britain since before 1973,
and in certain circumstances for women married to citizens of the United
Kingdom and Colonies before 1983) were preserved for five years from 1 January
1983, and so ended on 31 December 1987.
Special arrangements covering the status of British Dependent Territories
citizens connected with Hong Kong when the territory returns to the People’s
Republic of China in 1997 are made by the Hong Kong (British Nationality)
Order 1986.
In 1987, 65,000 people acquired citizenship by naturalisation or registration
in the United Kingdom.
Immigration into the United Kingdom is controlled by the Immigration Act 1971
(as amended by the British Nationality Act 1981 and the Immigration Act 1988)
and the Immigration Rules made in accordance with the Act. British citizens
under the British Nationality Act 1981 and those Commonwealth citizens who
had the right of abode before 1 January 1983 (when the 1981 Act came into
force) have the right of abode and are not subject to immigration control. Those
who do not have this right require permission to enter and remain in the United
Kingdom, which is given in accordance with the Rules. These Rules, which are
approved by Parliament and which may be changed from time to time, set out
the requirements to be met by those seeking entry whether in a temporary
capacity, for example as students or visitors, or with the intention of taking
employment or setting up in business or for settlement as the dependants of a
person already settled in the United Kingdom. Nationals from certain countries
LAND AND PEOPLE
25
THE
ECONOMIC
AND SOCIAL
PATTERN
Housing
and the
Environment
require a visa before they can enter the United Kingdom. Other nationals subject
to immigration control require entry clearance when coming to settle in the
United Kingdom and in certain other circumstances. Visas and other entry
clearances are normally obtained from the nearest British diplomatic post in a
person’s home country.
In accordance with the United Kingdom’s obligations under the Treaty of
Rome, European Community nationals do not require entry clearances nor are
they subject to restrictions on their freedom to take or seek work. The United
Kingdom similarly respects its obligations under the United Nations Convention
and Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees.
In 1987 some 45,500 people were accepted for settlement, some 1,300 fewer
than in 1986. A quarter of these were from the South Asian sub-continent and
half were the wives and children of men settled in the United Kingdom.
This section deals (to some extent in broad and informed terms) with social
developments affecting many sections of the population.
The majority of people (some 97 per cent) live in private households (in
families or on their own). The remainder include residents in hotels, and people
in the armed services and in educational or other institutions. In 1987 just
under four-fifths of people living in private households lived in a unit headed by
a married couple.
Among many changes in household and family structure is the continuing fall
in the average size of households in Great Britain from over four people in 1911
to 3 09 in 1961 and 2 -52 in 1987. The fall reflects a greater proportion of people
living on their own (10 per cent) or in one-parent families, the increasing
number of elderly people (more of whom are living alone), and the preferences of
parents for smaller families. The trend towards smaller households (25 per cent
of households consist of one person) is expected to continue and the number of
one-person households is forecast to increase substantially in the next few
years.
A growing proportion of households, over 63 per cent, own or are buying their
own homes, owner-occupation being higher among married couples than for
single, divorced or widowed household heads. The number of owner-occupied
dwellings rose from over 4 million in 1951 to over 14 million in 1986. Four
British households out of five live in houses rather than flats.
Nearly half of Britain’s housing has been built since 1945. Recent housing
developments have been concentrated in suburban areas. Many families now
live in houses grouped in small terraces, or semi-detached or detached, usually
of two storeys with gardens, and providing two main ground-floor living rooms,
a kitchen, from two to four bedrooms, a bathroom, and one or two lavatories.
Originally, many houses were located in ‘ribbon development’ along main roads,
but in recent years housing estates have nearly always been sited away from
main roads. In inner urban areas slum clearance and redevelopment have been
major features of post-1945 public housing programmes. While high-rise flats
were popular in the 1960s and 1970s, the emphasis in new building is now on
low-rise, high-density designs, often incorporating gardens or patios.
Housing standards are continually improving; some 98 per cent of households
in Great Britain have exclusive use of a bath or shower, and a similar proportion
sole use of an inside lavatory (high percentages by international standards),
while 73 per cent have central heating.
An important influence on the planning of housing and services has been the
growth of car ownership; about 64 per cent of households have the use of at least
one car (or van), including 19 per cent with the use of two or more. Greater
access to motorised transport and the construction of a network of modern
26
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Living
Standards
trunk roads and motorways have resulted in a considerable increase in personal
mobility and changed leisure patterns, and have influenced the design of
housing estates and shopping areas. Most detached or semi-detached houses in
new suburban estates have garages, and out-of-town shopping centres, often
including large supermarkets, and do-it-yourself stores, are usually planned for
the motorist.
The growth in car ownership has brought very great benefits but also a
number of problems, notably, in many towns and cities, increased congestion,
noise and air pollution arising from motor vehicle emissions. Public transport
has been affected, and many services have been reduced or withdrawn,
especially in rural areas. However, greater competition in express coach services
has resulted in more long-distance and commuter coach services being
provided, and deregulation of local bus services in 1986 is beginning to have an
impact, the most important effect being the introduction of minibuses in many
areas.
There has been a steady reduction of the main atmospheric and freshwater
pollutants that have been of concern in the past, producing dramatic improve¬
ments in, for example, the quality of the air in cities and the condition of major
rivers, although various forms of pollution from traffic and industrial processes
remain a problem in some areas. There is a high degree of concern for the
environment, as shown by the growth in the number of organisations (especially
voluntary societies) concerned with conservation. Voluntary membership of
environmental organisations rose sharply between 1971 and 1986. For example,
the membership of the National Trust grew from 280,000 to 1-5 million, and
that of the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds from 100,000 to over
440,000.
Marked improvements in the standard of living have taken place during the
twentieth century, but until recently at a slower rate than in some other major
industrialised countries. Although gross domestic product (GDP) per head fell in
the early 1980s, Britain has experienced an economic recovery and is now into
its eighth successive year of growth, with growth since 1980 being higher than
in the other major European Community countries. In the year to the second
quarter of 1988 GDP grew by around 4 per cent in real terms, with growth
occurring throughout the economy, both in manufacturing and services.
Inflation is at a lower level than in the early 1980s; in August 1988 the index of
retail prices was 5-7 per cent higher than in August 1987.
Long-term trends in the pattern of expenditure show a substantial rise in
expenditure on housing, televisions, video recorders, telephones, electrical and
some other durable goods, motor vehicles and a range of services. Some durable
goods, such as televisions and refrigerators, are available in more than 95 per
cent of households. Of durable goods shown in the diagram on p 27, ownership
of telephones, freezers (including fridge-freezers) and central heating systems is
growing most rapidly; other durable goods which have grown in popularity
include music centres and other audio equipment, video recorders and home
computers.
The general level of nutrition remains high. Over the last 25 years there have
been substantial rises in the consumption of poultry, instant coffee and
processed (including frozen) vegetables and fruit, while home consumption per
person of mutton and lamb, beef and veal, bread, potatoes, eggs, milk, butter,
sugar, tea and some other foods has fallen. However, another feature has been
an increase in the number of meals eaten away from home, either at work or in
restaurants, and a growth in the consumption of food from ‘take-away’ and
fast-food' shops. In addition, in the 1960s and 1970s the proportion of
convenience foods eaten grew as women increasingly went out to work and had
LAND AND PEOPLE
27
Availability of Certain Durable Goods
Per cent of households with goods
Source: General Household Survey
less time to prepare meals, and as the variety of prepared foods rose in line with
the growth in ownership of refrigerators and freezers. There is some evidence of
consumption of food being influenced by health factors, for example, people are
drinking more skimmed milk at the expense of whole milk and eating more
wholemeal instead of white bread. The consumption of butter fell by two-thirds
between 1961 and 1986.
Alcohol consumption has risen substantially since the 1950s and alcohol
abuse has become a problem although the level is well below that in some other
European Community countries. Beer remains much the most popular alcoholic
drink. A high proportion of beer is drunk in public houses (‘pubs'), which are a
traditional social centre for many people, and in clubs. A notable development
has been the increase in consumption of lager, now estimated to account for
over half of beer sales. Consumption of light (table) wine has increased
considerably in recent years, although there has been little change in the
consumption of higher strength wines such as sherry and port. The pattern of
spirits consumption has also been changing, with a decline in the consumption
of whisky and gin, and higher consumption of some other spirits.
Employment has been increasing since 1983, representing the longest period
of continuous employment growth for nearly 30 years. However, the pattern of
employment has altered considerably, with a substantial decline in employment
in manufacturing industry being accompanied by a long-term increase in the
numbers employed in service industries. Another feature has been an increase
in the number of self-employed, now accounting for over 10 per cent of the
workforce. Earnings from employment are the main source of income for most
people; in 1986 wages and salaries accounted for 60 per cent of household
income. The distribution of pre-tax income has remained relatively stable over a
long period, the lower 50 per cent of income earners accounting for some 22 to
28
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Women
Equal
Opportunities
24 per cent of pre-tax income since 1949. Income before tax of the self-employed
is less evenly distributed than total income, mostly because of the veiy large
incomes of a small number of people, mainly professionals such as lawyers,
accountants and doctors. The combined effect of the tax system and the receipt
of benefits is to redistribute incomes on a more equal basis.
Wealth is much less evenly distributed, with the top 1 per cent of the
population aged 18 or over owning about 20 per cent of marketable wealth, and
the top 10 per cent having 54 per cent. The inclusion of‘non-marketable’ rights
in occupational and state pension schemes reduces these shares substantially to
around 11 and 36 per cent respectively. Since the mid-1970s there has been
little change in the distribution of marketable wealth or in that of marketable
wealth plus occupational and state pension rights. The proportion of net wealth
held in shares has been declining, but the Government's privatisation pro¬
gramme has had a major effect on the pattern of share ownership, with a survey
early in 1988 indicating that over 20 per cent of the adult population in Great
Britain were shareholders, as against 7 per cent in 1979.
Considerable changes have occurred in the twentieth century in the economic
and domestic lives of women, due, in part, to the removal of almost all sex
discrimination in political and legal rights. At the heart of women's changed role
has been the rise in the number of women, particularly married women, at work.
With later marriages and the availability of effective methods of contraception
there has been a decline in family size. Women as a result are involved in
child-bearing for a much shorter time and this, together with a variety of other
factors which have made housework less burdensome, has made it possible for
women with even young children to combine raising a family with employment.
The growth of part-time work, job-sharing and flexible working hours, together
with training and retraining schemes, allow women to take advantage of more
employment opportunities.
Women comprise 43 per cent of the workforce in Great Britain and the
proportion of married women who work outside the home has grown to over 50
per cent of those between the ages of 16 and 60. There is still a significant
difference between women’s and men’s earnings but the equal pay legislation
which came into force at the end of 1975 has narrowed the gap. Women’s
average hourly earnings, exclusive of overtime (for full-time employees),
increased from just over a half of those of men in 1970, to nearly three-quarters
in 1987. Nevertheless, women’s wages remain relatively low partly because
women tend to work in lowly paid sectors of the economy and they work less
overtime than men.
The Sex Discrimination Acts 1975 and 1986 make discrimination between men
and women unlawful in employment, education, training and the provision of
housing, goods, facilities and services. Discriminatory advertisements which
breach the Act are also unlawful. In most cases complaints of discrimination are
dealt with by industrial tribunals since they concern employment; others may be
taken before county courts in England and Wales or the sheriff court in
Scotland. Under the Equal Pay Act 1970, as amended in 1984, women in Great
Britain are entitled to equal pay with men when doing work that is the same or
broadly similar, or work which is of equal value. There is similar legislation on
sex discrimination and equal pay in Northern Ireland. The Equal Opportunities
Commission, set up in 1975 (1976 in Northern Ireland under separate
legislation), enforces the Sex Discrimination Acts and the Equal Pay Act. Its
statutory duties are to work towards the elimination of discrimination and to
promote equality of opportunity. The Commission advises people of their rights
under the Acts and may give financial or other assistance to help individuals to
LAND AND PEOPLE
29
Ethnic and
National
Minorities
Race Relations
Act
conduct a case before a court or tribunal. It also has power to conduct
investigations and to issue notices requiring discriminatoiy practices to stop. In
addition, it keeps legislation under review and may submit proposals for
amending it to the ministers concerned. The Commission seeks to make women
more aware of the opportunities available to them and its information centre is a
national source of material on all aspects of equality.
People have been coming to settle in Britain for centuries from many parts of the
world. Some came to avoid political or religious persecution, others to find a
better way of life or an escape from poverty.
The Irish have long made homes in Britain. Many Jewish refugees started a
new life in the country towards the end of the nineteenth century and in the
1930s, and after 1945 large numbers of other European refugees settled in
Britain. The large communities from the West Indies and South Asian
sub-continent date principally from the 1950s and 1960s. There are also
sizeable groups of Americans, Australians, Chinese and various European
communities such as Greek and Turkish Cypriots, Italians and Spaniards. More
recently Ugandan Asians and people from Latin America, Indo-China and Sri
Lanka have sought refuge in Britain.
In 1984-86, according to the results of a sample survey, the non-white
population of Great Britain was nearly 2 -4 million (some 4-5 per cent of the total
population) of whom about 43 per cent were born in Great Britain. Although
they are disproportionately concentrated in areas of greatest deprivation in the
inner cities where the disadvantages they share with the poorer sections of the
indigenous community are compounded by racial discrimination, progress has
undoubtedly been made over the last 20 years in several areas of life. Many
individuals have achieved distinction in their careers and in public life and
the proportion of ethnic minority workers in professional and managerial jobs
has increased. The growth of commercial enterprise has been significant,
particularly among Asians, and there are numerous examples of self-help
in ethnic minority communities.
The principal means of combating disadvantage is through the economic,
environmental, educational and health programmes of central government and
local authorities, as well as through special programmes which channel extra
resources into projects to benefit ethnic minorities specifically. The latter
provide, for example, such staff as specialist teachers for those groups of
children who need English language tuition, business support services and
measures to revive local economies and improve the environment in inner city
areas. Cultural and recreational schemes are funded, including community and
social centres for different ethnic minorities, and the health and personal social
services make special provision for certain groups.
The welfare of ethnic minorities and good relations between minorities and
the local community are promoted by community relations councils and other
voluntary bodies. In recognition of the tensions that can arise between the police
and ethnic minorities, consultation between the police and the community has
been made a statutory requirement, liaison work is undertaken in the schools
and police training in race relations has received particular attention.
Policies for promoting equality of opportunity in a multiracial society in which
all citizens receive equal respect are pursued against a background of legislation
against discrimination. The Race Relations Act 1976 makes discrimination
unlawful on grounds of colour, race, nationality or ethnic or national origin in
the provision of goods, facilities and services, in employment, training and
related matters, in education, in housing and in advertising. It strengthened
legislation passed in 1968 which, in turn, widened the scope of the first race
30
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Commission for
Racial Equality
Leisure
Trends
relations legislation enacted in 1965. It also strengthened the criminal law on
incitement to racial hatred which was further reinforced by the Public Order Act
1986.
The 1976 Act brought the law against racial discrimination into line with that
against sex discrimination (see p 28), and gave complainants direct access to
civil courts and, in the case of employment complaints, to industrial tribunals.
The Commission for Racial Equality was established by the Race Relations Act
1976 with statutory duties to work towards the elimination of discrimination
and to promote equality of opportunity and good relations between people of
different racial groups. It has power to investigate unlawful discriminatory
practices and to issue non-discrimination notices, requiring that such practices
should cease. It has an important educational role and has issued a code of
practice in employment. It is also the principal source of advice for the general
public about the Race Relations Act and has discretion to assist individuals with
their complaints. The Commission can also undertake or fund research.
The Commission supports the work of the 100 or so community relations
councils, which are autonomous, voluntary bodies set up in most areas with a
significant ethnic minority population to promote equality of opportunity and
good relations at the local level. It makes grants towards the salaries of the
community relations officers employed by the councils, most of whom also
receive funds from their local authorities, and gives grants to ethnic minority
self-help groups and to other projects run by or for the benefit of the minority
communities.
Most people have considerably more free time, more ways in which to spend it
and higher real incomes than had previous generations. Agreed hours of
full-time work are usually from 35 to 40 hours a week, although many people
actually work somewhat longer because of voluntary overtime. A large majority of
employees work a five-day week.
The most common leisure activities are home based, or social, such as visiting
or entertaining relatives or friends. Television viewing is by far the most popular
leisure pastime, and nearly all households have a television set, with 90 per cent
in 1987 having a colour set. Over 51 per cent of households have two or more
television sets and average viewing time for the population aged four and over is
about 28 hours a week. Growing numbers are using video recorders to watch
programmes at times other than their transmission; the proportion of
households with a video recorder rose from 24 per cent in 1984 to 46 per cent in
1987. Other popular pursuits include: listening to the radio, records, compact
discs or cassettes; reading; do-it-yourself home improvements such as house
painting and decorating; going out for a meal or for a drink or to the cinema or to
watch a sporting event; gardening; outings (such as visits to the countryside,
seaside or to museums); photography; visits to social clubs and leisure centres;
and social and voluntary work. About half the households in Britain have a pet,
the most common being dogs (of which there are thought to be over 6 million in
Britain) and cats, the number of which has gradually risen to about 6 million.
Sports and other pastimes have grown in popularity, reflected by increasing
membership of the main organisations concerned with outdoor activities,
although for some sports, such as greyhound racing, the number of spectators
has been declining. Walking and swimming are the two most popular sporting
activities, being almost equally undertaken by men and women. Snooker/
billiards/pool and darts are the next most popular sports among men. Keep-fit,
yoga, squash and cycling are among the sports where participation has been
increasing in recent years.
Holiday entitlements have increased for most full-time employees, and by the
LAND AND PEOPLE
31
end of 1987, nearly all manual workers had a basic holiday entitlement of four
weeks or more and over one-fifth five weeks or more. In 1987, 58 per cent of the
population took at least one long holiday of four or more nights away from home,
the main holiday period being from May to September. The number of long
holidays taken by British residents was 48-5 million in 1987 (compared with
43-8 million in 1977), of which 28-5 million were taken in Britain. The most
popular destinations for summer holidays are the West Country and southern
England. In addition, some 37 million shorter holidays were taken in Britain in
1987. British residents also took 20 million holidays overseas in 1987, of which
62 per cent involved package arrangements. The most popular destinations
were Spain, France and Greece. An increasing number of people take more than
one holiday each year, many choosing an activity holiday (such as sports,
walking, climbing or pot-holing) for their second break; the proportion of adults
taking two or more holidays a year increased from 15 per cent in 1971 to 21 per
cent in 1987.
2 Government
The United Kingdom constitution, unlike that of most other countries, is not
contained in any single document. Formed partly by statute, partly by common
law and partly by convention, it can be altered by Act of Parliament, or by general
agreement to create, vary or abolish a convention. The constitution thus adapts
readily to changing political conditions and ideas.
The organs of government are clearly distinguishable although their functions
often intermingle and overlap. The legislature, Parliament, is the supreme
authority. The executive consists of: (1) the Government—Cabinet and other
ministers who are responsible for initiating and directing national policy;
(2) government departments, which are responsible for national administration;
(3) local authorities, which administer and manage many local services; and
(4) public corporations responsible for operating particular nationalised indus¬
tries or, for example, a social or cultural service, subject to ministerial control in
varying degrees. The judiciary determines common law and interprets statutes,
and is independent of both legislature and executive.
The Monarchy
The British people look to the Queen not only as their head of State, but also as
the symbol of their nation’s unity. The monarchy is the most ancient secular
institution in the United Kingdom. During the last thousand years its
continuity has only once been broken (by the establishment of a republic which
lasted from 1649 to 1660) and, despite interruptions in the direct line of
succession, the hereditary principle upon which it was founded has always been
preserved. The royal title in the United Kingdom is: ‘Elizabeth the Second, by the
Grace of God of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and of
Her other Realms and Territories Queen, Head of the Commonwealth, Defender
of the Faith’. The form of the royal title is varied for those other member states of
the Commonwealth of which the Queen is head of State,1 to suit the particular
circumstances of each. Other member states are republics or have their own
monarchies.
The seat of the monarchy is in the United Kingdom. In the Channel Islands
and the Isle of Man the Queen is represented by a Lieutenant-Governor. In the
other member nations of the Commonwealth of which the Queen is head of
State, her representative is the Governor-General appointed by her on the advice
of the ministers of the country concerned and completely independent of the
United Kingdom Government.
In the United Kingdom dependencies the Queen is usually represented by
governors, who are responsible to the British Government for the good
government of the countries concerned.
C?T0nuTlth couDntries of which the Queen is head of State are: Antigua and
arbuda Australia, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Canada, Grenada, Jamaica, Mauritius New
Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Saint Christopher and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Solomon Islands and Tuvalu
The Royal Family
From the reign of Queen Victoria to August 1988
QUEEN VICTORIA 1819-1901
i. Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha (Prince Consort)
-a
§
£
£
O
CO
g
'35
T3
§
co
  v
r
g
&
<s
CO
H
'co
-a
O
(N
E ^
(f)
r)
? tr
I 1 § -8 g „ c S11
E
m io b c
a) a) 05 9- 3
^ ^
-S-SS-.E
Q
1
| Sc s
i SA, § s
fliil
slomo
GOVERNMENT
35
Succession,
Accession and
Coronation
Acts of
Government
The title to the Crown derives partly from statute and partly from common law
rules of descent. Lineal Protestant descendants of a granddaughter of James I of
England and VI of Scotland (Princess Sophia, the Electress of Hanover) are alone
eligible to succeed, and although succession is not bound to continue in its
present line, it can be altered only by common consent of the member nations of
the Commonwealth of which the Queen is Sovereign.
The sons of the Sovereign have precedence over the daughters in succeeding
to the throne. When a daughter succeeds, she becomes Queen-Regnant, and the
powers of the Crown are vested in her as though she were a king. While the
consort of a king takes her husband s rank and style, the constitution does not
give any special rank or privileges to the husband of a Queen-Regnant although
in practice he fills an important role in the life of the nation, as does the Duke of
Edinburgh.
The Sovereign succeeds to the throne as soon as his or her predecessor dies
and there is no interregnum. He or she is at once proclaimed at an Accession
Council to which all members of the Privy Council are summoned. The Lords
Spiritual and Temporal (see p 38), the Lord Mayor and Aldermen and other
leading citizens of the City of London are also invited.
The Sovereign s coronation follows the accession after a convenient interval. It
is a ceremony which has remained essentially the same for over a thousand
years, even if details have often been modified to conform to the customs of the
time. It takes place at Westminster Abbey in London in the presence of
representatives of the Houses of Parliament and of all the great public interests
of the United Kingdom, of the Prime Ministers and leading members of the other
Commonwealth nations, and of representatives of other countries.
The Queen personifies the State. In law, she is head of the executive, an integral
part of the legislature, head of the judiciary, the commander-in-chief of all armed
forces of the Crown and the ‘supreme governor’ of the established Church of
England. As a result of a long process of evolution, during which the monarchy’s
absolute power has been progressively reduced, the Queen acts on the advice of
her ministers, which she cannot ignore. The United Kingdom is governed by Her
Majesty’s Government in the name of the Queen.
Within this framework, and in spite of a trend during the past hundred years
towards assigning powers directly to ministers, there are still important acts of
government which require the participation of the Queen. These include
summoning, proroguing (discontinuing until the next session without disso¬
lution) and dissolving Parliament; giving Royal Assent to Bills passed by
Parliament; appointing many important office holders, including government
ministers, judges, officers in the armed forces, governors, diplomats and
bishops and some other senior clergy of the Church of England; conferring
peerages, knighthoods and other honours1; and remitting all or part of the
penalty imposed on a person convicted of a crime. An important function is
appointing the Prime Minister and by convention the Queen invites the leader of
the political party which commands a majority in the House of Commons to form
a government. In international affairs, the Queen as head of State has the power
to declare war and make peace, to recognise foreign states and governments, to
conclude treaties and to annexe or cede territory.
With rare exceptions (as when appointing the Prime Minister), those acts
involving the use of royal prerogative’ powers are nowadays performed by
government ministers who are responsible to Parliament and can be questioned
about a particular policy. It is not necessary to have Parliament’s authority to
1 Although most honours are conferred by the Queen on the advice of the Prime Minister a few
are conferred on her personal selection—the Order of the Garter, the Order of the Thistle the
Order of Merit and the Royal Victorian Order.
36
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Ceremonial and
Royal Visits
Royal Income
and
Expenditure
exercise these powers, although Parliament has the power to restrict or abolish a
prerogative right.
Ministerial responsibility in no way detracts from the importance of the
Queen’s role in the smooth working of government. She holds meetings of the
Privy Council, gives audiences to her ministers and other officials in Britain and
overseas, receives accounts of Cabinet decisions, reads dispatches and signs
numerous state papers; she must be informed and consulted on every aspect of
national life; and she must show complete impartiality.
Such is the significance attached to these royal functions that provision has
been made for a regent to be appointed to perform them should the Queen be
totally incapacitated. The regent would be the Queen’s eldest son, the Prince of
Wales, then those in succession to the throne who are of age. In the event of the
Queen’s partial incapacity or absence abroad, there is provision for appointing
Counsellors of State (the Duke of Edinburgh, the four adults next in line of
succession, and the Queen Mother) to whom the Queen may delegate certain
royal functions. However, Counsellors of State may not, for instance, dissolve
Parliament (except on the Queen’s express instructions), or create peers.
Ceremonial has always been associated with British kings and queens, and, in
spite of the change in the outlook of both the Sovereign and the people, many
traditional customs and ceremonies are retained. Royal marriages and royal
funerals are marked by public ceremony, and the Sovereign’s birthday is
officially celebrated in June by Trooping the Colour on Horse Guards Parade.
State banquets take place when a foreign monarch or head of State visits
Britain; investitures are held at Buckingham Palace and the Palace of
Holyroodhouse in Scotland to bestow honours; and royal processions add
significance to such occasions as a State opening of Parliament, when the
Queen drives from Buckingham Palace to Westminster. Each year the Queen
and other members of the royal family visit many parts of the United Kingdom.
Their presence at scientific, artistic, industrial and charitable events of national
and local importance encourages nationwide interest and publicity. The Queen
pays state visits to foreign governments, accompanied by the Duke of
Edinburgh. She also undertakes lengthy tours in the other countries of the
Commonwealth. Other members of the royal family pay official visits overseas,
occasionally representing the Queen, and often in connection with an organisa¬
tion or a cause with which they are associated.
About 85 per cent of the expenditure arising from the royal family’s official
duties is met by public departments. This includes the costs of the royal yacht,
the Queen’s Flight, travel by train and the upkeep of the royal palaces. The
Queen’s public expenditure on staff and expenses incurred in carrying out
official duties as head of State is financed from the Civil List, approved by
Parliament. (In 1988 this was £4-5 million.) Her private expenditure as
Sovereign is met from the Privy Purse, which is supplied mainly from the
revenues of the Duchy of Lancaster1; and her personal expenditure as a private
individual from her own personal resources. There are annual allowances
approved by Parliament to other members of the royal family, though not to the
Prince of Wales, who as Duke of Cornwall is entitled to the net revenue of the
estate of the Duchy of Cornwall (he voluntarily surrenders a quarter of the
revenue to the Exchequer). The Queen pays into the Exchequer a sum
equivalent to that provided by Parliament in respect of certain members of the
royal family.
1 The Duchy of Lancaster is an inheritance which, since 1399, has always been enjoyed by the
reigning Sovereign; it is kept quite apart from his or her other possessions and is separately
administered by the Chancellor of the Duchy.
GOVERNMENT
37
The Functions
of Parliament
The Meeting of
Parliament
Parliament
Parliament is the supreme legislative authority. Its three elements, the Queen,
the House of Lords and the elected House of Commons, are outwardly separate,
are constituted on different principles, and meet together only on occasions of
symbolic significance such as the State opening of Parliament when the
Commons are summoned by the Queen to the House of Lords. As a law-making
body, however, Parliament usually requires the concurrence of all its parts.
Parliament can legislate for the United Kingdom as a whole, for any of the
constituent parts of the country separately, or for any combination of them. It
can also legislate for the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man, which are Crown
dependencies and not part of the United Kingdom, having subordinate
legislatures which make laws on island affairs.1
Free from any legal restraints imposed by a written constitution, Parliament is
able to legislate as it pleases: generally to make, unmake, or alter any law; to
legalise past illegalities and make void and punishable what was lawful when
done and thus reverse the decisions of the ordinary courts; and to destroy
established conventions or turn a convention into binding law. It can prolong its
own life beyond the normal period without consulting the electorate.
In practice, however. Parliament does not assert its supremacy in this way. Its
members bear in mind the common law and have tended to act in accordance
with precedent and tradition. The validity of an Act of Parliament which has
been duly passed, promulgated and published cannot be disputed in the law
courts, but no Parliament would be likely to pass an Act which it knew would
receive no public support. The system of party government helps to ensure that
Parliament legislates with its responsibility to the electorate in mind.
As a member of the European Community, the United Kingdom recognises the
various types of Community legislation, and sends 81 elected members to the
European Parliament.
The main functions of Parliament are (1) to pass laws, (2) to provide, by voting
taxation, the means of carrying on the work of government, (3) to scrutinise
government policy and administration, particularly proposals for expenditure,
and (4) to debate the major political issues of the day. In discharging these
functions Parliament helps to bring the relevant facts and issues before the
electorate. By custom. Parliament is also consulted before the ratification of all
important international treaties and agreements, the making of treaties being,
in theory at least, a royal prerogative exercised on the advice of the Government
and not subject to parliamentary approval.
A Parliament has a maximum duration of five years, but is often dissolved and a
general election held before the end of this term. The maximum life has been
prolonged by legislation in rare circumstances such as the two world wars.
Dissolution and writs for a general election are ordered by the Queen on the
advice of the Prime Minister.
The life of a Parliament is divided into sessions. Each usually lasts for one
year—beginning and ending most often in October or November and inter¬
spersed with ‘adjournments’ at night, at weekends, at Christmas, Easter and
the late (English) Spring Bank Holiday and during a long summer recess
starting in late July or early August. The average number of ‘sitting’ days in a
session is about 175 in the House of Commons and about 155 in the House of
1 The legislatures of the Channel Islands (the States of Jersey and the States of Guernsey) and the
Isle of Man (the Tynwald Court) consist of the Queen, the Privy Council and the local assemblies. It
is the duty of the Home Secretary, as the Privy Council member primarily concerned with island
affairs, to scrutinise each legislative measure before it is submitted to the Queen in Council.
38
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The House of
Lords
Lords. At the start of each session the Queen’s speech to Parliament outlines the
Government’s broad policies and proposed legislative programme. Each session
is terminated by prorogation. Parliament then ‘stands prorogued until the new
session opens. A short speech is made on behalf of the Queen summarising
Parliament’s work during the past session. An adjournment does not affect
uncompleted business, but prorogation terminates nearly all parliamentary
business, so that all public Bills not completed lapse, and must be reintroduced
in the next session unless they are to be abandoned.
The House of Lords consists of the Lords Spiritual and the Lords Temporal. The
Lords Spiritual are the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, the Bishops of
London, Durham and Winchester, and the 21 next most senior diocesan
bishops of the Church of England. The Lords Temporal consist of (1) all
hereditary peers and peeresses of England, Scotland, Great Britain and the
United Kingdom, (2) all life peers and peeresses, and (3) those Lords of Appeal
(‘law lords’) created life peers to assist the House in its judicial duties. Hereditary
peerages carry a right to sit in the House (subject to certain disqualifications),
provided the holder establishes his or her claim and is 21 years of age or over,
but anyone succeeding to a peerage may, within 12 months of succession,
disclaim that peerage for his or her lifetime. Disclaimants lose their right to sit
in the House but gain the right to vote at parliamentary elections and to offer
themselves for election to the House of Commons.
Peerages, both hereditary and life, are conferred by the Sovereign on the
advice of the Prime Minister. They are usually granted in recognition of service
in politics or other walks of life. Some peers are created because the Government
of the day wishes to have the recipient in the House of Lords. The House also
provides a place in Parliament for men and women whose advice is useful to the
State, but who do not wish to be involved in party politics.
In mid-1988 there were 1,190 members of the House of Lords, including the
two archbishops and 24 bishops. The Lords Temporal consisted of 759
hereditary peers who had succeeded to their titles, 26 hereditary peers who have
had their titles conferred on them (including the Prince of Wales), and 379 life
peers, of whom 21 were ‘law lords’. Of the total, 81 peers were not in receipt of a
writ of summons and some 179 peers were on leave of absence from the House
(see below). Of the peers of Ireland, 47 were entitled to sit in the House of Lords
because they were holders of an English, Scottish or United Kingdom peerage.
Other Irish peerages do not entitle their holders to membership of the House of
Lords.
Not all peers with a right to sit in the House of Lords attend the sittings.1 Peers
who frequently attend the House (the average daily attendance is some 320)
include elder statesmen and others who have spent their lives in public service.
They receive no salary for their parliamentary work, but can recover expenses
incurred in attending the House (for which there are maximum daily rates) and
certain travelling expenses. (For ministers’ salaries, see p 51.)
The House is presided over by the Lord Chancellor, who takes his place on the
woolsack2 as ex-officio Speaker of the House. In his absence his place may be
taken by a deputy speaker, a deputy chairman or, if neither is present, by a
speaker chosen by the Lords present. The first of the deputy speakers is the Lord
Chairman of Committees, who is appointed at the beginning of each session and
1 Some hereditary peers do not establish their claim to succeed and so do not receive a writ of
summons entitling them to sit in the House. Lords may apply for leave of absence for the
duration, or for the remainder, of a Parliament.
2 The woolsack is a seat in the form of a large cushion stuffed with wool from several
Commonwealth countries; it is a relic from the medieval period when wool was the greatest source
of the country’s wealth.
GOVERNMENT
39
The House of
Commons
Parliamentary
Electoral
System
takes the chair in all committees, unless the House decides otherwise. The Lord
Chairman and the Principal Deputy Chairman of Committees are salaried
officers of the House.
The permanent officers include the Clerk of the Parliaments who is respon¬
sible for the records of proceedings, including judgments, and for the
promulgation of Acts of Parliament, and who is also the accounting officer for
money voted to the House; the other Clerks at the Table who, with the Clerk of
the Parliaments and the other officers and officials of the House, are collectively
known as the Parliament Office; the Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod, who is
also Serjeant at Arms in attendance upon the Lord Chancellor and is responsible
for security, accommodation and services in the House of Lords’ part of the
Palace of Westminster; and the Yeoman Usher who is Deputy Serjeant at Arms
and assists Black Rod in his duties.
The House of Commons is elected by universal adult suffrage and consists of 650
Members of Parliament (MPs). At present 41 are women. Of the 650 seats, 523
are for England, 38 for Wales, 72 for Scotland, and 17 for Northern Ireland.
General elections are held after a Parliament has been dissolved and a new one
summoned by the Queen. When an MP dies or resigns1 or is given a peerage, a
by-election takes place. Members are paid an annual salary of £24,107 (from
January 1989) and an office costs allowance of £22,588. There are also a
number of other allowances, including travel allowances, a supplement for
London members and, for provincial members, subsistence allowances and
allowances for second homes. (For ministers’ salaries, see p 51.)
The chief officer of the House of Commons is the Speaker, elected by MPs to
preside over the House. Other officers are the Chairman of Ways and Means, and
two deputy chairmen who act as Deputy Speakers, elected by the House on the
nomination of the Government. They, like the Speaker, neither speak nor vote
other than in their official capacity. The House is administered by a Commission
chaired by the Speaker.
Permanent officers (who are not MPs) include the Clerk of the House of
Commons, who is the principal adviser to the Speaker of the House on its
privileges and procedures; his department has responsibilities relating to the
conduct of the business of the House and its many committees. The Clerk is also
accounting officer for the House. The Serjeant at Arms, who waits upon the
Speaker, carries out certain orders of the House, is the official housekeeper of
the Commons’ part of the building, and is responsible for its security. Other
officers serve the House in the Library, the Department of the Official Report
(Hansard), the Administration Department and the Refreshment Department.
For electoral purposes the United Kingdom is divided into constituencies, each
of which returns one member to the House of Commons. To ensure equitable
representation four permanent Boundary Commissions, one each for England,
Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, make periodic reviews of constituencies
and recommend any redistribution of seats that may seem necessary in the light
of population movements or other changes.
Elections are by secret ballot. British citizens, together with citizens of other
Commonwealth countries and citizens of the Irish Republic resident in the
United Kingdom, may vote provided they are aged 18 or over, registered in the
annual register of electors for the constituency and not subject to any
disqualification. People not entitled to vote include members of the House of
An MP who wishes to resign from the House can do so only by using the technical device of
applying for an office under the Crown (Crown Steward or Bailiff of the Chiltern Hundreds, or
Steward of the Manor of Northstead), ancient offices which disqualify the holder from
membership of the House but which cany no salary and have no responsibilities.
40
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Lords, patients detained under mental health legislation, sentenced prisoners
and people convicted within the previous five years of corrupt or illegal election
practices. Service voters (members of the armed forces and their spouses, Crown
servants and staff of the British Council employed overseas, together with their
wives or husbands if accompanying them) may be registered for an address in a
constituency where they would live but for their service. In 1987 the franchise
was extended when the right to vote was granted to overseas electors, that is,
British citizens who had been resident in the United Kingdom and registered as
electors within the previous five years.
Each elector may cast one vote, normally in person at a polling station. Anyone
who is entitled to an absent vote may vote by post or by proxy, but postal ballot
papers cannot be sent to addresses outside the United Kingdom. Service voters,
overseas electors, electors who are physically incapacitated or unable to vote in
person because of the nature of their work may vote by post or by proxy for an
indefinite period. In 1987 the right to apply for an absent vote at a particular
election was extended to any elector whose circumstances on polling day are
such that he or she cannot reasonably be expected to vote in person at his or her
allotted polling station, for example, an elector away on holiday.
Voting is not compulsory; 74-6 per cent of a total electorate of 43-6 million
people voted in the general election in June 1987. The candidate who polls the
most votes in a constituency is elected.
British citizens and citizens of other Commonwealth countries, together with
citizens of the Irish Republic, may stand and be elected as MPs provided they are
aged 21 or over and are not subject to any disqualification. Those disqualified
include undischarged bankrupts; people sentenced to more than one year’s
imprisonment; clergy of the Church of England, Church of Scotland, Church of
Ireland and Roman Catholic Church; peers; and holders of certain offices listed
in the House of Commons Disqualification Act 1975. The latter include holders
of judicial office, civil servants, some local government officers, members of the
regular armed forces, or the police service, some members of public corporations
and government commissions, and in addition British members of the
legislature of any country or territory outside the Commonwealth. A candidate’s
nomination for election must be signed by two electors as proposer and
seconder, and by eight other electors registered in the constituency. He or she
does not require any party backing. A candidate must also deposit £500, which
is forfeited if his or her votes do not exceed 5 per cent of those validly cast.
The maximum sum a candidate may spend on an election campaign is £3,370
plus 2-9 pence for each elector in a borough constituency or 3-8 pence for each
elector in a county constituency. A candidate may post an election address to
each elector in the constituency, free of charge. All election expenses, apart from
the candidate’s personal expenses, are subject to the statutory limit.
The Political The party system, existing in one form or another since the eighteenth century,
Party System is an essential element in the working of the constitution.
The present system relies heavily upon the existence of organised political
parties, each laying policies before the electorate for approval. The parties are
not registered or formally recognised in law, but in practice most candidates in
elections, and almost all winning candidates, belong to one of the main parties.
For the last 150 years a predominantly two-party system has operated, and
since 1945 either the Conservative Party, which can trace its origins to the
eighteenth century, or the Labour Party, which emerged in the last decade of the
nineteenth century, has held power. A new party—the Social and Liberal
Democrats—was formed in 1988 when members of the former Liberal Party
(which traced its origins to the eighteenth century) merged with members of the
Social Democratic Party, which was itself formed in 1981. A separate Social
THE MONARCHY
The Queen opened
Australia’s new
Parliament House, in
Canberra, in May 1988.
In the historic
surroundings of
Westminster Hall,
London, the Queen
and the Duke of
Edinburgh received
Addresses from both
Houses of Parliament
on the occasion of the
tercentenary of the
Revolution of
1688—89, known as
‘The Glorious
Revolution’.
BRITAIN’S UPLANDS
The Mourne
Mountains, Northern
Ireland.
Snowdon, Wales.
NATURAL HISTORY
The vast collection of specimens
made by naturalist Carl Linnaeus
(1701-78) is preserved by the
Linnean Society, London. The
oldest surviving scientific society
in the world, the society
celebrated its bicentenary in
1988.
Giant water lilies in the Princess
of Wales Conservatory, the
newest and largest glasshouse at
the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew.
GOVERNMENT
41
Democratic Party (SDP) continues to exist, being formed of those SDP members
who opposed the merger. Other parties include two nationalist parties. Plaid
Cymru (founded in Wales in 1925) and the Scottish National Party (founded in
1934). In Northern Ireland there are a number of parties; the largest of those
represented in the House of Commons are the Ulster Unionist Party, which was
formed in the early part of this century, and the Democratic Unionist Party,
founded in 1971 by a group which broke away from the Ulster Unionists.
Since 1945 seven general elections have been won by the Conservative Party
and six by the Labour Party and the great majority of members of the House of
Commons have represented either one or other of these two parties. The
percentages of votes cast for the main political parties in the last general election
of June 1987 and the resulting distribution of seats in the House of Commons
are given in Table 3.
Table 3: Percentages of Votes Cast, and Members Elected, in the 1987 General
Election
Party
% of votes
cast
Party
Members
elected
Conservative 42-3
Labour 308
Liberal—Social
Democratic Alliance3 22-6
Others 4-3
Conservative
Labour
Liberal
Social Democratic
Scottish National
Plaid Cymru
(Welsh Nationalist)
Ulster Unionist
(Northern Ireland)
Democratic Unionist
(Northern Ireland)
Social Democratic and
Labour (Northern Ireland)
Ulster Popular Unionist
(Northern Ireland)
Sinn Fein (Northern Ireland)'
Speaker
Total
375
229
17
5
3
9
3
3
1
1
_Lb
650
The former Liberal and Social Democratic Parties (see p 40) entered into an electoral alliance in 1981 and
contested the general elections of 1983 and 1987 with a joint programme.
The Speakers candidacy was as Mr Speaker seeking re-election'. (He was, before his election as Speaker a
Conservative MP.)
r The member of Sinn Fein (the political wing of the Provisional IRA) has not taken his seat.
Note: On 1 September 1988 the state of the parties (excluding the Speaker and his three deputies) was as follows:
Conservative 374, Labour 227, Social and Liberal Democrat 19, Social Democratic 3, Scottish National 3, Plaid
Cymru (Welsh Nationalist) 3, Ulster Unionist 9, Democratic Unionist 3, Social Democratic and Labour 3 Ulster
Popular Unionist 1, Sinn Fein 1.
The party which wins most seats (although not necessarily the most votes) at a
general election, or which has the support of a majority of members in the House
of Commons, usually forms the Government. By tradition, the leader of the
majority party is asked by the Sovereign to form a government; and about 100 of
its members in the House of Commons and the House of Lords receive
ministerial appointments (including appointment to the Cabinet—see p 51) on
the advice of the Prime Minister. The largest minority party becomes the official
Opposition with its own leader and ‘shadow cabinet’.
42
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Parliamentary
Procedure
Leaders of the Government and Opposition sit on the front benches of the
Commons with their supporters (the back-benchers) sitting behind them.
Similar arrangements for the parties also apply to the House of Lords; however.
Lords who do not wish to be associated with any political party may sit on the
‘cross-benches’. The effectiveness of the party system in Parliament rests largely
on the relationship between the Government and the opposition parties.
Depending on the relative voting strengths of the parties in the House of
Commons, the Opposition might seek to overthrow the Government by securing
its defeat on a ‘matter of confidence’. In general, however, its aims are to
contribute to the formulation of policy and legislation by constructive criticism;
to oppose government proposals it considers objectionable; to secure con¬
cessions on government Bills; and to increase public support and enhance its
chances of electoral success.
The detailed arrangements of government business are settled, under the
direction of the Prime Minister and the Leaders of the two Houses, by the Chief
Government Whips in consultation with the Chief Opposition Whips. The Chief
Whips together constitute the ‘usual channels’ often referred to when the
question of finding time for debating some particular issue is discussed. The
Leaders of the two Houses are primarily responsible for the direction of business
and for providing facilities for the Houses to debate matters about which they
are concerned.
Outside Parliament, party control is exercised by the national and local
organisations. Inside Parliament, it is exercised by the Chief Whips and their
assistants (chosen within the party) whose duties include keeping members
informed of forthcoming parliamentary business, maintaining the party’s
voting strength by ensuring members attend important debates, and conveying
to the party leadership the opinions of back-bench members. The importance a
party attaches to a vote on a particular issue is indicated to the MPs by the
underlining (once, twice or three times) on the notice sent to them; failure to
comply with a ‘three-line whip’ is usually seen as rebellion against the party’s
policy. Party discipline tends to be less strong in the Lords than in the
Commons.
The Chief Government Whip in the Commons is Parliamentary Secretary to
the Treasury; of the other Government Whips, three (one of whom is Deputy
Chief Whip) are officers of the Royal Household, five hold titular posts as Lords
Commissioners of the Treasury and five are Assistant Whips. Salaries are also
paid to the Chief Opposition Whips in both Houses and to two of the Opposition
Assistant Whips in the Commons. The Government Whips in the Lords hold
offices in the Royal Household and act as government spokesmen.
Annual assistance from public funds helps opposition parties carry out their
parliamentary work at Westminster. It is limited to parties which had at least
two members elected at the previous general election or one member elected and
a minimum of 150,000 votes cast. The amount is £2,550 for every seat won plus
£5-10 for every 200 votes.
Parliamentary procedure is based on custom and precedent, partly formulated
in standing orders governing details of practice in each House. The system of
debate is much the same in the two Houses: the subject originates in the form of
a motion (a proposal made by a member in order to elicit a decision from the
House). When a motion has been moved, the Speaker proposes the question as
the subject of debate. At the end of each debate the question may be agreed to
without voting, or else is decided by a vote on a simple majority. The main
difference between the two Houses is that in the Lords the office of Speaker
carries with it no authority to check or curtail debate, such matters being
decided by the general sense of the House, whereas in the Commons the Speaker
GOVERNMENT
43
Legislative
Proceedings
has full authority to give effect, promptly and decisively, to the rules and orders
of the House. The Speaker of the Commons must guard against abuse of
procedure or infringement of minority rights; has discretion to allow or disallow
a closure motion (to end discussion so that the matter may be put to the vote);
and has powers to check irrelevance and repetition in debate, and to save time in
other respects. In cases of grave disorder the House can be adjourned or the
sitting suspended by the Speaker. Voting in the Commons is under the direction
of the Speaker, whose duty it is to pronounce the final result. In the event of a
tied vote the Speaker gives the casting vote, but only in accordance with
established conventions which preclude an expression of opinion on the merits
of the question.
The voting procedure in the House of Lords is similar to that in the Commons,
except that the Speaker or chairman has an original, but no casting, vote. Bills
and subordinate legislation are in general allowed to proceed in the form before
the House unless a majority votes to reject or amend them; on other motions the
question is decided in the negative unless there is a majority in favour. When the
House is sitting judicially (the Lords is the final court of appeal for civil cases in
Britain and for criminal cases in England, Wales and Northern Ireland) the
judgment under appeal is not changed if the votes are equal.
The Commons has a public register of MPs’ financial interests. Members with
a relevant pecuniary interest in a matter before the House, direct or indirect,
must declare it when taking part in a debate, though to act as a disqualification
from voting the interest must be direct, immediate and personal. In any other
proceedings of the House or in transactions with other members or with
ministers or civil servants, MPs must also disclose any relevant financial interest
or benefit. There is no register of financial interests in the Lords, but peers
speaking in a debate in which they have a direct interest are expected to declare
it.
Proceedings of both Houses are public, except on extremely rare occasions; the
minutes (in the Commons called Votes and Proceedings and in the Lords,
Minutes of Proceedings) and the speeches (The Official Report of Parliamentary
Debates, Hansard) are published daily. The records of the Lords from 1497 and
of the Commons from 1547, together with the parliamentary and political
papers of certain past members of both Houses, are available to the public on
application to the House of Lords Record Office. The Commons is not at present
televised, but proceedings are recorded and sound transmissions of some are
made on television and radio, either live or recorded. A Parliamentary Sound
Archive has been established. Debates on televising proceedings have taken
place on several occasions and in February 1988 the House of Commons voted in
favour of televising its proceedings for an experimental period. The proceedings
of the House of Lords have been televised since 1985.
The law undergoes constant reform in the courts as established principles are
interpreted, clarified or reapplied to meet new circumstances, but substantial
changes are the responsibility of Parliament and the Government through the
normal legislative process.
A draft law takes the form of a parliamentary Bill. Most Bills are public Bills
involving measures relating to public policy, but there are also private Bills
which deal solely with matters of individual, corporate or local interest. Hybrid
Bills are public Bills which may in certain respects affect private rights, and
their passage through Parliament is governed by a special procedure which
allows those affected to make representations. Public Bills can be introduced, in
either House, by a government minister or by a ‘private’ member. Most public
Bills that become law are in practice sponsored by the Government.
Before a government Bill is finally drafted, there is normally considerable
44
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
consultation with professional bodies, voluntary organisations and other
agencies interested in the subject matter, such as major interest and pressure
groups which aim to promote a specific cause. Proposals for legislative changes
are sometimes set out in government ‘White Papers’ which may be debated in
Parliament before a Bill is introduced. From time to time consultative
documents, sometimes called ‘Green Papers’, set out for public discussion
government proposals which are still at a formative stage.
Bills must be passed by each House. As a rule government Bills likely to raise
political controversy go through the Commons before the Lords, while those of
an intricate and technical nature often pass through the Lords first. (Consolida¬
tion Bills are always introduced in the House of Lords.) A Bill with a mainly
financial purpose is nearly always introduced in the Commons, and a Bill
involving taxation must be based on resolutions agreed by that House, often
after debate, before it can be introduced. If the main object of a Bill is to create a
public charge, it can only be introduced by a minister or, if brought from the
Lords, be proceeded with in the Commons if taken up by a minister, an
arrangement which gives the Government considerable control over legislation.
At the beginning of each session private members of the Commons ballot for
precedence in introducing a Bill on one of the Fridays specially allocated; the
first 20 are successful. After the ballot a private member may also present a Bill
after question time (see p 47), or seek to introduce a Bill under the ‘ten minute
rule' which allows two speeches, one in favour of and one against the measure,
after which the House decides whether to allow the Bill to be brought in. Private
members’ Bills do not often proceed very far, but a few become law each session.
If one secures a second reading, the Government usually introduces any
necessary money resolution. Private members’ Bills may be introduced in the
House of Lords at any time, but the time that can be given to them in the
Commons is limited.
The process of passing a public Bill is similar in both Houses. The Bill receives
a formal first reading on introduction, is printed, and after a while (between one
day and several weeks depending on the nature of the Bill) is given a second
reading after a debate on its general principles and merits. In the Commons a
non-controversial Bill may be referred to a second reading committee to decide
whether it should be read a second time. After a second reading in the
Commons, a Bill is usually referred for detailed examination to a standing
committee (see p 45). If the House so decides, the Bill may be referred to the
whole House sitting in committee. The committee stage is followed by the report
stage, during which further amendments may be considered. At the third
reading a Bill is reviewed in its final form and may again be debated. The House
may vote to limit the time devoted to examining a Bill by passing a government
timetable motion, commonly referred to as a ‘guillotine’. After the third reading a
Commons Bill is sent to the Lords where it goes through broadly the same
stages. In the Lords, after the second reading, a Bill is considered by a committee
of the whole House unless the House takes the rare decision to refer it to a Public
Bill Committee. It is then considered on report and read a third time; at all these
stages amendments may be made. A Bill which starts in the Lords and is passed
by that House is then sent to the Commons for all the stages there. Amendments
made by the second House generally must be agreed by the first, or a com¬
promise reached, before a Bill can become law.
Most government Bills introduced and passed in the Lords pass through the
Commons without difficulty. However, if a non-governmental Lords Bill were
unacceptable to the Commons it would generally not become law since no
debating time would be allotted to it. The Lords, on the other hand, do not in
general prevent a Bill insisted upon by the Commons from finally becoming law.
Normally they either accept the Bill without changes, or amend and return it for
GOVERNMENT
45
Delegated
Legislation
Parliamentary
Committees
Committees of
the Whole House
Standing
Committees
consideration by the Commons, who frequently agree to the amendments made.
In practice, the Lords pass without amendment Bills authorising taxation or
national expenditure. A Bill that deals only with taxation or expenditure must
become law within one month of being sent to the Lords, whether or not they
agree to it, unless the Commons directs otherwise. If no agreement is reached
between the two Houses on a non-financial Commons Bill (or an amendment to
it) the Lords can in practice delay the Bill (with certain exceptions) for about 13
months. At the end of this time it may, in accordance with the Parliament Acts
1911 and 1949, be submitted to the Queen for Royal Assent, provided it has
again been passed by the Commons. There is one important exception: a Bill to
lengthen the life of a Parliament would require the full assent of both Houses in
the normal way.
The limitations on the power of the Lords, contained in the Parliament Acts,
are based on the belief that the principal legislative function of the non-elected
House nowadays is to act as a chamber of revision, complementing, not
rivalling, the elected House.
When a Bill has passed through all its parliamentary stages, it is sent to the
Queen for Royal Assent, after which it is part of the law of the land and known as
an Act of Parliament. The Royal Assent has not been refused since 1707.
Private Bills, promoted by people or organisations outside Parliament (often
local authorities) to give them special powers not granted by the general law,
go through substantially the same procedure as public Bills, but most of the
work is done in committee, where procedures follow a semi-judicial pattern:
the promoter must prove the need for the powers or privileges sought and
the objections of opposing interests are heard. Both sides may be legally
represented.
Delegated legislation, used to relieve pressure on parliamentary time, gives
ministers and other authorities the power to regulate administrative details
after a law has been passed. To minimise the risk that powers thus conferred on
the executive might supersede or weaken parliamentary government, they are
normally delegated to authorities directly responsible to Parliament. Moreover,
the Acts of Parliament by which particular powers are delegated often provide for
some measure of parliamentary control over legislation made in carrying out
these powers, by reserving to Parliament the right to affirm or annul the orders
themselves. Certain Acts also require direct consultation with organisations
affected before rules and orders can be made.
A joint committee of both Houses reports on the technical propriety of these
‘statutory instruments’. In order to save time on the floor of the House, where
statutory instruments may be considered, the Commons also uses standing
committees to consider the merits of instruments, with any decisions reserved
to the House.
Either House may resolve itself into a committee (of the whole House) to consider
Bills in detail after their second reading. A committee of the whole House is
presided over by the Chairman of Ways and Means (the Chairman of Committees
in the House of Lords) or a deputy chairman.
House of Commons standing committees include those which examine public
Bills at the committee stage and, in certain cases, at the second reading and
report stages; two Scottish standing committees; the Scottish Grand Com¬
mittee; the Welsh Grand Committee; and the Northern Ireland standing
committee. Ordinary standing committees have no distinctive names, being
referred to simply as Standing Committee A, B, C, and so on; and the
membership is separately appointed to consider each specific Bill. Each
Select
Committees
Joint
Committees
Party
Committees
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Committee has between 16 and 50 members with a party balance reflecting as
far as possible that in the House as a whole. The Scottish Grand Committee,
which comprises all 72 Scottish members (and may be convened in Edinburgh),
considers the principles of Scottish Bills referred to it at second reading stage,
the Scottish estimates and other matters concerning Scotland only. The Welsh
Grand Committee, with all 38 Welsh members and up to five others, considers
Bills referred to it at second reading stage, and matters concerning Wales only.
There is also provision for a Northern Ireland committee to debate matters
relating specifically to Northern Ireland. The Lords’ equivalent to a standing
committee, a Public Bill Committee, is rarely used.
Unlike standing committees, which proceed by way of formal debate, select
committees are appointed, normally for the duration of a Parliament, to examine
subjects by taking written and oral evidence and, after private deliberation,
presenting a report of their conclusions and recommendations. Select commit¬
tees may be appointed to help Parliament with the control of the executive by
examining aspects of public policy and administration, or to undertake more
specific responsibilities in connection with the internal operations and proce¬
dures of Parliament. In the former category come the 14 committees established
by the House of Commons to examine the expenditure, administration and
policy of the main government departments and related bodies. The Foreign
Affairs Committee, for example, ‘shadows’ the work of the Foreign and
Commonwealth Office, and there are select committees on Scottish and Welsh
Affairs. The committees are constituted on a party basis, in approximate
proportions to party strength in the House. Other regular committees include
those on European Legislation, Public Accounts, Members’ Interests, the
Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration, and House of Commons
Services. The Committee of Selection and the Standing Orders Committee have
duties relating to private Bills, and the Committee of Selection also chooses
members to serve on standing and select committees. A Liaison Committee
considers general matters relating to select committees. On rare occasions a
parliamentary Bill is examined by a select committee, a procedure additional to
the usual legislative process—this occurs, for example, every few years for the
Armed Forces Bill.
In their scrutiny of government policies, the committees question ministers,
senior civil servants and interested bodies and individuals. Through hearings
and published reports, they bring before Parliament and the public a body of fact
and informed opinion on many important issues, and build up considerable
expertise in their subjects of inquiry.
In the House of Lords, besides the Appeal and Appellate Committees in which
the bulk of the House’s judicial work is transacted, there are two major select
committees, with several sub-committees, on the European Communities and
on Science and Technology. There are also select committees on House of Lords’
Offices, Hybrid Instruments, Leave of Absence and Lords’ Expenses, Personal
Bills, Private Bill Standing Orders, Privileges, Procedure, Selection and Broad¬
casting.
Joint committees are appointed in each session to deal with Consolidation Bills
and delegated legislation. The two Houses may also agree to set up joint select
committees on other subjects. A joint committee was appointed in 1987 to
examine private Bill procedure.
In addition to the official committees of the two Houses there are several
unofficial party organisations or committees. The Conservative and Unionist
Members' Committee (the 1922 Committee) consists of the back-bench
GOVERNMENT
47
membership of the party in the House of Commons. When the Conservative
Party is in office, ministers attend its meetings by invitation and not by right,
but when the party is in opposition, the whole membership of the party may
attend meetings and the leader appoints a consultative committee which acts as
the party’s ‘shadow cabinet'. The Parliamentary Labour Party is a corporate body
comprising all members of the party in both Houses; when the Labour Party is in
office a liaison committee acts as a channel of communication between the
Government and its back-benchers in both Houses; when the party is in
opposition the Parliamentary Labour Party is organised under the direction of
an elected Parliamentary Committee which acts as the ‘shadow cabinet’.
Other Forms of The effectiveness of parliamentary control of the Government is a subject of
Parliamentary continuing discussion, both inside and outside Parliament. Control is exercised
Control finally by the ability of the House of Commons to force the Government to resign
by passing a resolution of ‘no confidence’ or by rejecting a proposal which the
Government considers so vital to its policy that it has made it a ‘matter of
confidence’ or, ultimately, by refusing to vote the money required for the public
service. In addition to the system of close scrutiny by select committees, the
House of Commons offers a number of opportunities for a searching examin¬
ation of government policy by both the Opposition and the Government’s own
back-benchers.
These include:
1. Question time, when for an hour on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and
Thursday, ministers answer MPs’ questions. The Prime Minister’s question
time takes place on Tuesday and Thursday. Parliamentary questions are one
means of eliciting information about the Government’s intentions, as well as a
way of airing, and possibly securing redress of, grievances brought to MPs’
notice by constituents. MPs may also put questions to ministers for written
answers, which are published in Hansard, the official report.
2. The right of MPs to use motions for the adjournment of the House to open
discussions on constituency cases or matters of public concern. There is a
half-hour adjournment period at the end of the business of the day; and
immediately before the adjournment for each recess (Christmas, Easter,
spring and summer) a full day is spent discussing matters raised by private
members. Moreover, an MP wishing to discuss a ‘specific and important
matter that should have urgent consideration’ may, at the end of question
time, ask leave to move the adjournment of the House. If the Speaker accepts
the terms of the motion, the MP asks the House for leave for the motion to be
put forward. Leave can be given unanimously, or it can be given if 40 or more
MPs support the motion or if fewer than 40 but more than ten support it and
the House (on a vote) is in favour. Once leave has been given, the matter is
debated for three hours, usually on the next day.
3. The 20 Opposition days each session, when the Opposition can choose
subjects for debate. Of these days, 17 are at the disposal of the Leader of the
Opposition and three at the disposal of the second largest opposition party.
4. Debates on the occasion of the passage, three times a year, of Consolidated
Fund or Appropriation Bills, when members can exercise their traditional
right of ‘raising grievances’, on matters for which any minister is responsible,
after voting the necessary supplies (money) for the Crown.
Procedural opportunities for criticism of the Government also arise during the
debate on the Queen’s speech at the beginning of a session, during debates or
motions of censure for which the Government gives up part of its own time, and
during debates on the Government’s legislative proposals.
Parliamentary
Commissioner
for
Administration
Parliamentary
Privilege
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Opportunities for criticism and examination of government policy are
provided in the House of Lords at daily question time, during debates on
motions and in ‘unstarred’ questions (which can be debated) at the end of the
day’s business as well as during debates on specific legislative proposals.
The main responsibilities of Parliament, and more particularly of the House of
Commons, in managing the revenue of the State and payments for the public
service are to authorise the taxes and duties to be levied and the various objects
of expenditure and the sum to be spent on each. It also has to satisfy itself that
the sums granted are spent only for the purposes which Parliament intended. No
payment out of the central Government's public funds can be made and no
taxation, charges or loans authorised, except by Act of Parliament, although
interim payments can be made, within limits, from the Contingencies Fund.
Scrutiny of public expenditure is carried out by House of Commons select
committees (see p 46).
To keep the two Houses informed of European Community developments, and
to enable them to scrutinise and debate Community policies and proposals,
there is a select committee in each House (see p 46), and ministers make regular
statements about Community business.
The Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration (the ‘Parliamentary
Ombudsman’) investigates, independently, complaints of maladministration
when asked to do so by MPs on behalf of members of the public. Powers of
investigation extend to administrative actions by central government depart¬
ments and certain executive and non-departmental bodies but not to policy
decisions (which can be questioned in Parliament) nor to matters affecting
relations with other countries. Complaints by British citizens arising from
dealings with British posts overseas are open to investigation in some
circumstances. The Commissioner has access to departmental papers and
reports the findings to the MP who presented the complaint. The Commissioner
is required to report annually to Parliament. In addition, he or she publishes
details of selected investigations at quarterly intervals and may submit other
reports where necessary. A Commons select committee has responsibility for
overseeing the Commissioner’s work.
Each House of Parliament has certain rights and immunities to protect it from
unnecessary obstruction in carrying out its duties. The rights apply collectively
to each House and individually to each member.
For the Commons the Speaker formally claims ‘their ancient and undoubted
rights and privileges’ at the beginning of each Parliament. These include
freedom of speech; freedom from arrest in civil actions; exemption from serving
on juries, attending as witnesses or serving as sheriffs; and the right of access to
the Crown, a collective privilege of the House. Further privileges include the
rights of the House to control its own proceedings (so that it is able, for instance,
to exclude ‘strangers’ if it wishes), to pronounce upon legal disqualifications for
membership and to declare a seat vacant on such grounds; and to penalise for
breach of its privileges and for contempt.
The privileges of the House of Lords are broadly similar to those of the House of
Commons.
The Privy Council
Until the eighteenth century, the Sovereign in Council, or Privy Council, was the
chief source of executive power in the State. As the system of Cabinet
government developed, however, the Privy Council became less prominent. Many
powers were transferred to the Cabinet as an inner committee of the Council,
GOVERNMENT
49
Committees of
the Privy
Council
Composition
Prime Minister
and much of its work was handed over to newly created government depart¬
ments, some of which were originally committees of the Privy Council.
Nowadays the main function of the Privy Council is to advise the Queen to
approve Orders in Council (those made under prerogative powers, such as
Orders approving the grant of royal charters of incorporation; and those made
under statutory powers). Members of the Privy Council attending meetings at
which Orders are made do not thereby become personally responsible for the
policy upon which the Orders are based; this rests with the minister responsible
for the subject matter of the Order in question, whether or not he or she was
present at the meeting.
The Privy Council also advises the Crown on the issue of royal proclamations,
some of the most important of which relate to prerogative acts (such as
summoning or dissolving Parliament). The Council’s own statutory responsi¬
bilities, which are independent of the powers of the Sovereign in Council,
include powers of supervision over the registering bodies for the medical and
allied professions.
Apart from Cabinet ministers, who must be Privy Counsellors and are sworn
in on first assuming office, membership of the Council (retained for life except
for very occasional removals) is accorded by the Sovereign on the recommenda¬
tion of the Prime Minister to eminent people in the United Kingdom and
independent monarchical countries of the Commonwealth. There are about 400
Privy Counsellors. A full Council is summoned only on the death of the Sovereign
or when the Sovereign announces his or her intention to marry.
There are a number of advisory Privy Council committees whose meetings differ
from those of the Privy Council itself in that the Sovereign cannot consti¬
tutionally be present. These may be prerogative committees, such as those
dealing with legislative matters submitted by the legislatures of the Channel
Islands and the Isle of Man and with applications for charters of incorporation;
or they may be provided for by statute as are those for the universities of Oxford
and Cambridge and the Scottish universities.
The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council is the final court of appeal from
the courts of the United Kingdom dependencies, courts of independent
members of the Commonwealth which have not discontinued the appeal, courts
of the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man, and certain other courts, some
professional and disciplinary committees and ecclesiastical sources.
Administrative work is carried out in the Privy Council Office under the Lord
President of the Council, a Cabinet minister.
Her Majesty’s Government
Her Majesty’s Government is the body of ministers responsible for the
administration of national affairs. The Prime Minister is appointed by the
Queen, and all other ministers are appointed by the Queen on the recommenda¬
tion of the Prime Minister. The majority of ministers are members of the
Commons, although the Government is also fully represented by ministers in
the Lords. The Lord Chancellor is always a member of the House of Lords.
The composition of governments can vary both in the number of ministers and
in the titles of some offices. New ministerial offices may be created, others may
be abolished, and functions may be transferred from one minister to another.
The Prime Minister is also, by tradition. First Lord of the Treasury and Minister
for the Civil Service. The head of the Government became known as the Prime
Minister during the eighteenth century. The Prime Minister’s unique position of
Departmental
Ministers
Non-
Departmental
Ministers
Lord Chancellor
and Law Officers
Ministers of
State
Junior Ministers
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
authority derives from majority support in Parliament and from the power to
choose ministers and to obtain their resignation or dismissal individually. By
modern convention, the Prime Minister always sits in the House of Commons.
The Prime Minister informs the Queen of the general business of the
Government, presides over the Cabinet, and is responsible for the allocation of
functions among ministers.
The Prime Minister’s other responsibilities include recommending to the
Queen a number of appointments. These include: Church of England
archbishops, bishops and deans and some 200 other clergy in Crown ‘livings’;
high judicial offices, such as the Lord Chief Justice, Lords of Appeal in Ordinary,
and the Lords Justices of Appeal; Privy Counsellors, Lord-Lieutenants and
certain civil appointments, such as Lord High Commissioner to the General
Assembly of the Church of Scotland, Poet Laureate, Constable of the Tower, and
some university posts; and appointments to various public boards and
institutions, such as the British Broadcasting Corporation, as well as various
royal and statutory commissions. Recommendations are likewise made for the
award of many civil honours and distinctions and of Civil List pensions (to
people who have achieved eminence in science and the arts and are in some
financial need). The Prime Minister also selects the trustees of certain national
museums and institutions.
The Prime Minister’s Office at 10 Downing Street (the official residence in
central London) has a staff of civil servants who attend to the day-to-day
discharge of the Prime Minister's numerous responsibilities. The Prime Minister
may also appoint special advisers to the Office from time to time to assist in the
formation of policies.
Ministers in charge of government departments, who are usually in the Cabinet,
are known as ‘Secretary of State’ or ‘Minister’, or may have a special title, as in
the case of the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
The holders of various traditional offices, namely the Lord President of the
Council, the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, the Lord Privy Seal, the
Paymaster General and, from time to time. Ministers without Portfolio, may
have few or no departmental duties and are thus available to perform any special
duties the Prime Minister may wish to give them. In the present Government the
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, for example, is Minister of Trade and
Industry in the Department of Trade and Industry.
The Lord Chancellor holds a special position, being a minister with departmen¬
tal functions and also head of the judiciary. The four Law Officers of the Crown
are: for England and Wales, the Attorney General and the Solicitor General; and
for Scotland, the Lord Advocate and the Solicitor General for Scotland.
Ministers of State usually work with ministers in charge of departments with
responsibility for specific functions, and are sometimes given titles which reflect
these particular functions. More than one may work in a department. A Minister
of State may be given a seat in the Cabinet and paid accordingly.
Junior ministers (generally Parliamentary Under-Secretaries of State or, where
the senior minister is not a Secretary of State, simply Parliamentary Secretaries)
share in parliamentary and departmental duties. They may also be given
responsibility, directly under the departmental minister, for specific aspects of
the department’s work. The Parliamentary Secretary to the Treasury and other
Lords Commissioners of the Treasury are in a different category as Government
Whips (see p 42).
GOVERNMENT
51
Ministerial
Salaries
The Cabinet
Cabinet
Meetings
The salaries of ministers in the House of Commons range from £34,808 a year
(from January 1988) for junior ministers to £51,068 for Cabinet ministers. In
the House of Lords salaries range from £28,688 for junior ministers to £40,438
for Cabinet ministers. The Prime Minister receives £62,698 and the Lord
Chancellor (from October 1988) £86,240.1
Ministers in the Commons, including the Prime Minister, receive a parliamen¬
tary salary of £16,911 a year (which is included in the above figures) in
recognition of their constituency responsibilities and are entitled to claim the
other allowances which are paid to all MPs (see p 39).2
The Cabinet is composed of about 20 ministers chosen by the Prime Minister
and may include departmental and non-departmental ministers. Its origins can
be traced back to the informal conferences which the Sovereign held with
leading ministers, independently of the Privy Council, during the seventeenth
century. After the Sovereign's withdrawal from an active role in politics in the
eighteenth century and the development of organised political parties stimu¬
lated by successive extensions of the franchise from 1832 onwards, the Cabinet
assumed its modern form.
The functions of the Cabinet are: the final determination of policies, the
supreme control of government and the co-ordination of government depart¬
ments. The exercise of these functions is vitally affected by the fact that the
Cabinet is a group of party representatives, depending upon majority support in
the House of Commons.
The Cabinet meets in private and its proceedings are confidential. Its members
are bound by their oath as Privy Counsellors not to disclose information about
its proceedings; although after Cabinet papers have been in existence for 30
years they may be made available for inspection in the Public Record Office.
Diaries published by several former ministers have given the public an insight
into Cabinet procedures in recent times.
Normally the Cabinet meets for a few hours once or twice a week during
parliamentary sittings, and rather less often when Parliament is not sitting. To
keep the amount of work coming before the Cabinet within manageable limits, a
great deal of work is carried on through the committee system, which involves
the reference of issues either to a standing Cabinet committee or to an ad hoc
committee composed of the ministers primarily concerned. The committee then
considers the matter in detail and either disposes of it or reports upon it to the
Cabinet with recommendations for action. The present Cabinet has four
standing committees: a defence and overseas policy committee and an economic
strategy committee, both under the chairmanship of the Prime Minister; and a
home and social affairs committee and a legislation committee, both under the
chairmanship of the Lord President of the Council. Sub-committees of the
standing committees may be established. Membership and terms of reference of
all Cabinet committees are confidential.
Non-Cabinet ministers may be invited to attend meetings on matters affecting
their departments, and may be members of Cabinet committees. The Secretary
of the Cabinet and other senior officials of the Cabinet Office also attend
meetings of the Cabinet and its committees as appropriate.
1 These figures show the salaries to which the holders are entitled; however, the Prime Minister
has decided to draw no more than the salaiy payable to a Cabinet minister in the House of
Commons.
2 The Leader of the Opposition in the Commons receives a salary of £31,237 for the post as well
as the parliamentary salary of £16,911; the Leader of the Opposition in the Lords also receives a
salary.
52
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Cabinet
Office
Ministerial
Responsibility
The Cabinet Office, headed by the Secretary of the Cabinet, under the direction
of the Prime Minister, comprises the Cabinet Secretariat, the Central Statistical
Office, the Office of the Minister for the Civil Service and the Historical Section.
The Cabinet Secretariat serves ministers collectively in the conduct of Cabinet
business and operates as an instrument in the co-ordination of policy at the
highest level.
The Office of the Minister for the Civil Service is responsible for Civil Service
central recruitment, senior and public appointments, policies on training,
promotion and staff development, equal opportunities, occupational health and
the non-financial aspects of personnel management.
The Central Statistical Office is concerned with the preparation and interpre¬
tation of the statistics needed for central economic and social policies and
management, such as the national accounts, balance of payments and the index
of industrial production, and co-ordinates the statistical work of other
departments.
The Historical Section of the Cabinet Office is in the process of completing the
official histories of the second world war, and is responsible for preparing official
histories of certain peacetime events.
‘Ministerial responsibility’ refers both to the collective responsibility which
ministers share for government policy and actions and to ministers’ individual
responsibility to Parliament for their departments’ work.
The doctrine of collective responsibility means that the Cabinet acts unani¬
mously even when Cabinet ministers do not all agree on a subject. The policy of
departmental ministers must be consistent with the policy of the Government as
a whole. Once the Government’s policy on a matter has been decided, each
minister is expected to support it or resign. On rare occasions, ministers have
been allowed free votes in Parliament on government policies involving
important issues of principle.
The individual responsibility of a minister for the work of his or her
department means that, as political head of that department, he or she is
answerable for all its acts and omissions and must bear the consequences of any
defect of administration, any injustice to an individual or any aspect of policy
which may be criticised in Parliament, whether personally responsible or not.
Since most ministers are members of the House of Commons, they must answer
questions and defend themselves against criticism in person. Departmental
ministers in the House of Lords are represented in the Commons by someone
qualified to speak on their behalf, usually a junior minister.
Departmental ministers normally decide all matters within their responsi¬
bility, although on important political matters they usually consult their
colleagues collectively, through the Cabinet or a Cabinet committee. A decision
by a departmental minister binds the Government as a whole.
The responsibility of ministers for their departments is an effective way of
keeping government under public control, for the knowledge that any depart¬
mental action may be reported to and examined in Parliament discourages the
taking of arbitrary and ill-considered decisions.
On assuming office ministers must resign directorships in private and public
companies, and must order their affairs so that there is no conflict between
public duties and private interests.
Government Departments
Government departments are the main instruments for giving effect to
government policy when Parliament has passed the necessary legislation, and
for advising ministers. They may, and frequently do, work with and through
GOVERNMENT
53
Non-
Departmental
Public Bodies
Advisory
Bodies
local authorities, statutory boards, and government-sponsored organisations
operating under various degrees of government control.
A change of government does not necessarily affect the number or general
functions of government departments, although a radical change in policy may
be accompanied by some organisational change.
The work of some departments (for instance, the Ministry of Defence) covers
the United Kingdom as a whole. Other departments (such as the Department of
Employment) cover England, Wales and Scotland, but not Northern Ireland.
Others, such as the Department of the Environment, are mainly concerned with
affairs in England. Some departments, such as the Department of Trade and
Industry, maintain a regional organisation, and some which have direct contact
with the public throughout the country (for example, the Department of
Employment) also have local offices.
A department is usually headed by a minister. Certain departments in which
questions of policy do not normally arise are headed by a permanent official, and
a minister with other duties is responsible for them to Parliament. For instance,
ministers in the Treasury are responsible for the Central Office of Information,
Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, HM Customs and Excise, the Inland Revenue
and a number of small departments including the Treasury Solicitor’s Depart¬
ment, the Royal Mint, and the National Investment and Loans Office. Depart¬
ments generally receive their funds directly out of money provided by Parliament
and are staffed by the Civil Service.
A number of bodies with a role in the process of government are neither
government departments nor part of a department (in April 1987 the figure was
1,643). Known as non-departmental public bodies, but often popularly
described as ‘quangos’ (‘quasi-autonomous non-governmental organisations',
although there is no precise definition of the term), they are of three kinds:
executive bodies, advisory bodies and tribunals. Executive bodies normally
employ staff and have their own budget; they consist of public bodies which
carry out, among other duties, administrative, executive, regulatory and
commercial functions. They operate typically within broad policy guidelines set
by departmental ministers but are in varying degrees independent of govern¬
ment in carrying out their day-to-day responsibilities. Examples include the Arts
Council of Great Britain, the British Council, the Commonwealth Development
Corporation and the Commission for Racial Equality. Tribunals are a special¬
ised group of judicial bodies which are akin to courts of law. They are normally
set up under statutory powers which also govern their constitution, functions
and procedure. Tribunals often consist of laymen, but generally have a legally
qualified chairman. They tend to be less expensive, and less formal, than courts
of law. Independently of the executive, tribunals decide the rights and
obligations of private citizens towards one another or towards a government
department or other public authority. Important examples are industrial
tribunals, rent tribunals and social security tribunals. Tribunals usually consist
of an uneven number of people so that a majority decision can be reached.
Members are normally appointed by the minister concerned with the subject.
Tribunals and advisory bodies do not normally employ staff or spend money
themselves, but their expenses are paid by government departments concerned;
a note on advisory bodies is set out below.
Many government departments are assisted by advisory councils or committees
which undertake research and collect information, mainly to give ministers
access to informed opinion before coming to a decision involving a legislative or
executive act. In some cases a minister must consult a standing committee, but
usually advisory bodies are appointed at the discretion of the minister.
54
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The membership of the advisory councils and committees varies according to
the nature of the work involved, and will usually include representatives of
varying interests and professions.
In addition to the standing advisory bodies, there are committees set up by the
Government to examine and make recommendations on specific matters. For
certain important inquiries Royal Commissions, whose members are chosen for
their wide experience and diverse knowledge, may be appointed. Royal
Commissions examine written and oral evidence from government departments,
interested organisations and individuals, and submit recommendations. The
Government may accept the recommendations in whole or in part, or may decide
to take no further action or to delay action. Inquiries may also be undertaken by
departmental committees.
As a result of a major review of non-departmental public bodies undertaken in
1979 and subsequent further reviews there has been a net reduction of 1,524 in
the total number of bodies. Scrutiny of these bodies continues with a view to
improving performance and value for money.
Each of the main government departments has its own information division or
directorate, public relations branch or news department staffed by professional
information officers responsible for communicating their department’s policies
and activities to the news media and the public (sometimes using publicity
services provided by the Central Office of Information—see p 56) and for
advising their department on the public’s reaction to them. The presentation of
government policy is co-ordinated, at official level, by the Prime Minister’s Press
Secretary. As press adviser to the Prime Minister, the Press Secretary and other
staff in the Prime Minister’s Press Office have direct and constant contact with
the parliamentary press through regular meetings with the Lobby correspon¬
dents (a group of political correspondents who have the special privilege of
access to the Lobby of the House of Commons where they can talk privately to
government ministers and other members of the House) and other day-to-day
contacts. The Prime Minister’s Press Office forms the accepted channel through
which information about parliamentary business is conveyed to the media.
Distribution of An outline of the principal functions of the main government departments is
Functions given below. Departments are arranged in alphabetical order, except for the
Scottish and Northern Ireland departments which are grouped at the end of the
section and the Cabinet Office, which was described on p 52. Further
information on the work of some departments is given in later chapters under
the relevant subject headings.
Government
Information
Services
DEPARTMENT Main areas of responsibility
The work of many departments listed on pp 54—7 covers the United Kingdom as
a whole. Where this is not the case, the following abbreviations are used: (GB) for
functions covering England, Wales and Scotland; (E, W & NI) for those covering
England, Wales and Northern Ireland; (E & W) for those covering England and
Wales; and (E) for those concerned with England only.
Ministry of Policies for agriculture, horticulture and fishing (E & W); food policies.
Agriculture,
Fisheries and
Food
Office of General promotion of arts (GB); library and information services (E with advice
Arts and to W and NI); national museums (E); public libraries and local museums (E);
Libraries British Library; national heritage.
GOVERNMENT
55
DEPARTMENT
Crown
Prosecution
Service
HM Customs
and Excise
Ministry of
Defence
Department of
Education and
Science
Department of
Employment
Department of
Energy
Department
of the
Environment
ECGD
(Export Credits
Guarantee
Department)
Foreign and
Commonwealth
Office
Office of
Gas Supply
Department of
Health
Home Office
Main areas of responsibility
An independent department specialising in the prosecution of criminal offences.
Headed by the Director of Public Prosecutions, who acts under the superinten¬
dence of the Attorney General (E & W).
Collecting and accounting for revenues of Customs and Excise, including value
added tax; agency functions including controlling certain imports and exports
and compiling overseas trade statistics.
Defence policy and control and administration of the armed services.
Policies for education (E); the Government’s relations with univer¬
sities (GB); fostering civil science in Britain and internationally.
The Employment Service, employment policy and legislation; training policy and
legislation; health and safety at work; industrial relations, wages councils, equal
opportunities; small firms and tourism; statistics on labour and industrial
matters (GB); the Careers Service (E); international representation on employ¬
ment matters.
Policies for all forms of energy, including its efficient use and the development of
new sources; the Government’s relations with the public energy industries.
Policies for planning and regional development, local government, new towns,
housing, construction, inner city matters, environmental protection, water, the
countryside, sport and recreation, conservation, historic buildings and ancient
monuments (E); and Property Services Agency (GB).
Provision of insurance for exporters against risk of not being paid for goods and
services, and access to bank finance for exports; insurance cover for new
investment overseas.
Conduct of Britain’s overseas relations.
Monitoring of British Gas as a public gas supplier and granting authorisations
to other suppliers of gas through pipes.
National Health Service, personal social services provided by local authorities,
and certain aspects of public health, including hygiene (E).
Administration of justice; criminal law; treatment of offenders, including
probation; the prison service; the police; crime prevention; fire and civil defence
services; licensing laws; scrutiny of local authority by-laws; control of firearms
and dangerous drugs; electoral matters (E & W). Gaming and lotteries (GB).
Regulation of broadcasting; passports, immigration and nationality; race
relations and sex discrimination. Responsibilities relating to the Channel
Islands and the Isle of Man.
56
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
DEPARTMENT
Central Office
of Information
Board of Inland
Revenue
The Law
Officers’
Department
The Lord
Chancellor’s
Department
Ordnance
Survey
Overseas
Development
Administration
Parliamentary
Counsel
Paymaster
General’s Office
Office of
Population
Censuses and
Surveys
HM Procurator
General and
Treasury
Solicitor’s
Department
Serious Fraud
Office
Department of
Social Security
Main areas of responsibility
Provision of publicity material and other information services on behalf of
government departments and a number of public agencies.
Administration of direct taxes; collection of National Insurance contributions.
Valuation of land and buildings (GB).
Provision of advice to the Government on English law and representation of the
Crown in appropriate domestic and international cases, both civil and criminal,
by the Law Officers of the Crown for England and Wales—the Attorney General
and the Solicitor General (E & W). The Attorney General, who is also Attorney
General for Northern Ireland, superintends the Crown Prosecution Service
(E & W), the Serious Fraud Office (E, W & NI) and the Director of Public
Prosecutions for Northern Ireland (NI).
Administration of the Supreme Court (Court of Appeal, High Court, Crown
Court) and the county courts (E & W), together with certain other courts and
tribunals, and all work relating to judicial and quasi-judicial appointments.
Responsibility for promoting general reforms in the civil law and for operating
the Legal Aid and Advice Scheme. (The Home Office has important responsi¬
bilities for the criminal law.)
Official surveying and mapping, including geodetic surveys and associated
scientific work, and topographic surveys covering all of Great Britain and some
overseas countries.
Administration of financial aid to, and technical co-operation in, developing
countries.
Drafting of government Bills (except those relating exclusively to Scotland);
advising departments on parliamentary procedure (E, W & NI).
Provision of banking services for government departments other than the
Boards of Inland Revenue and Customs and Excise, and the payment of public
service pensions.
Administration of the Marriage Acts and local registration of births, marriages
and deaths; population estimates and projections; compilation of health
statistics; censuses (E & W). Surveys for other government departments (GB).
Provision of a common legal service for a large number of government
departments. Duties include instructing Parliamentary Counsel on Bills and
drafting subordinate legislation; providing litigation and conveyancing services;
and giving general advice on the interpretation and application of the law
(E & W).
Investigating and prosecuting serious or complex fraud under the superintend¬
ence of the Attorney General (E, W & NI).
The social security system (GB).
GOVERNMENT
57
DEPARTMENT Main areas of responsibility
Her Majesty’s Provision of stationery, printing and related services to Parliament, government
Stationery departments and other public bodies; and publication and sale of government
Office documents.
Office of
Telecom¬
munications
(OFTEL)
Monitoring of British Telecom and other public and non-public telecommuni¬
cations operators; enforcing competition legislation and representing telecom¬
munications consumers’ interests.
Department of
Trade and
Industry
Industrial and commercial policy, promotion of enterprise and competition at
home and abroad, investor and consumer protection. Specific responsibilities
include industrial innovation policy; regional industrial policy; business
development, management development and business/education links; interna¬
tional trade policy; commercial relations and export promotion; competition
policy; company law; insolvency; consumer protection and safety; radio regula¬
tion (GB).
Department of Land, sea and air transport; sponsorship of the nationalised London Regional
Transport Transport and British Rail; domestic and international civil aviation; interna¬
tional transport agreements; shipping and the ports industry; navigational
lights, pilotage, HM Coastguard and marine pollution; oversight of road
transport (GB); motorways and trunk roads; road safety; and oversight of local
authority transport (E).
HM Treasury
Welsh Office
Broad economic strategy with particular responsibilities for public finance and
expenditure, including control of manpower and pay in the Civil Service.
Many aspects of Welsh affairs, including health and personal social services;
education, except for terms and conditions of service, student awards and the
University of Wales; the Welsh language and culture; local government; housing;
water and sewerage; environmental protection; sport; agriculture and fisheries;
forestry, land use, including town and country planning; countryside and
nature conservation; new towns, ancient monuments and historic buildings;
roads; tourism; a range of matters affecting the careers service and the training
activities of the Department of Employment in Wales; selective financial
assistance to industry; the Urban Programme in Wales; the operation of the
European Regional Development Fund in Wales and other European Commun¬
ity matters; non-departmental public bodies; civil emergencies; all financial
aspects of these matters including Welsh rate support grant; and oversight
responsibilities for economic affairs and regional planning in Wales.
Scotland has its own system of law and wide administrative autonomy. The
Secretary of State for Scotland, a Cabinet minister, has responsibility in
Scotland (with some exceptions) for both formulating and carrying out policy
relating to agriculture and fisheries, education, law and order, local government
and environmental services, social work, health, housing, roads and certain
aspects of shipping and road transport services.
The Secretary of State also has a major role in the planning and development
of the Scottish economy, and important functions relating to industrial
development, with responsibility for financial assistance to industry, for the
58
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Scottish Development Agency, the Highlands and Islands Development Board
and the Scottish Tourist Board and for the training activities of the Department
of Employment in Scotland and the careers service. The Secretary of State plays
a full part in determining energy policy, particularly in relation to responsibility
for the electricity supply industry in Scotland. He is also responsible for the
government interest in a range of other functions from fire services to sport and
for overseeing many non-departmental public bodies.
The distinctive features and the different conditions and needs of Scotland
and its people are reflected in separate Scottish legislation on many domestic
matters or else in special provisions applying to Scotland alone, inserted in Acts
which otherwise apply to the United Kingdom generally.
The Secretary of State discharges his responsibilities principally through the
Scottish Office’s five departments, supported by Central Services (see below) and
four smaller departments—the Department of the Registers of Scotland, the
Scottish Record Office, the General Register Office for Scotland and the Scottish
Courts Administration.
United Kingdom government departments with significant Scottish responsi¬
bilities have offices in Scotland with delegated powers and work closely with the
Scottish Office. The United Kingdom headquarters of several government
departments are located in Scotland.
An outline of the main functions of the Scottish departments is given
below.
DEPARTMENT Functions
Department of Promotion of the agricultural and fishing industries.
Agriculture and
Fisheries for
Scotland
Scottish Housing; building control; water supplies and sewerage; environmental protec-
Development tion and the countryside; land-use planning; general policy relating to local
Department government organisation; ancient monuments and historic buildings; roads;
certain transport functions.
Scottish Education (excluding universities); student awards; libraries; museums and
Education galleries; sport and recreation; the arts; social work services.
Department
Scottish Home Central administration of law and order (including police service, criminal
and Health justice, legal aid and penal institutions); the National Health Service; fire, home
Department defence and civil emergency services.
Industry Industrial and regional economic development matters; energy; tourism; urban
Department regeneration; new towns.
for Scotland
Central Services to the five Scottish departments. These include the Office of the
Services Solicitor to the Secretary of State, the Scottish Information Office, and Finance
Divisions.
Lord Advocate’s Provision of legal advice to the Government on issues affecting Scotland and the
Department and principal representation of the Crown for litigation in Scotland by the Law
Crown Office Officers of the Crown for Scotland (the Lord Advocate and the Solicitor General
for Scotland); control of all prosecution in Scotland.
GOVERNMENT
59
DEPARTMENT Functions
Scottish Courts Organisation, administration and staffing of the courts and court offices;
Administration jurisdiction and procedure of civil courts; enforcement of judgments; and
programme of Scottish Law Commission.
Other General Register Office for Scotland; Scottish Record Office; Department of the
Administrative Registers of Scotland.
Departments
NORTHERN Between 1921 and 1972 Northern Ireland had its own Parliament and
IRELAND Government, subordinate to the Parliament at Westminster, but in 1972,
following the resignation of the Northern Ireland Government, the British
Government assumed direct responsibility for functions previously exercised by
the Northern Ireland Government. Attempts have been made by successive
governments to find a means of restoring devolved government to Northern
Ireland on a basis that would command widespread acceptance throughout the
community. The most recent attempt failed in June 1986 when the Northern
Ireland Assembly, elected in 1982, was dissolved after it ceased to discharge its
responsibilities of making proposals for the resumption of devolved government
and of monitoring the work of the Northern Ireland departments. The
Government expressed the hope that a new Assembly would be established
which would contribute to the better government and administration of
Northern Ireland.
The Secretary of State for Northern Ireland is the Cabinet minister responsible
for Northern Ireland. Through the Northern Ireland Office he has direct
responsibility for constitutional developments, law and order and security, and
electoral matters. The work of the Northern Ireland departments, whose
functions are listed below, is also subject to the direction and control of the
Secretary of State.
DEPARTMENT Functions
Department of
Agriculture for
Northern Ireland
Department
of Economic
Development for
Northern Ireland
Department
of Education for
Northern Ireland
Department
of the
Environment for
Northern Ireland
Development of agricultural, forestry and fishing industries; administration of
agricultural grant schemes; advisory service to farmers; agricultural research,
education and training.
Development of industry and commerce, as well as the administration of
government policy in relation to tourism, energy and minerals; administration
of an employment service and labour training schemes and assistance to
industrial development, through the Industrial Development Board for Northern
Ireland.
Central policy, co-ordination, legislation, oversight, and financial control of the
five education and library boards and education as a whole from nursery to adult
and continuing education, youth services, sport and recreation, cultural
activities and community services and facilities including the improvement of
community relations.
Housing (policy, programmes and finance); planning (regional strategy, develop¬
ment plans, development control and comprehensive development); construc¬
tion and maintenance of roads, transport and traffic management, and motor
taxation; water and sewerage; environmental protection; ordnance survey;
collection of rates; harbours; historic monuments and buildings; maintenance
of public records; and certain controls over local government.
60
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
DEPARTMENT Main areas of responsibility
Department of Control of public expenditure; liaison with HM Treasury and the Northern
Finance and Ireland Office on financial matters, economic and social planning and research;
Personnel Ulster Savings; charities; valuation and Lands Service; formulating, co¬
ordinating and monitoring policies for equal opportunities and personnel
management; and general management and control of the Northern Ireland Civil
Service.
Department of Health and personal social services; social security; social legislation; and the
Health and Office of the Registrar-General.
Social Services for
Northern Ireland
The Civil Service
The Civil Service is concerned with the conduct of the whole range of
government activities as they affect the community, ranging from policy
formulation to carrying out the day-to-day duties that public administration
demands.
Civil servants are servants of the Crown. They are responsible to the minister
in whose department they work for carrying out his or her policies. Ministers
alone are answerable to Parliament for their policies and the actions of their staff
(though civil servants may give evidence to parliamentary select committees on
their minister’s behalf). In the determination of policy the civil servant has no
constitutional responsibility or role distinct from that of the minister. A change
of minister, for whatever reason, does not involve a change of staff. (Ministers
sometimes appoint special advisers from outside the Civil Service; the advisers
are paid from public funds, but their appointments come to an end when the
Government’s term of office finishes, or when the Minister to whom the special
adviser is appointed leaves the Government or moves to another appointment.)
Including part-time staff (two part-time officers being reckoned as equivalent
to one full-time), in July 1988 there were around 576,900 civil servants (nearly
half of them women), roughly half of whom were engaged in the provision of
public services, such as paying sickness benefits and pensions, collecting taxes
and contributions, running employment services, staffing prisons, and provid¬
ing services to industry and agriculture. Around a quarter were employed in the
Ministry of Defence. The rest were divided between: central administrative and
policy duties; service-wide support services, such as accommodation, printing
and information; and largely financially self-supporting services, for instance,
those provided by the Department for National Savings and the Royal Mint.
The total number includes about 72,300 ‘industrial’ civil servants, mainly
manual workers in government industrial establishments.
Four-fifths of civil servants work outside Greater London. The number of civil
servants has fallen from 732,000 in April 1979 to 576,900 in July 1988,
reflecting the Government’s policy of controlling the cost and size of the Civil
Service and of improving its efficiency. Manpower targets were discontinued in
April 1988 but manpower remains under review. The primary consideration
when employing further staff will be whether it is consistent with the limits set
on running costs.
Within the Civil Service reforms of all aspects of the management of
government departments are being implemented to ensure improved manage-
GOVERNMENT
61
ment performance, in particular through the sharper accountability of indi¬
vidual managers based on clear objectives and responsibilities. These reforms
include an experimental performance-related pay scheme, and other means to
encourage and reward improved performance.
A major new initiative for improving management was launched in February
1988 when the Government announced plans to set up executive agencies
within government departments to deliver certain government services. Under
these plans, each agency is to be managed by a chief executive responsible for
day-to-day operations within a framework of policy objectives and resources set
by the minister responsible. The agencies will generally be set up within the Civil
Service, their staff will remain civil servants and the normal rules of account¬
ability will continue to apply. The first such agency—the Vehicle Inspectorate in
the Department of Transport—was established in August 1988.
Savings are also being sought by subjecting services in government depart¬
ments to competitive tendering and by contracting out such services whenever
commensurate with sound management and good value for money. By April
1987 savings of £31 million net a year had been achieved.
Northern Ireland has its own Civil Service and Civil Service Commission,
modelled on its counterpart in Great Britain.
Central
Management
and
Structure
Responsibility for central co-ordination and management of the Civil Service is
divided between the Treasury and the Cabinet Office (Office of the Minister for
the Civil Service). In addition to its other functions, the Treasury is responsible
for the structure of the Civil Service and the classification of posts. It is also
responsible for recruitment policy and for controlling manpower, pay, pensions
and allowances. The Office of the Minister for the Civil Service, which is part of
the Cabinet Office and under the control of the Prime Minister, as Minister for
the Civil Service, is responsible for the organisation, structure, non-financial
aspects of personnel management and overall efficiency of the Service. The
function of official Head of the Home Civil Service is combined with that of
Secretary to the Cabinet. At the senior levels of the Home Civil Service there is an
open structure of unified grades which, with some exceptions, covers all posts
whatever the nature of their duties. Grades 1, 2 and 3 replace the former grade
titles of Permanent Secretary, Deputy Secretary and Under-Secretary while
Grades 4, 5, 6 and 7 cover the senior levels of most occupational groups and
classes down to Principal, Principal Scientific Officer, Principal Professional and
Technology Officer and equivalent levels.
Below this the structure of the non-industrial Civil Service is based on a
system of categories and occupational groups and classes, which are the basic
groupings of staff for the purposes of recruitment, pay and personnel
management. These include the General Category (covering the Administration,
Economist, Statistician, Information Officer and Librarian groups), the Science
Category, the Professional and Technology Category (including architects,
surveyors, electrical and mechanical engineers, graphics officers and marine
services staff), and the Training Category (covering Instructional Officers) and
the Legal, Police, Secretarial, Research Officer, Social Security, Security and
Museum Categories. These 11 categories account for some 75 per cent of
non-industrial staff. Work requiring specialist skill is always done by appro¬
priately qualified individuals.
Personnel management policies encourage the deployment of staff so that
talent can be used to the best advantage, and, with higher posts open to people
of outstanding ability (whatever their specialist background or original method
of entry into the Service), ensure that people with the necessary qualities can
gain suitably wide experience to fit them for posts at the highest levels. The
exchange of staff between the Civil Service and industry is also encouraged.
62
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Diplomatic
Service
Recruitment
and Training
Promotion and
Terms of
Service
The Diplomatic Service, a separate service of some 4,700 or so people, provides
the majority of the staff for the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and at United
Kingdom diplomatic missions and consular posts abroad. Its functions include
advising on policy, negotiating with overseas governments and conducting
business in international organisations; promoting British exports and trade
generally, administering aid, presenting ideas, policies and objectives to the
people of overseas countries; and protecting British interests abroad.
The Service has its own grade structure, linked for salary purposes with that
of the Home Civil Service, and conditions of work are in many ways comparable
while taking into account the special demands of the Service, particularly of
postings overseas. Members of the Home Civil Service and the armed forces, and
individuals from the private sector, may also serve in the Foreign and
Commonwealth Office and at overseas posts on loan or attachment.
Recruitment of staff to the middle and higher levels of the Home Civil Service
and the Diplomatic Service is the responsibility of the Civil Service Commission
which, in conjunction with departments, ensures staff are selected solely on
merit through fair and open competition. The selection of junior staff, such as
those engaged in clerical and manual work, is undertaken by the departments.
For the Administration Group, the central part of the Home and Diplomatic
Civil Services, entry is at three levels relating broadly to the academic
achievements of: a second class honours degree, or better; GCE Advanced level;
and GCSE grades A, B or C. The selection procedure for the highest of these
levels (the Administration Trainee entry) comprises qualifying tests, followed by
tests and interviews at the Civil Service Selection Board and an interview by the
Final Selection Board. For the next level (the Executive Officer entry) selection
involves qualifying tests followed by an interview. For the lower level (the clerical
entry) selection is normally by interview of those holding the prescribed
educational qualifications.
Entry to the professional and technical grades usually requires appropriate
qualifications, and selection is on the basis of past record and by interview.
Most government departments employ full-time training officers and tutors to
help identify staff training needs and organise training by the most appropriate
methods (for example, formal courses or self-instruction). The Civil Service
College provides training most efficiently undertaken centrally. Use is also made
of external institutions.
Civil servants under the age of 18 may continue their education by attending
courses usually for one day a week (‘day release’ schemes). Adult staff may be
entitled to financial assistance to undertake, mainly in their own time, private
studies leading to recognised educational or professional qualifications in
approved subjects. There are also opportunities for civil servants to obtain
fellowships for research in areas of interest both to themselves and to their
departments.
Departments are responsible for promotion at all grade levels. Normally
promotion is from grade to grade, but there can be accelerated promotion for
staff who show exceptional promise. Promotion or appointment to Grades 1 and
2 and all transfers between departments at these levels are approved by the
Prime Minister, who is advised by the official head of the Home Civil Service.
Terms of service for civil servants are generally governed by agreements
between senior officials (the Official Side of the National Whitley Council) and
representatives of the employees (the Trade Union Side of the National Whitley
Council). For industrial civil servants, the negotiating body is the Joint
Co-ordinating Committee of government industrial establishments.
GOVERNMENT
63
Political and
Private
Activities
Security
Civil servants are required to discharge loyally the duties assigned to them by
the Government of the day of whatever political persuasion. For the Civil Service
to serve successive governments of different political complexions it is essential
that ministers and the public should have confidence that civil servants’
personal views do not cut across the discharge of their official duties. The
purpose of the rules which govern political activities by civil servants is to allow
them the greatest possible freedom to participate in public affairs without
infringing these fundamental principles. The rules are concerned with political
activities liable to give public expression to political views, rather than with
privately held beliefs and opinions.
The Civil Service is divided into three groups for the purposes of deciding the
extent to which individuals may take part in political activities. The ‘politically
free group, consisting of industrial staff and non-office grades, are free to
engage in any political activity including adoption as a candidate for the United
Kingdom or the European Parliament (although they would have to resign from
the Service if elected). The politically restricted" group, which comprises
Principal and equivalent grades and above as well as Administration Trainees,
are debarred from national political activities but may apply for permission to
take part in local political activities. The ‘intermediate’ group, which comprises
all civil servants not in either of the other two groups, may apply for permission
to take part in national or local political activity, apart from candidature for the
United Kingdom or the European Parliament.
Where required, permission is granted to the maximum extent consistent
with the reputation of the Civil Service for political impartiality and the
avoidance of any conflict with official duties. (It is granted subject to a code of
discretion requiring moderation and the avoidance of embarrassment to
ministers.)
Generally, there are no restrictions on the private activities of civil servants,
provided that these do not bring discredit on the Civil Service, and that there is
no possibility of conflict with official duties. For instance, a civil servant is
required to seek permission before taking part in any outside activity which
involves the use of official experience, or before accepting a directorship in any
company holding a contract with his or her department.
As a general rule the political views of civil servants are not a matter of official
concern. However, no one whose loyalty is in doubt may be employed on work
vital to the security of the State. For this reason certain posts are not open to
those who are known to be members of communist or fascist organisations or of
subversive groups, or associated with them in such a way as to raise legitimate
doubts about their reliability, or to anyone whose reliability may be in doubt for
any other reason.
Each department is responsible for its own internal security, advised as
necessary by the Security Service. The Security Commission, if requested to do
so by the Prime Minister after consultation with the Leader of the Opposition,
may investigate and report on breaches of security in the public service and
advise on changes in security procedure.
Local Government
A wide range of public services is provided by democratically elected local
authorities throughout the United Kingdom. The gradual expansion of local
services, particularly in the period between the late 1940s and mid-1970s, has
inevitably led to a steady rise in local government expenditure and in its support
from central funds. In recent years central government has sought to check this
growth as part of a general policy of reducing public expenditure. Measures
64
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Principal Types
of Local
Authority
introduced to promote greater efficiency and cost-effectiveness have included
the holding back of central government grant from authorities spending above
government targets, the prescription of maximum levels of spending and rates
for selected high-spending authorities in England and the establishment in
England and Wales of the independent Audit Commission to audit accounts and
seek economical use of resources. The Government has legislated to promote
greater competition in the provision of some local authority services. In Scotland
there is an independent Commission for Local Authority Accounts and similar
action has been taken to control local authority expenditure. Moreover, since
staff costs form such a significant part of public expenditure, local authorities
have been urged to reduce staff levels. Local authorities in England, Wales and
Scotland are required to publish quarterly staffing levels for particular services.
The specific powers and duties of local authorities are conferred on them by
Parliament, or by measures made under its authority. The actual adminis¬
tration, and the exercise of discretion within statutory limits, are the responsi¬
bility of the local authority. In the case of certain services, however, ministers
have powers to secure a measure of national uniformity in the standard of a
service provided, to safeguard public health, or to protect the rights of individual
citizens. For some services the minister concerned has wide powers of
supervision; for others there are strictly limited powers.
The main links between local authorities and the central government are: in
England, the Department of the Environment, although other departments are
concerned with various local government functions; in Scotland, the Scottish
Office; in Wales, the Welsh Office; and in Northern Ireland, the Department of
the Environment for Northern Ireland.
England and Wales (outside Greater London) are divided into 53 counties,
within which there are 369 districts. All the districts and 47 of the counties—the
‘non-metropolitan’ counties—have independent, locally elected councils with
separate functions. County authorities provide the large-scale local government
services, while the district authorities are responsible for the more local ones
(see p 66).
In Greater London—an area of about 1,580 sq km (610 sq miles) and a
population of some 7 million—the local government authorities are the councils
of 32 London boroughs and the Corporation of London, while in the six
metropolitan counties there are 36 district councils.
Until April 1986 Greater London and the metropolitan counties had their own
councils but these were abolished by the Local Government Act 1985, which was
designed to create a more effective, economical and accountable system by
removing a tier of local government. As a result many of the functions previously
carried out by the Greater London Council and the metropolitan county councils
have been transferred to the London borough and metropolitan district
councils. However, a number of services (waste regulation and disposal in
certain areas; the police and fire services, including civil defence, and public
transport in all metropolitan counties; and the fire service, including civil
defence, in London) which require a statutory authority over areas wider than
the boroughs and districts are now run by joint authorities composed of elected
councillors nominated by the borough or district councils. At present, education
in inner London is the responsibility of a single body, the Inner London
Education Authority (ILEA). In order to achieve a more cost-effective and
responsive education service for the area, however, the Government has
introduced legislation to abolish ILEA and transfer its responsibilities to
individual inner London borough councils from April 1990. As a direct result of
the abolition of the Greater London Council and the metropolitan county
councils, it is expected that some 7,000 posts will eventually be shed, producing
GOVERNMENT
65
an estimated saving of about £100 million a year. Special residuary bodies have
been appointed to take responsibility for certain residual county council
and Greater London Council matters. These include compensation, unassigned
legal rights and liabilities, and the disposal of surplus property. The residuary
bodies are required to prepare proposals to wind up their affairs as soon as
practicable.
Within rural districts in England, parish councils or meetings are focuses for
local opinion as bodies with limited powers of local interest. In Wales community
councils have similar functions.
On the mainland of Scotland local government is on a two-tier basis: nine
regions are divided into 53 districts, each area having its own elected council.
There are three virtually all-purpose authorities for Orkney, Shetland and the
Western Isles. Provision is also made for local community councils, although
these are not local authorities.
The areas and electoral arrangements of local authorities are kept under
review by the Local Government Boundary Commissions for England, Wales and
Scotland.
In Northern Ireland 26 district councils are responsible for local environmen¬
tal and certain other services. Statutory bodies, such as the Northern Ireland
Housing Executive and area boards, are responsible to central government
departments for the administration of major services such as housing,
education and libraries, and health and personal social services. Regional
services such as roads, water and sewerage, and planning, are the responsibility
of central government, through the Department of the Environment for
Northern Ireland.
Election of
Councils
Local authority councils consist of a number of elected unpaid councillors
presided over by a chairman. Councillors can claim a flat-rate attendance
allowance or a financial loss allowance for performing council business; they are
also entitled to travelling and subsistence allowances. Parish and community
councillors cannot claim expenses for duties within their own areas.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland each council annually elects a
chairman and vice-chairman. Some districts have the ceremonial title of
borough, or city, both granted by royal authority (in Northern Ireland, by the
Secretary of State). In boroughs and cities the chairman is normally known as
the Mayor (in the City of London and certain other large cities, he or she is
known as the Lord Mayor). In Scotland the chairman of the district council of
each of the four cities is called the Lord Provost. No specific title is laid down for
the chairmen of other councils, but some are known as conveners, while others
continue to use the old title of ‘provost'.
Councillors are elected for four years. All county councils, London borough
councils, and about two-thirds of non-metropolitan district councils are elected
in their entirety every four years. In the remaining districts (including all
metropolitan districts) one-third of the councillors are elected in each of the
three years between county council elections.
In Scotland local elections are held every two years, alternately for districts and
for regions and islands authorities, so that all types of authority are elected for
four years at a time.
Anyone is entitled to vote at a local government election in Great Britain
provided he or she is aged 18 years or over, is a British citizen, other
Commonwealth citizen, or a citizen of the Irish Republic, is not subject to any
legal incapacity and is registered as a local government elector for the area for
which the election is held. To qualify for registration a person must be resident
in the council area on the qualifying date. In Northern Ireland there are slightly
different requirements.
66
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Functions and
Services
A candidate for election as councillor normally stands as a representative of
one of the national political parties, or of some local interest, or as an
independent. Candidates must be British citizens, other Commonwealth
citizens or citizens of the Irish Republic, and aged 21 or over. In addition, they
must be registered as local electors in the area of the local authority to which
they seek election; or have resided in or occupied (as owner or tenant) land or
other premises in that area during the whole of the 12 months preceding the day
on which they are nominated as candidates or, in that 12 months, have had
their principal or only place of work there. No one may be elected to a council of
which he or she is an employee, and there are some other disqualifications.
Local authority areas are generally divided into electoral areas for local council
elections. Administrative counties in England and Wales are divided into
electoral divisions. Districts in England, Wales and Northern Ireland are divided
into electoral ‘wards’, returning one councillor or more. In Scotland the electoral
areas in the regions and islands areas are called electoral divisions, each
returning a single member; the districts are divided into wards, similarly
returning a single member. For parish or community council elections in
England and Wales, each parish or community, or ward of a parish or
community, forms an electoral area which returns one member or more.
The procedure for local government voting in Great Britain is similar to that
for parliamentary elections. In Northern Ireland local government elections are
held on the basis of proportional representation and electoral wards are grouped
into district electoral areas.
Local authorities' functions are far-reaching. Some are primarily duties, others
purely permissive.
Broadly speaking, functions in England and Wales are divided between county
and district councils on the basis that county councils are responsible for
matters requiring planning and administration over wide areas or requiring the
support of substantial resources while district councils as a whole administer
functions of more local significance.
English county councils are generally responsible for strategic planning,
transport planning, highways, traffic regulation, consumer protection, refuse
disposal, police and the fire service. Education, libraries and the personal social
services are functions of county councils in non-metropolitan areas and of
district councils in metropolitan areas. All district councils are responsible, for
instance, for environmental health, housing, decisions on most planning
applications, and refuse collection. They may also provide off-street car parks
subject to the consent of the county council. Powers to carry out some
functions—such as the provision of museums, art galleries and parks—are
available at both levels; arrangements depend on local agreement.
In the metropolitan counties the district councils are responsible for the full
range of services (apart from the police, the fire service and public transport and,
in some areas only, waste regulation and disposal—see p 64). In Greater London
the boroughs and the City Corporation are responsible for a similar range of
functions but London’s metropolitan police force is directly responsible to the
Home Secretary. Responsibility for passenger transport lies with London
Regional Transport and in inner London, education is at present administered
by the Inner London Education Authority (ILEA—see p 64). Responsibility for
land drainage and flood protection, including the Thames Barrier, rests with the
Thames Water Authority.
In Wales the division of functions between county and district councils is
much the same as that between county and district councils in non¬
metropolitan areas of England.
Local authorities in England and Wales may arrange for any of their functions
GOVERNMENT
67
Internal
Organisation of
Local Authorities
Public
Access
Officers and
Employees
to be carried out on their behalf by another local authority, other than functions
relating to education, police, the personal social services and national parks.
In Scotland the regional and district authorities discharge local government
functions in a way broadly similar to that of authorities in England and Wales.
Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles, because of their isolation from the
mainland, have single, virtually all-purpose authorities.
In Northern Ireland local environmental and certain other services, such as
leisure and the arts, are administered by the district councils. Responsibility for
planning, roads, water supply and sewerage services is exercised in each district
through a divisional office of the Department of the Environment for Northern
Ireland. Area boards, responsible to central departments, administer locally
education, public libraries and the health and personal social services. The
Northern Ireland Housing Executive, responsible to the Department of the
Environment, administers housing.
Local authorities have considerable freedom to make arrangements for carrying
out their duties. They may co-operate or share among themselves the discharge
of their functions. Most use a committee system, whereby policy and principle
are decided in full council, and the various services are administered by
committees composed of selected members of the council and, where the
authority chooses, ‘persons of experience’. A council may delegate to a
committee or officer any of its functions except those in connection with raising
loans, levying rates (see p 69) or making financial demands on other local
authorities liable to contribute; these are legally reserved to the council as a
whole. Some councils have policy advisory or co-ordinating committees which
originate policy for implementation by the full council. The powers and duties of
local authority committees (which may be advisory or executive) are usually laid
down in formal standing orders. Parish and community councils in England
and Wales are often able to do their work in full session although they appoint
committees from time to time as necessary.
Following recommendations of an independent inquiry into the conduct of
business in local authorities in Great Britain in 1986, the Government has
announced proposals which are designed to strengthen the democratic func¬
tioning of local authorities. These include requiring council committees to
reflect the political composition of the council, generally removing voting powers
from co-opted members of decision-making committees and prohibiting the
most senior officers from being members of other local authorities or under¬
taking public activity.
The public (including the press) are admitted to council, committee and
sub-committee meetings, and have a right of access to agenda, reports and
minutes of meetings and certain background papers. Local authorities may
exclude the public from meetings and withhold these papers only in limited
circumstances specified by legislation.
Nearly 3 million people are employed by local authorities in Great Britain. These
include administrative, professional and technical staff, teachers, firemen,
those engaged on law and order services, and manual workers. Nearly half of all
local government workers are employed in the education service.
Although a few appointments must be made by all the authorities responsible
for the functions concerned, councils are individually responsible within
national policy requirements for determining the size, composition and
deployment of their workforces. In Northern Ireland each council must by law
appoint a clerk of the council as its chief officer.
As a general rule, employees are of three kinds: heads of departments or chief
Local
Authority
Finance
Current
Expenditure
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
officers; administrative, professional, clerical and technical staff; and manual
workers. Senior staff appointments are usually made on the recommendation of
the committee or committees particularly concerned; most junior appointments
are made by heads of departments, who are also responsible for engaging
manual workers.
Pay and conditions of service for local authority staff are generally a matter for
each council, although there are scales recommended by national negotiating
machinery set up by the local authorities themselves.
Authorities differ in the degree to which they employ staff to carry out certain
functions (for example, building work, street cleaning or refuse collection) or use
private firms under contract. The Government’s policy of promoting value for
money is encouraging the use of private firms where there are resultant
economies, and legislation now requires authorities to open up further services
to competition from the private sector. In the specific case of building and
maintenance work, the Local Government, Planning and Land Act 1980 obliges
authorities’ direct labour organisations to bid for such work in open competi¬
tion if they wish to undertake it.
In 1987—88 expenditure by local authorities in the United Kingdom was some
£41,000 million, a little under one-quarter of general government expenditure.
Current expenditure amounted to some £37,000 million, and capital expendi¬
ture, net of capital receipts, to about £4,000 million. Education accounts for
over one-third of the total. Most of the remainder is spent on health and social
security, law and order, and the environment.
The system of local authority finance in Great Britain is to be changed
radically, beginning in April 1989 in Scotland and in April 1990 in England and
Wales (see p 70).
Local authority current expenditure in England and Wales is financed by a
combination of central government grants and local rates (a tax based on
property values). A few services such as the police and the Urban Programme for
inner city areas receive specific central government grants towards their cost.
However, most central government support for current spending is provided
through the rate support grant. This has two elements: domestic rate relief
grant, which is paid to rating authorities as a direct subsidy to domestic rates,
and block grant. Block grant is a general grant which is designed to compensate
for variations in the needs which local authorities have to provide for and for
differences in the resources they may be able to raise in local rates. Each local
authority’s grant is, therefore, calculated to be sufficient for it to provide a
common level of service without inefficiency while at the same time charging the
same rate poundage. This system requires an assessment of each authority’s
need to provide services which takes account of a large number of factors and
characteristics of an authority’s area and population.
Within this system, local authorities are free to decide on their overall level of
spending and on their priorities between particular services. However, because
of the need to control public expenditure, the method for calculating an
authority’s entitlement to block grant provides that for almost all authorities,
grant entitlement decreases as expenditure increases, thus giving an incentive
for expenditure restraint. The Government has power, subject to parliamentary
approval, to fix upper limits on the rates of selected authorities whose spending
it considers to be excessive.
In Scotland the grant is distributed in three parts: the ‘needs’ element,
designed to give most help to authorities whose spending needs are greatest; the
‘resources’ element, used to supplement the rate income of authorities whose
rateable value per head of population falls below a standard figure, prescribed for
GOVERNMENT
69
Capital
Expenditure
Rates
each year; and the domestic’ element, which compensates authorities for loss of
rate income from reductions in rate poundage which they are required to give to
householders. Local authorities are free to decide on their level of spending, but
central government can make selective grant and rate reductions in the case of
individual authorities planning excessive and unreasonable expenditure. Cur¬
rent expenditure guidelines are issued and the grant payable to authorities is
reduced where the level of expenditure planned by authorities is in excess of the
guidelines. The Government has power to set a general limitation on rates.
In Northern Ireland district councils receive central government grants
comprising specific grants which assist with the financing of certain functions
(for example, the acquisition of open space, and the provision of clean air) and
certain capital projects (for example, leisure centres), and a general grant, which
is paid by the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland. The general
grant compensates councils for loss of rate income arising from statutory
derating of premises; it also contains a resources element which brings the
rating resources of poorer councils up to a standard level determined by the
Department.
Local government capital expenditure is financed primarily by borrowed money
which is supplemented by capital grants and other income, especially receipts
from property sales. Every year each local authority receives from the Govern¬
ment a capital expenditure allocation for each of the main blocks of services for
which it is responsible. An authority may in any year borrow amounts of money
broadly equal to the total of the allocations it has received. Allocations may be
supplemented by a proportion of the capital receipts generated by the authority.
With other minor additions, this constitutes a ceiling on the total of most types
of capital expenditure which the authority may undertake in that year.
Authorities have almost complete discretion, within their legal powers, to spend
according to locally determined priorities.
Rates are local taxes paid by the occupiers of land and property (with certain
exceptions, see below) to meet part of the cost of local services. Each occupier’s
payment is calculated annually by the rating authority by multiplying the
rateable value of a property (broadly equivalent to its annual rental value) by the
rate poundage—an amount per £ of rateable value fixed by the authority
according to its projected financial needs. Rateable values are assessed
periodically, the last occasion being in 1973 in England and Wales and 1985 in
Scotland, and there is a system of appeals for disputed assessments.
Government grants reduce domestic rates below the levels paid by business
concerns. Rating relief is available in certain circumstances on premises
adapted for the use of people with disabilities. Agricultural land and buildings
(apart from living accommodation and farm shops) and places of religious
worship are exempted from rates. Charities pay half the full rate on premises
occupied for charitable purposes and may be given further relief by rating
authorities, who can also reduce or remit the rates for a wide range of non-
profit-making bodies. In England and Wales rating authorities have the
discretion to levy a rate on property unoccupied for more than three months.
For non-domestic property this is limited to 50 per cent of the full rate, with
complete exemption for empty warehouses and factories. In enterprise zones,
which have been set up in certain areas to foster industrial and commercial
regeneration, commercial and industrial properties are exempt from paying
rates for ten years.
In Scotland industrial (including freight transport) premises are rated at 60
per cent of net annual value. Most empty properties pay no rates.
In Northern Ireland all industrial premises are fully derated as are commercial
70
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
New
Arrangements
Loans
Control of
Finance
Local
Government
Complaints
System
premises in enterprise zones. Certain other properties, such as freight transport
and recreational premises, are partially derated.
The main features of the reform of local authority finance in Great Britain,
which are designed to strengthen local democratic accountability, are the
replacement of domestic rates by a community charge which each authority will
set and which will be payable by every resident adult; a grant system that will
compensate for differences in local authorities’ needs and will provide additional
help by way of a fixed sum for each adult; and (in England and Wales) a national
non-domestic rate, the proceeds of which will be distributed to local authorities
in proportion to the number of adults. (In Scotland, however, local authorities
will continue to set non-domestic rates with annual increases limited to the rate
of inflation.) The new system is to be introduced in Scotland in April 1989. In
England and Wales it will be introduced in April 1990 to coincide with a
revaluation of non-domestic properties. The Government will also introduce a
new system of control on capital finance in England and Wales in April 1990.
Local authorities are allowed to borrow money long term to finance new capital
expenditure and also to refinance loans raised for capital finance thus enabling
flexible debt management. Authorities are not permitted to borrow long term to
finance revenue expenditure but they may borrow money short term in
anticipation of revenues receivable. In Northern Ireland long-term borrowing by
district councils is subject to central approval; in Scotland central approval is
given to capital expenditure, not to loans.
Most long-term borrowing by authorities is from the Public Works Loan Board
(or, in Northern Ireland, the Consolidated Fund). The Board draws its funds
from the Government’s National Loans Fund and thus allows authorities to
enjoy interest rates lower than any institution except the Government.
Authorities may also borrow from the capital market using means specified in
legislation. All loan charges are secured against the revenues of the authority
and represent a first charge on those revenues.
Local councils normally have a finance committee to keep their financial policy
under constant review. They must have their annual accounts audited by
independent auditors appointed by the Audit Commission in England and
Wales, or by the Commission for Local Authority Accounts in Scotland. In
Northern Ireland this role is exercised by a local government audit section
appointed by the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland.
A complaints system for local government in England and Wales involves
independent statutory Commissions for Local Administration comprising local
commissioners (local government Ombudsmen). The English Commission has
three local commissioners and the Welsh, one. In Scotland the statute provides
for a single commissioner. All commissioners are responsible in their particular
area for investigating citizens’ allegations of injustice resulting from mal¬
administration by local authorities.
In Northern Ireland a Commissioner for Complaints deals with complaints
alleging injustices suffered as a result of maladministration by district councils
and certain other public bodies.
Fire Services
Every part of the United Kingdom is covered by a local authority fire service,
which is subject to some general oversight by central government. Other than in
Northern Ireland, where the fire service is financed wholly from central
GOVERNMENT
71
Fire Prevention
government funds, the cost is shared between local authorities and central
government, the latter contribution through the rate support grant.
Each of the 64 fire authorities must by law make provision for fire-fighting,
and maintain a brigade of sufficient strength to meet all normal requirements
(in some parts of Scotland combined authorities provide fire cover). Other
authorities also maintain fire brigades, for instance, the Army and Royal Air
Force Departments of the Ministry of Defence; the Civil Aviation Authority at
airports; and some large industrial and commercial concerns. These work in
co-operation with the local authority fire services.
The Home Secretary and the Secretary of State for Scotland have central
responsibility in England and Wales and in Scotland respectively. Central
government is concerned mainly with ensuring the operational efficiency of
brigades. Ministers have statutory powers to prescribe standards and general
requirements on administrative and operational matters of service-wide signifi¬
cance. These include appointments and promotions, the provision of a central
training institution, pensions and disciplinary matters. Their approval is also
required for reductions in the fire-fighting establishments of fire brigades. Each
minister is advised by a Central Fire Brigades Advisory Council, comprising the
respective home departments, local authorities, fire service representative
organisations and certain specialist advisers. In the home departments
inspectorates of fire services advise on operational and technical matters. Most
fire brigades include part-time personnel who provide fire cover in less-densely
populated areas in return for a retaining fee and call-out and attendance fee. Fire
authorities also employ people for duties in controls, communications, and
mobilising and staff duties. There are about 35,600 full-time and 16,900
part-time operational members of fire brigades in Britain.
The standardisation of some equipment is encouraged, to assist compatibility
when a fire is attended by more than one brigade. The principal types of
fire-fighting appliances bought by fire authorities are based upon specifications
approved by the Secretaries of State and issued in the form of advice by the
Central Fire Brigades Advisory Councils. The specifications aim to describe the
minimum standards required while allowing some freedom of design.
Each fire authority must appoint a Chief Fire Officer (Firemaster in Scotland)
who exercises day-to-day control from brigade headquarters. Divisional officers
in charge of the geographical areas into which most brigade regions are divided
are responsible for mobilising forces. Constant communication is maintained
between divisional and brigade headquarters and if additional resources are
required to deal with an incident, neighbouring divisions, or a neighbouring fire
brigade, are asked to provide assistance.
Fire authorities are concerned in some way with fire precautions in most
buildings used by the public and have major responsibility for enforcing
legislation concerning fire precautions. They must also make efficient arrange¬
ments for giving advice on fire prevention, restricting the spread of fires, and
means of escape. Courses in fire prevention are held at the Fire Service College
for fire brigade officers. In addition to their enforcement and advisory duties,
brigades are also involved in education and publicity to promote fire safety,
particularly in the home; the Home Office and the Scottish Home and Health
Department also promote fire safety in the home. Central government is advised
on prevention by the Joint Fire Prevention Committee of the Central Fire
Brigades Advisory Councils, representing the fire service and central and local
authorities.
Research
Research into health hazards to fire-fighters, fire prevention, fire-brigade
organisation and fire-fighting equipment is conducted by the Home Office with
Special
Services
Fire Losses
Fire Casualties
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the help of the fire services under the auspices of the Joint Committee on
Fire Research of the Central Fire Brigades Advisory Councils. Individual
research projects are undertaken by the Home Office Scientific Research and
Development Branch or, under contract to the Home Office, by other govern¬
ment agencies, notably the Fire Research Station, which is part of the Building
Research Establishment of the Department of the Environment, or by private
consultants. The Fire Research Station is the principal organisation studying
and investigating technical aspects of fire.
Fire authorities have discretion to use their brigades and equipment in a variety
of non-fire emergencies. These are known as ‘special services’ and include rail,
road and aircraft accidents, collapse of buildings, flooding of premises, leakage
of harmful gas or liquids and the rescue of people or animals from dangerous
situations. Fire authorities are entitled to levy a charge for such services.
The direct cost of damage to buildings and goods destroyed by fires in Great
Britain in 1987 amounted to an estimated £470 million (consequential losses
from the interruption of business are not included in this total). Most fires
involving heavy losses occur when the premises are unattended; and fires are
more likely to start in storage areas than in production departments. Industries
which suffer most severely include engineering and electrical firms; textiles;
food, drink and tobacco warehousing; chemical and allied industries; paper,
printing and publishing firms; and retailing.
About 950 people, particularly the elderly and young children, die in fires every
year (most of them at home) and about a further 12,700 suffer injury. Among the
chief causes of fatal fires are ignition of upholstery, bedding and clothing by
smokers’ materials and by heaters.
3 Overseas
Relations
Administration
Britain s overseas relations have been shaped by its history as a major trading
and maritime power and its concern to maintain peace and to promote global
prosperity through international co-operation.
Since 1945 Britain has progressively, and largely peacefully, dismantled its
Empire. Yet it retains world-wide trading concerns and continuing responsibili¬
ties for 14 dependent territories and for the 6 million of its citizens who live
overseas. London is a major world financial centre. Britain’s overseas invest¬
ments are the second largest in the world, fast catching up with Japan's. Britain
imports over one-third of its food and more than half of its raw material
requirements. Exports account for over a quarter of its gross national product
(GNP).
In a world where communications, information and problems are increasingly
on a global scale, Britain regards regional or world co-operation as the best way
to attain its overseas objectives. It has diplomatic relations with 165 countries
and with around 20 of these it has common security arrangements, principally
through the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation. Britain provides development
assistance to over 120 independent countries as well as to its remaining
dependencies. It is a member of some 120 international organisations, ranging
from the world-wide United Nations to regionally based and technically
orientated bodies. The principal regional organisation to which Britain belongs
is the European Community: Britain increasingly co-ordinates its foreign policy
through the mechanism of European political co-operation. As a member of the
Commonwealth, which evolved out of the British Empire, Britain is part of a
representative cross-section of the international community, whose 48 mem¬
bers share a common language and close professional, academic and commer¬
cial links. Britain also has strong ties with the United States, including a
common language and similar political and cultural traditions.
Britain considers that the maintenance of international order, governed by
respect for a generally accepted system of law, is vital if international
eo-operation is to be effective. As a permanent member of the United Nations
Security Council, it makes support for the United Nations a central feature of its
foreign policy.
The general conduct of overseas relations is the responsibility of the Secretary of
State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs acting through the Foreign and
Commonwealth Office (FCO) and over 200 British diplomatic posts overseas.
The latter comprise embassies and high commissions in about 130 countries,1
together with subordinate consulates-general and consulates, and missions at
ten international organisations. These posts, like the Foreign and Common¬
wealth Office, are staffed by members of the Diplomatic Service and locally
en§a§ed people. Excluding supporting administrative and communications
services, 30 per cent of front-line diplomatic staff and senior locally engaged staff
are involved in commercial work such as export promotion and the protection of
1 A few embassies are accredited to more than one country; for example, the embassy at Dakar in
Senegal is also accredited to Mauritania, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Mali and Cape Verde.
74
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The British
Council
British commercial interests, 25 per cent in consular/entry clearance services,
18 per cent in political and economic work, 9 per cent in information and 7 per
cent in other work.
Other departments which have a primary concern with overseas relations
include the Ministry of Defence, the Department of Trade and Industry, the
Treasury and the Overseas Development Administration (ODA, which is part of
the FCO); but the involvement of most has increased with the growing
dependence of domestic economic policy on international decisions and with
Britain’s membership of the European Community.
Where questions of overseas policy involve matters within the responsibility of
other departments, the FCO formulates policy in consultation with the
departments concerned. The balance of responsibilities is a matter of constant
adjustment, and the department with the predominant functional interest, even
though it may be primarily domestic, takes the lead. This is particularly so in
policy concerning the European Community and international monetary
matters. In the case of policy towards the Community, the FCO exercises its
co-ordinating role at official level through the machinery of the Cabinet Office.
Other bodies whose work has an overseas dimension include the British
Overseas Trade Board and ECGD (the Export Credits Guarantee Department),
which provide export services for industry; the Crown Agents for Oversea
Governments and Administrations,1 which helps to arrange purchases from
British aid funds and appointments under technical co-operation programmes
(as well as providing mainly purchasing and management services to overseas
governments and institutions); and the British Council.
The British Council, established in 1934, aims to promote Britain abroad
through cultural, educational and technical co-operation. The activities of the
Council, which is represented in over 80 countries, include the teaching of
English and the recruitment of British teachers for posts overseas; administer¬
ing the Government’s educational assistance and technical co-operation train¬
ing programmes; fostering personal contacts between British and overseas
people, especially in the educational, professional and scientific areas; running,
or helping to maintain, libraries of British books and periodicals overseas and
providing information through touring exhibitions and bibliographical services;
and presenting overseas the best of British arts and culture. Overseas it acts as
education adviser to Britain’s diplomatic missions and is responsible for
educational assistance in developing countries in which it is represented and for
links and exchanges in higher education which require official support. In
Britain the Council is concerned mainly with arranging programmes for
professional visitors and with the placing, administration and welfare of
overseas students. A basic principle is that the Council’s work should be of
benefit both to Britain and to the receiving country.
In 1987—88 the Council assisted 28,050 overseas students, trainees and
visitors to come to Britain and 60,400 students learnt English through the
Council and associated teaching centres overseas. Apart from FCO- and
ODA-funded schemes, the Council provided 1,682 fellowships and 3,212
short-term professional visits to Britain in 1987—88. Many visitors finance all or
part of the costs while others are paid for by overseas governments and
international agencies. Training in Britain was arranged for 3,340 people and
funded by clients.
Book, audio-visual and periodical issues made by the Council’s 116 libraries
around the world totalled 7-4 million and users contributed £1-2 million to the
1 A public body established in 1833 to look after the financial and supply needs of British
dependent territories, the Crown Agents has been reorganised with a view to its privatisation in
due course.
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
75
costs. In many places the libraries have film and video stocks, software
demonstration equipment and on-line access to British databases. The Council
supported 700 British drama, dance or music events, including experimental
work and jazz and rock concerts for younger audiences.
In 1988—89 the Council’s annual grant from the FCO was £77-8 million. It also
received another £132 million, mainly from the ODA, to manage various
government-assisted programmes. The Council’s own programmes are funded
by its government grant and by earnings. The latter—£63-6 million in
1987—88—derive mainly from English language teaching, educational services,
examinations, courses and library membership. Business sponsorship provided
£670,000, and £3 million was contributed directly by commercial sponsors
towards events with which the Council was involved.
Membership of the European Community
Britain is a fully committed member of the European Community, an
association of 12 democratic nations which originated in the need for countries
in Western Europe to co-operate in the reconstruction of their ruined economies
at the end of the second world war and their desire to use this economic
co-operation to promote peace and freedom. In 1952 Belgium, France, the
Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, Luxembourg and the Netherlands estab¬
lished the European Coal and Steel Community to include their coal and steel
resources within a common market. This was followed by the Treaties of Rome,
signed in March 1957, setting up the European Economic Community and the
European Atomic Energy Community. Britain became a member in 1973,
together with Denmark and the Irish Republic; Greece followed in 1981 and
The European Community
76
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Community-
Institutions
Portugal and Spain in 1986. The separate institutions established by the three
Community treaties were merged in 1967.
The Community’s aim, as set out in the Treaty of Rome and confirmed in the
Single European Act of 1986, is to lay the foundations for a closer union between
the peoples of Europe on the basis of a common internal market, the gradual
approximation of member states’ economic policies and a framework of common
law. The Community has abolished internal tariffs and some other trade
barriers, established a common external customs tariff and made provision for
freer movement of labour, capital and services. Member states have agreed to
establish a genuinely free internal market by 1992. The Community also
negotiates on behalf of its member states in international trade negotiations.
Overseas countries having special links with the Community are accorded
preferential treatment in aid and the development of trade. The Community
accounts for about a fifth of world trade, and nearly half of Britain’s trade is with
the other 11 member states.
Britain plays a constructive part in the development of the Community, which
it regards as a means of strengthening democracy and reinforcing stability in
Europe and of increasing the collective strength of member states in interna¬
tional trade and other negotiations. In addition, it welcomes the member states’
commitment, enshrined by a treaty in 1986, to political co-operation on foreign
policy issues.
Under the treaties major policy decisions are taken by the Council of Ministers,
on which member states are represented by foreign or other ministers as
appropriate to the subject under discussion. The Presidency of the Council
changes at six-monthly intervals, Britain having assumed it for the third time
from July to December 1986. Most Council decisions are taken on the basis of a
proposal made by the European Commission; some may be decided by majority
or qualified majority, with votes weighted according to provisions set out in the
treaties. In other cases the Council proceeds on the basis of unanimity. The
Single European Act provides for improved decision-taking through more use of
qualified majority voting, particularly on interned market measures.
Heads of Government meet at least twice a year as the European Council,
which takes important decisions and discusses Community policies and world
affairs generally.
The European Commission puts forward policy proposals, executes decisions
taken by the Council of Ministers and ensures that Community rules are
correctly observed. It is composed of 17 Commissioners (two from Britain),
nominated by member governments and appointed by common agreement, and
is pledged to act independently of national or sectional interests.
The European Parliament, directly elected by the people in member states at
five-yearly intervals, has 518 members, 81 of whom come from Britain. Members
sit in eight main groups according to party affiliation and not nationality. The
next election will take place in 1989.
The Parliament is consulted on a wide range of issues before the Council takes
final decisions and these arrangements have been recently improved. The
Commission can be removed from office as a whole by a two-thirds majority of all
members of the Parliament in a vote of censure. The Parliament can also reject in
its entirety the draft annual budget as presented by the Commission and
approved by the Council. Members may also put questions to the Council of
Ministers and the Commission.
The European Court of Justice, consisting of 13 judges, interprets and
adjudicates on the meaning of the treaties and of any measures taken by the
Council of Ministers and the Commission; it also hears complaints and appeals
brought by or against Community institutions, member states or individuals
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
77
Finance
Internal Policies
The Single
Market
and gives preliminary rulings on cases referred to it by courts in the member
states. It represents the final authority on all aspects of Community law. The
Single European Act provides for a Court of First Instance to be attached to the
Court of Justice.
The European Court of Auditors examines all Community revenue and
expenditure to see that it has been legally received and spent, and to ensure
sound financial management. It draws up an annual report and may sub¬
mit observations on specific questions as the Community institutions
request.
Community policies are implemented by regulations, which are legally
binding and directly applicable in all member countries; directives, which are
binding, as to the result to be achieved, on member states to which they are
addressed but allow national authorities to decide on means of implementation;
decisions, which are binding on those to whom they are addressed (for example,
member states, firms or individuals); and recommendations and opinions,
which have no binding force. The Council of Ministers can also indicate a
general policy direction through resolutions.
In addition to, and separately from, the institutions operating within the
Community framework established by treaty, the member states have set up
machinery under which they consult each other before taking up final positions
on important questions of foreign policy. Known as political co-operation,
these consultations include regular meetings of foreign ministers, monthly
meetings of senior officials, and contacts at working level among those con¬
cerned with particular questions. In addition, the 12 foreign ministries are
linked by a secure communications system and a small secretariat assists the
Presidency.
The Community is financed by a system of levies on agricultural imports;
customs duties; the product of a notional rate of value added tax (VAT) levied on
a harmonised base at 1-4 per cent; and (following an agreement concluded in
February 1988) contributions based on member states’ GNP. These are known
as ‘own resources’.
Without some form of adjustment Britain’s contributions under the system
would be much higher than its receipts from Community policies, because the
Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) absorbs about two-thirds of Community
spending and Britain's agricultural sector is relatively small. This problem was
foreseen during the accession negotiations, and in 1980 the Community
recognised that there was a problem for Britain. After a series of annual
budgetary refunds the European Council reached an agreement in June 1984
under which Britain obtains a rebate of 66 per cent of the gap between its shares
of VAT payments and of Community expenditure. The VAT ceiling of 1 per cent
was increased to 1 -4 per cent from 1986, partly to meet the costs of enlargement
of the Community.
In February 1988 member states agreed that in future the ceiling on own
resources available to the Community should be expressed in terms of
Community GNP rather than, as previously, in VAT. The new ceiling was set at
1-2 per cent of GNP. Because existing measures to control spending on the CAP
had been shown to be ineffective, member states also accepted legally binding
measures to control both output and spending. They also agreed on a guideline
limit on overall agricultural spending (see p 79). The 1984 arrangements for
British rebates are to continue.
In Britain’s view, completion of a single, unified market of 320 million people by
removing the remaining major barriers to the free movement of goods, services
and capital is the most effective means of improving European competitiveness
78
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Transport
Industry
Employment
The Environment
in world markets, so generating wealth and prosperity for its citizens. The
Single European Act commits member states to the objective of establishing a
genuine single market by the 1992 target date. Since the Commission
submitted its White Paper ‘Completing the Internal Market’ to the Milan
European Council in June 1985, nearly 200 single-market measures have been
agreed, including nearly 50 measures during the British Presidency in the
second half of 1986. Nevertheless, a great deal remains to be done. Britain's
priorities are the simplification and eventual lifting of customs and other
frontier restrictions on the free movement of goods, the removal of technical
barriers to trade, the liberalisation of public purchasing and the freeing of
markets in services, especially financial services and transport.
In 1988 the Government launched a campaign to bring home to British
businesses the importance of 1992 and to encourage companies to plan ahead to
meet the challenge it represents.
Britain favours the establishment of a deregulated transport system within the
Community, and has welcomed the June 1986 agreement by transport
ministers to abolish all quota restrictions on the movement of road haulage in
intra-Community trade by 1992. In January 1988 new measures to increase
competition in civil aviation came into effect. Britain's links with other member
states will be improved as a result of the 1986 decision taken by Britain and
France to facilitate the construction and operation of a rail link under the
Channel.
Community action seeks to encourage the development of new European
high-technology industries and the restructuring of older ones. The ESPRIT
programme supports research in advanced microelectronics, information
processing, software technology, office automation and integrated manufac¬
turing while the BRITE project is designed to promote the use of advanced
technology in motor vehicles, aeronautics, chemicals, textiles, engineering and
other industries. Member states also participate in the Eureka programme set
up to improve European performance in high technology.
The Community is pledged to abolish state aid to the steel industry and return
to a free market. To this end, production quotas for the different categories of
steel are to be phased out between 1988 and 1990. In 1987 the Council approved
the RESIDER programme aimed at assisting the development of new economic
activities in regions affected by the restructuring of the steel industry. The
Community’s policy on shipbuilding is that state aid to the industry should help
it to adapt to prevailing market conditions.
Britain believes that the Community has an important role to play in fighting
unemployment. In December 1986 the Social Affairs Council agreed an action
programme for employment growth with the aim of promoting new businesses,
improving the working of the labour market, better training, and more help for
the long-term unemployed. It was based on proposals put forward by Britain, the
Irish Republic and Italy. Other measures agreed or adopted during the British
Presidency included a Commission action programme on small and medium¬
sized enterprises which was endorsed in outline, £1,000 million in loans to help
small businesses gain access to new technology and a Council resolution
emphasising the importance of cutting administrative burdens on business.
International co-operation is often necessary to deal with environmental
pollution which does not respect national boundaries. The Community has been
active in this area for some 15 years and its role has been given explicit legal
recognition in the Single European Act. Community instruments are concerned
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
79
with such issues as water and air pollution, the disposal of wastes, noise and the
protection of wild birds. Britain is actively participating in negotiations to
reduce emissions from large power plants as part of the effort to reduce acid
rain; in September 1986 the Government announced that three major coal-fired
power stations would be retrofitted with flue gas desulphurisation equipment
over the period from 1988 to 1997 at a cost of £780 million and that in future all
new coal-fired stations (some 6,000 megawatts of existing generating capacity)
would be fitted with similar technology. In May 1987 this was followed by the
launching of a new £170 million ten-year programme to install low nitrogen
oxide burners at the 12 largest power stations. In June 1988 Britain, along with
the other members of the Community, agreed to reduce the level of emissions
from power stations. Britain is to reduce its airborne emissions of sulphur
dioxide by 60 per cent from 1980 levels over the next 15 years, and emissions of
nitrogen oxide are to be similarly reduced by 30 per cent over the next ten years.
Britain is also concerned about pollution from vehicle exhausts, and,
following a British initiative, the Council of Ministers adopted a directive in
March 1985 providing for the introduction of unleaded petrol throughout the
Community not later than 1989. In 1987 a directive was adopted allowing for the
reduction of exhaust emissions from motor vehicles over a five-year period from
1988. Member states also agreed to fund further research into protection
against radiation and in September 1987 the Community signed the Montreal
Protocol to the Vienna Convention for Protection of the Ozone Layer.
In 1987 Britain, six other Community member states, Norway and Sweden
agreed to phase out the dumping of harmful wastes in the North Sea by the end
of 1989 and of marine incineration by 1994.
Agriculture
Fisheries
Other Policies
Decisions on the level of Community support prices for agriculture are taken
annually on the basis of proposals presented by the European Commission. Over
many years these support prices have not been adjusted sufficiently to take
account of technical progress in agriculture which has caused a continued
increase in production. The growing market imbalance has led to the creation of
unwanted food surpluses. To deal with the problem, the Agriculture Council,
under British chairmanship, agreed in December 1986 to reduce Community
milk production by 9-5 per cent over two years and to restrict recourse to market
intervention in the beef sector, thereby effectively reducing beef support prices
by 13 per cent. In February 1988 member states agreed a guideline limit on
overall agricultural spending and introduced the concept of‘stabilisers’ through
which automatic cuts will be made in the Community guaranteed price for a
commodity if agreed production levels are exceeded. To complement these
arrangements and to discourage overproduction further, member states agreed
a set-aside scheme to take some agricultural land out of production.
Britain has a particular interest in the control of Community fishing since a
sizeable proportion of the total catch taken in the area bounded by member
states 200-mile limits is in British waters. It therefore took an active role in
negotiations on an agreement reached in 1983 on a new Community fisheries
policy; this covers access to coastal waters, conservation of fish stocks, the
allocation of catch quotas among member states within each year’s total
allowable catch, enforcement of these rules and financial aid to promote the
adaptation and development of the Community’s fishing fleet.
The European Social Fund assists areas of high unemployment by providing
grants towards schemes of training, job creation and geographical mobility of
workers. The European Regional Development Fund provides grants for
industrial and infrastructure projects in the less-developed or industrially
External
Relations
East—West
Relations
The Middle
East
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
declining regions of the Community with the aim of reducing existing
imbalances or preventing the creation of new ones. In 1987 Britain was allocated
some £391 million from the Regional Development Fund and £431 million from
the Social Fund.
Britain also receives about a fifth of the lending of the European Investment
Bank, which was set up in 1958 to provide finance on a non-profit-making basis
for investment to develop the Community’s less-favoured regions, to modernise
industry and to help projects of common interest to two or more member states.
The European Monetary System was established in 1979 to promote monetary
stability in Europe. It consists of an exchange-rate mechanism, a monetary unit
known as the European Currency Unit (ECU—based on a ‘basket’ of national
currencies including sterling, the value of which is recalculated daily) which is
used within the Community for budgetary and other purposes, and enlarged
Community short- and medium-term credit facilities. The member states are
also committed to the establishment of a European Monetary Fund. Britain has
participated in the system from the outset, although not in the exchange-rate
arrangements, and has deposited 20 per cent of its gold and dollar currency
reserves with the European Monetary Co-operation Fund in exchange for ECUs.
The Government intends that Britain should join the exchange-rate mechanism
when conditions permit.
Britain has given high priority to Community action to combat drug
trafficking and terrorism. In October 1986 a meeting of ministers responsible
for these subjects set up a high-level working group to study ways of improving
co-operation against crime and terrorism and an action plan to fight drug
abuse. The Community is also committed to closer co-operation in the fight
against AIDS.
The aim of European political co-operation on foreign policy issues is to
maximise the influence of the Twelve in international affairs; it takes place
outside the framework of the Treaty of Rome.
The six original Community members first decided to co-operate on foreign
policy matters in 1970 and it was then decided to establish separate arrange¬
ments to cover foreign policy co-operation. Successive political agreements and
declarations have extended the scope of the process. Since Britain’s accession in
1973, it has played a leading role in developing European political co-operation;
as the result of a British initiative, the Single European Act, which came into
effect in July 1987, places the basic commitments on a treaty basis for the first
time.
Britain considers that the 12 member states should ensure that a coherent
Western European voice is heard in the management of East—West relations.
The Twelve have welcomed the treaty between the United States and the Soviet
Union on the removal of intermediate-range nuclear forces (see p 89). They have
also stressed the need for the Soviet Union to address human rights issues
seriously and to honour commitments made in the 1975 Helsinki Final Act (see
p 87). At the current Vienna follow-up meeting, the Twelve have pressed for a
thorough review of how these commitments have been complied with and for
practical progress for the benefit of individual citizens throughout Europe.
In July 1980 the European Council’s Venice Declaration stated that a lasting
solution to the problem of the Middle East required the mutual acceptance of
two basic principles—the right of all countries in the area, including Israel, to
secure existence within guaranteed borders and the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination. The Twelve support the proposal for an interna¬
tional peace conference on the Middle East. Member states have repeatedly called
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
81
Central
America
Afghanistan
South Africa
Terrorism
on Israel to withdraw from territory occupied in 1967 and are opposed to Israeli
measures aimed at altering the legal, geographical and demographic structure of
this territory. Member states are also urging Israel to administer occupation in
accordance with international law and human rights standards. The Commu¬
nity has a development programme for the occupied territories and has adop¬
ted measures to allow direct exports of agricultural and industrial products
from them to the Community market.
The Twelve have also consistently emphasised the importance of the complete
withdrawal of foreign forces from Lebanon, except for those whose presence is
requested by the Lebanese Government, and of the obligation on all parties to
co-operate with the UN Interim Force in Lebanon. Member states have
consistently called for a ceasefire in the conflict between Iraq and Iran, and
support the United Nations Secretary-General’s efforts to achieve this.
The Twelve firmly believe that the problems of Central America must be solved by
political and not military means and that such solutions must come from within
the region. They have therefore consistently supported the efforts of the
Contadora Group (Colombia, Mexico, Panama and Venezuela) to negotiate a
comprehensive and verifiable peace agreement, and have welcomed the Central
American Accord signed in Guatemala in August 1987 by the presidents of
Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua designed to
establish a durable and lasting peace in Central America. The Community has a
co-operation agreement with the five Central American countries and Panama
providing for closer economic and aid links with the region.
Having consistently deplored the Soviet Union’s occupation of Afghanistan since
1980, member states have welcomed the agreement on Soviet withdrawal
reached in Geneva in April 1988 (see p 88); they now wish to see an overall
political settlement to the crisis and the installation of a representative
government by a genuine act of self-determination.
The Twelve have repeatedly called for a peaceful end to the system of apartheid.
They have adopted a wide range of measures in an attempt to bring home to the
South African Government the need for a genuine national dialogue and to help
the victims of apartheid. At the request of the European Council the Foreign and
Commonwealth Secretary, Sir Geoffrey Howe, visited Southern Africa in late
July 1986 in an attempt to build on the work of the Commonwealth Group of
Eminent Persons, to help create conditions in which genuine dialogue could
begin in South Africa and to explain the Twelve's policy to South Africa’s
neighbours. In September 1986 the Twelve called on the South African
Government to take the necessary steps to facilitate national dialogue and
undertook to work towards a programme of political action designed to promote
the achievement of this objective. They also emphasised the importance of
strengthened and more effective co-ordination of positive measures to assist the
victims of apartheid and adopted a new package of restrictive measures
consisting of bans on new investments and on the import of gold coins, iron and
steel from South Africa. The Twelve continue to work together to bring effective
pressure to bear for peaceful fundamental change.
Because of the threat posed by international and other terrorism, member states
have sought to act jointly against it. They have agreed not to export arms or
other military equipment to countries clearly implicated in supporting terrorist
activity and to take steps to prevent such material being diverted for terrorist
purposes; in 1986, for instance, they agreed measures against both Libya and
Syria following evidence of their involvement in terrorist activity. It is European
82
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Trade
Aid
Community policy that there should be no concessions made under duress to
terrorists or their sponsors; that there should be solidarity between member
states in their efforts to prevent terrorism and to bring the guilty to justice; and
that terrorist attacks against any member state should be met with a concerted
response. Among the measures agreed by ministers responsible for countering
terrorism are the establishment of a secure communications link between police
forces and arrangements for regular assessments and analyses of terrorist
threats to member states.
Under the Treaty of Rome, the European Commission is given explicit powers to
act on behalf of the Community vis-a-vis third countries on matters within
Community competence such as the common commercial policy. The Commis¬
sion accordingly negotiates on behalf of the Community in major international
trade negotiations. As a single trade bloc it plays a major role in seeking to
preserve the world open trading system on which member states depend for
future growth and jobs, and in defending the interests of its members against
protectionist measures. One of the Community’s priorities is the successful
conclusion of the Uruguay Round of trade negotiations launched in 1986 under
the auspices of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). The first
phase of the negotiations was completed on schedule at the end of 1987. The
negotiations seek to secure adherence to GATT rules; to cover trade in services
for the first time (accounting for about 20 per cent of world trade); and to tackle
agricultural trade problems. A major trade development in 1986 was the renewal
for a further five years of the Multi-Fibre Arrangement governing world trade in
textiles and the consequential renegotiation of 29 bilateral textile agreements
between the Community and third-country suppliers. The Community has also
agreed its priorities for future co-operation with the European Free Trade
Association.
The Community has association and co-operation agreements with all
countries with a Mediterranean coastline (except Albania and Libya) and with
Jordan; these give preferential access to Community markets. Non-preferential
co-operation agreements have also been made with individual countries in
South Asia and Latin America as well as with China, the Association of South
East Asian Nations, the Andean Pact and the Central American states. Trade
relations with the developing countries of Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific
are governed by the third Lome Convention (see below). Negotiations on trade
and economic co-operation agreements are taking place with Hungary, Czecho¬
slovakia and Romania. In June 1988 the Community established official
relations with the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (Comecon) and
signed a trade and economic co-operation agreement with the Gulf Co-operation
Council.
The Community’s Generalised Scheme of Preferences is designed to help
developing countries by granting tariff-free access to the Community market for
most of their industrial goods and varying degrees of preferential access for their
agricultural produce and textiles. The 1988 scheme concentrates benefits on the
poorer producers and countries and certain categories of exports from the more
competitive producers are being excluded, in the textiles sector for the first time.
The third Lome Convention, which governs aid, trade and co-operation between
the Community and 66 developing countries in Africa, the Caribbean and the
Pacific (ACP), was signed in December 1984 and came into force in May 1986.
Over half the ACP countries are members of the Commonwealth. The Conven¬
tion, which runs from 1986 to 1990, provides for aid totalling over £5,000
million and a further £770 million in the form of loans from the European
Investment Bank; it also covers industrial and agricultural co-operation, a
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
83
scheme designed to help stabilise the commodity export earnings of the ACP
countries and assistance for ACP mineral producers whose production and
income suffer from temporary disruptions beyond their control. In addition, it
offers duty-free access to the Community for ACP exports of all industrial and
most agricultural goods, including privileged access for sugar, bananas, rum
and beef. Emphasis is being placed on food production and on measures to
prevent desertification. All British dependent territories (with the exception of
Bermuda, Gibraltar and Hong Kong), together with the overseas territories of
other Community members, are formally associated with the Community under
provisions parallel to those of the Lome Convention and with similar aid and
trade benefits.
In 1987 the Council of Ministers approved a special Community programme
worth over £200 million to aid highly indebted low-income countries in
sub-Saharan Africa pursuing structural adjustment economic policies.
Britain played a leading part in the Community’s adoption of an aid
programme for developing countries in Asia and Latin America not covered by
the Lome Convention or having any other special relationship with the
Community. This has grown steadily since 1976 and was worth some £117
million in 1987. Priority is given to rural development and agricultural
production in the poorest countries, most of which are in Asia.
Co-operation and association agreements with individual countries and
regional groupings also include provision for development aid. In 1987, for
instance, new five-year financial protocols were agreed with most of the
Community’s Mediterranean partners; these will provide for £430 million of
Community aid and £1,120 million in loans from the European Investment
Bank.
The Community's food aid programme is designed to be an effective
instrument of development policy rather than a short-term expedient for the
disposal of unwanted food surpluses. In 1987 it spent some £282 million on food
aid, of which Britain’s share was £60 million, much of which went to Africa.
The Commonwealth
The Commonwealth is a voluntary association of 48 independent states with a
combined population of some 1,200 million, nearly a quarter of the world total.
Commonwealth members are a representative cross-section of nations at all
stages of social and economic development. They include some of the richest and
poorest members of the world community and also some of the largest and
smallest. Their peoples are drawn from practically all the world’s main races,
from all continents and from many faiths. Britain participates fully in all
Commonwealth activities and values it as a means of consulting and co¬
operating with peoples of widely different cultures and perspectives, thereby
increasing international understanding, stability and peace, and contributing
to more balanced global economic development.
The members are Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, Bahamas, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belize, Botswana, Britain, Brunei, Canada, Cyprus, Dominica, The
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guyana, India, Jamaica, Kenya, Kiribati, Lesotho,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mauritius, Nauru, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Papua New Guinea, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka,
Swaziland, Tanzania, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tuvalu, Uganda, Vanuatu,
Western Samoa, Zambia and Zimbabwe. Nauru and Tuvalu are special
members, entitled to take part in all Commonwealth meetings and activities
except Commonwealth Heads of Government Meetings. The Queen is recognised
as head of the Commonwealth; she is also head of State in 17 of these countries.
84
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Consultation
The origin of the Commonwealth lies in the gradual granting of self-
government to the older-established British colonies (later known as the
Dominions) in Australia, Canada, New Zealand and South Africa1 where
European settlement had occurred on a large scale. Their fully independent
status in relation to Britain was legally formulated in the Statute of Westminster
of 1931. The modern Commonwealth, comprising republics and national
monarchies as well as monarchies under the Queen, became possible when it
was agreed in 1949 that India, on becoming a republic, could continue to be a
member. Since then, almost all of Britain's former dependent territories have
attained their independence and have voluntarily joined the Commonwealth.2
As a member of the Commonwealth, Britain participates in a system of mutual
consultation and co-operation which benefits member countries and contri¬
butes to international understanding. Consultation takes place through diplo¬
matic representatives known as high commissioners, meetings of heads of
Government, specialised conferences of other ministers and officials, expert
groups, and discussions at international conferences and the United Nations.
Trade and cultural exhibitions and conferences of professional and unofficial
medical, cultural, educational and economic organisations are other ways in
which frequent contacts are made.
Heads of Government usually meet every two years, most recently in
Vancouver in 1987; they will next meet in Kuala Lumpur in 1989. Proceedings
are held in private, facilitating a frank and informal exchange of views. No votes
are taken, decisions being reached by consensus. These meetings allow prime
ministers and presidents to discuss international issues and decide on collective
initiatives. Common views on matters of major international concern are
formulated and reflected in the communiques issued at the ends of the
meetings. Occasionally, separate declarations are made on particular issues.
These have included the 1971 Declaration of Commonwealth Principles; the
1977 Gleneagles Statement, which commits member governments to take every
practical step to discourage sporting contacts with South Africa; and the 1985
Commonwealth Accord on Southern Africa, which provides for measures
designed to impress on South Africa the urgency of dismantling the apartheid
system. The 1987 Okanagan Statement and Programme of Action on Southern
Africa committed member states to increased support for the front-line states
including a special technical assistance programme for Mozambique. The 1987
Vancouver Declaration on World Trade condemned protectionism and sup¬
ported trade liberalisation through the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade
negotiations (see p 82).
Following the failure of Commonwealth and other attempts in 1986 to
encourage the evolution of a political dialogue leading to the establishment of a
non-racial and representative government, a summit of seven Commonwealth
leaders, meeting in London in August 1986, agreed on the need for further
measures against South Africa. Britain, while believing that mandatory
economic sanctions would not succeed in promoting peaceful change, agreed to
impose voluntary bans on new investment in, and the promotion of tourism to.
South Africa, as well as to implement European Community decisions to ban the
import of iron and steel (see p 81).
With many small states among its members the Commonwealth has expressed
concern about their security and development. At Nassau in 1985 Common¬
wealth leaders called for action which would reduce the vulnerability of small
states while not diminishing their status as independent, sovereign and equal
South Africa ceased to be a member of the Commonwealth in 1961.
Pakistan withdrew in 1972 and Fiji’s membership lapsed in 1987.
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
85
The
Commonwealth
Secretariat
Technical
Co-operation
Commonwealth
Organisations
members of the world community. British policy is to co-operate with other
member states in order to increase the security of small nations by encouraging
regional co-operation and by providing economic aid and technical assistance.
Finance ministers meet annually to discuss world economic problems, and in
recent years have paid particular attention to the problems of development and
the establishment of a fairer international economic order. Other meetings
include those of agriculture, education, health and law ministers which take
place every two or three years. Ministers of industry, labour and employment,
trade and women's affairs also meet.
The Commonwealth Secretariat, established in London in 1965 and financed by
member states, is the main agency for multilateral communication between
them. It is headed by a Secretary-General appointed by heads of Government
and responsible to member states collectively.
The Secretariat promotes consultation, disseminates information on matters
of common concern, and organises meetings and conferences, including those
of heads of Government and of ministers. It co-ordinates many Commonwealth
activities related to international economic, social and political affairs, includ¬
ing education, food production and rural development, the role of women in
development, human rights, youth programmes, management development,
science and technology, law and health. The Secretariat also administers the
Commonwealth Fund for Technical Co-operation.
Because of its neutral position the Secretariat has been able to make its good
offices available in cases of dispute, and has carried out, on request, special
assignments requiring demonstrable impartiality.
Britain plays an active part in the work of the Commonwealth Fund for
Technical Co-operation, established within the Secretariat to provide technical
assistance for economic and social development in Commonwealth developing
countries, and contributes almost a third of its income. The Fund provides
experts to undertake advisory assignments or fill specific posts and uses
consultancy firms to make studies for governments. Its fellowships and training
programme is of particular help in raising levels of technical, industrial,
managerial and other skills, and makes wide use of training facilities within
developing member countries for the benefit of other developing countries. It
has a special programme to help countries develop their exports, another on
food production and rural development and a small technical assistance group
to give advice in key areas. An industrial development unit, the main executive
agency of the Commonwealth Action Programme of Industrial Co-operation,
investigates the feasibility of establishing new industries in developing coun¬
tries and helps to prepare and initiate agreed projects.
Expenditure by Britain on bilateral technical co-operation with Common¬
wealth developing countries in 1987 was £138 million, the greater part being
spent on financing staff for service with Commonwealth governments and in
financing training places in Britain for people from Commonwealth countries.
In 1987 the British aid programme financed the study in Britain of 8,000
students from other Commonwealth countries. Other assistance includes
sending volunteers to serve overseas, consultancy services, the supply of
training and research equipment, and the provision of advice by British
scientific and technical institutions. (About 70 per cent of Britain’s gross
bilateral aid in 1987 went to Commonwealth countries, including Britain’s
remaining dependencies—see p 86.)
The Commonwealth Foundation was established in 1966 and reconstituted as
an international organisation in 1983. Financed by member governments, it
86
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
promotes closer co-operation among professional and other non-governmental
organisations within the Commonwealth. It has assisted over 30 Common¬
wealth professional associations, and has helped in the creation and growth of
many national ones; it has also supported 16 multidisciplinary professional
centres. It promotes understanding of work carried out by non-governmental
organisations and is encouraging the strengthening of information links
through the establishment of liaison units in each Commonwealth country.
The Commonwealth Institute in London promotes the Commonwealth, its
countries and its peoples to the British public. Funded mainly by the British
Government, it has three main galleries of permanent exhibitions and a
changing programme of temporary exhibitions, conferences and performances.
Its education service runs an extensive programme of teaching about the
Commonwealth in schools around Britain. The Institute is open to the public
every day without charge. The Royal Commonwealth Society, which is over 100
years old, is a centre for study and discussion, its library in London housing one
of the largest collections on the Commonwealth. The Society has branches in
many countries.
In keeping with the fact that the Commonwealth is an association of peoples
as well as governments, many unofficial organisations, professional bodies and
voluntary societies provide machinery for co-operation. Professional bodies
include associations of architects, doctors, educators, engineers, journalists,
lawyers, librarians, magistrates, museum curators, nurses, pharmacists,
planners, surveyors and veterinary surgeons. Other organisations include the
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, which organises an annual confer¬
ence of parliamentarians, the Commonwealth Press Union, the Association of
Commonwealth Universities, the Commonwealth Games Federation and the
English Speaking Union of the Commonwealth.
DEPENDENCIES There are 14 remaining British dependent territories: Anguilla; Bermuda;
British Antarctic Territory; British Indian Ocean Territory; British Virgin
Islands; Cayman Islands; Falkland Islands; Gibraltar; Hong Kong; Montserrat;
Pitcairn, Ducie, Henderson and Oeno; St Helena and St Helena Dependencies
(Ascension, Tristan da Cunha); South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands;
and the Turks and Caicos Islands. They have a combined population of 5-5
million, of which 5-3 million live in Hong Kong. Few are rich in natural
resources, and some are scattered groups of islands. There are no permanent
inhabitants in the British Antarctic Territory, British Indian Ocean Territory or
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands. Most dependencies have
considerable self-government with their own legislature and civil service. Britain
is generally responsible, through a Governor, for defence, internal security and
foreign affairs.
It is Britain’s policy to give independence to those dependencies that want it
and where it is practicable to do so, and not to force it on those which do not or
where it is not practicable. In the case of the Falkland Islands, which is the
subject of a territorial claim by Argentina, the inhabitants wish to retain the link
with Britain. The Government is committed to the defence of the Islanders’ right
to live under a government of their own choosing. The Islanders’ right of
self-determination is reflected in the 1985 Falkland Islands Constitution.
Argentina and Chile have claims to territory which overlaps part of the British
Antarctic Territory. Claims to territorial sovereignty in the Antarctic, however,
are suspended by the provisions of the 1959 Antarctic Treaty.
Gibraltar is the subject of a territorial claim by Spain, which imposed border
restrictions in the 1960s. Since the return of democracy to Spain, Britain and
Spain have reached agreement on the method for handling their differences over
Gibraltar, Spanish restrictions being lifted in February 1985. Britain wishes to
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
87
East—West
Relations
see the development of practical co-operation between Gibraltar and Spain to the
benefit of both peoples and remains committed to honouring the wishes of the
people of Gibraltar as to their future.
In 1984 an agreement was signed between Britain and the People’s Republic of
China on the future of Hong Kong. Under the agreement, which was ratified by
the two Governments in 1985, Britain will continue to be responsible for the
administration of Hong Kong until 30 June 1997, when the territory will be
restored to China. The Chinese Government will then establish a Hong Kong
Special Administrative Region, which will enjoy a high degree of autonomy,
except in foreign and defence affairs. It will be vested with executive, legislative
and independent judicial powers and its government will be composed of local
inhabitants. The laws currently in force in Hong Kong will remain basically
unchanged, as will its present social and economic systems and its way of life.
Private property rights and other rights and freedoms will be protected by law.
These arrangements will remain in place for at least 50 years after 1997.
International Peace and Security
Britain is concerned to protect its territorial integrity and political indepen¬
dence, as well as the interests of its dependencies and of its allies, and pursues
these objectives through a national security policy in which deterrence and
defence are coupled with efforts towards removing or alleviating the causes of
international tension and achieving balanced and verifiable international arms
control and disarmament.
British defence policy is based on the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation
(NATO)1 which member countries regard as their guarantee of security, freedom
and well-being, and as an important contributor to international peace and
stability. The purpose of NATO is to enable its member countries to maintain
peace with freedom. It pursues a strategy of deterrence, designed to convince
any potential aggressor that the use of force, or the threat of it, carries risks far
outweighing any likely advantage. At the same time NATO countries seek
through international negotiations to reach arms control agreements which will
enhance their security at lower levels of forces.
Britain’s defence resources are concentrated on key NATO tasks. However, the
Government’s defence policy is also designed to promote, whenever possible,
British and more general Western interests outside the NATO area. In addition,
Britain demonstrates its world-wide interests by periodic military deployments
and exercises overseas; by supporting United Nations and other peacekeeping
efforts; and by providing military assistance and training to a number of friendly
countries.
Britain seeks improvements in East-West relations based on a broader
understanding and on the recognition that East and West have a common
interest in peace and security at a lower level of weapons. The Government
believes that both sides should avoid policies which risk provoking confronta¬
tion and should aim instead for mutual accommodation and co-operation while
exercising restraint in the conduct of international relations both in Europe and
in the rest of the world. This is explicitly recognised in the 1975 Helsinki Final
Act of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE), which
states that European security has to be considered in the broader context of
world security. Britain is committed to doing everything possible to reduce the
1 NATO’s 16 member countries are Belgium, Britain, Canada, Denmark, France, the Federal
Republic of Germany, Greece, Iceland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal,
Spain, Turkey and the United States. France, Iceland (which has no military forces) and Spain do
not participate in NATO’s integrated military structure.
88
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
CSCE
risks of war and to avoid misunderstanding. The Government is following a
policy of increased contacts at all levels with the Soviet Union and its allies; the
Prime Minister, for instance, visited Moscow in 1987 for talks with the Soviet
leaders; she also met the General Secretary of the Soviet Communist Party, Mr
Mikhail Gorbachev, at Brize Norton in December 1987 and the Foreign and
Commonwealth Secretary visited the Soviet Union in February 1988. Britain
welcomed the signature by the United States and the Soviet Union of the
Intermediate Nuclear Forces Treaty (see p 89) in December 1987. Britain also
welcomed the Geneva Agreement on Afghanistan signed in April 1988 by the
Governments of Afghanistan and Pakistan. Under the settlement, formally
guaranteed by the United States and the Soviet Union, Soviet troops will be
withdrawn over a period of nine months and the Afghan refugees allowed to
return home. The phased withdrawal of Soviet troops began in May 1988.
Britain hopes that the agreement will lead to a representative government in
Afghanistan.
Britain believes that full implementation by all participants of the provisions of
the 1975 Helsinki Final Act would lead to increased stability in Europe and
improved co-operation between the 35 European and North American signatory
states. While not a legally binding document, the Final Act established a large
number of important political commitments and a code of behaviour for what
the participants hope will in time become a more normal and open relationship
between both governments and peoples in East and West. To this end it contains
undertakings about security, respect for human rights, and co-operation in
economic, humanitarian and other matters. Meetings to review the application
of the Final Act took place in Belgrade in 1977-78 and in Madrid between 1980
and 1983; a third began in Vienna in November 1986. The Madrid meeting, at
which it was decided that renewed efforts should be made to give full effect to the
Final Act, also convened an experts’ meeting in Ottawa on the subject of human
rights, a cultural forum in Budapest in 1985 and a meeting concerning human
contacts which took place in Berne in 1986. Britain and other Western countries
have taken the opportunity of the Vienna meeting to highlight the failure of the
Soviet Union and the Eastern European countries to implement many of the
commitments contained in the Final Act, particularly in the areas of human
rights, human contacts and information. Together with its partners and allies,
Britain has also tabled a number of new proposals to improve implementation in
the future.
As a result of the Madrid meeting, a Conference on Confidence- and
Security-Building Measures and Disarmament took place in Stockholm between
1984 and 1986 at which Britain and its NATO allies proposed an accord that
would lead to increased openness about military activities, thus reducing the
likelihood of hostilities and the risk of miscalculation in times of tension. These
proposals were incorporated in the Stockholm Document, signed by all 35
participating states in September 1986, which included advance notification
and subsequent observation of planned military manoeuvres above specified
thresholds and detailed information on their purpose, size, composition and
dates, as well as provisions for their verification and on-site inspection. Britain
and its NATO allies are considering the need for further confidence- and
security-building measures and tabled at the Vienna CSCE meeting in July
1987 a proposal for a reconvened conference on such measures.
Together with France, the United States and the Soviet Union, Britain is a
signatory to the 1972 Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin, which reaffirms the
four countries’ rights and responsibilities there, and provides for greatly
improved travel and communications facilities between West Berlin and the
Berlin
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
89
Arms Control
and
Disarmament
Nuclear
Weapons
Federal Republic of Germany, the German Democratic Republic and East Berlin,
and for the maintenance and development of the ties between West Berlin and
the Federal Republic.
Britain is committed to the search for significant balanced and verifiable
measures of arms control and disarmament, leading to increased security at
lower levels of forces, and has played a prominent part in multilateral
disarmament negotiations. Britain is a participating state in the Conference on
Disarmament at Geneva, and in the Mutual and Balanced Force Reductions
negotiations at Vienna; it also takes an active part in disarmament deliberations
under the auspices of the United Nations.
Britain strongly supports the negotiations between the United States and the
Soviet Union on nuclear and space arms, which began in Geneva in 1985. It fully
shares the agreed objective of working out effective agreements aimed at
preventing an arms race in space and terminating it on earth, at limiting and
reducing nuclear arms and at strengthening strategic stability. The British
Government expressed satisfaction at the outcome of the 1988 Moscow summit
between the Soviet Union and the United States and believes that the series of
discussions between the leaders of both countries has been positive and has
brought new hope to the world.
In December 1987 the British Government welcomed the signature in
Washington by the United States and the Soviet Union of the Intermediate
Nuclear Forces Treaty, which is aimed at eliminating within a three-year period
their ground-launched intermediate-range nuclear (INF) missiles throughout
the world. Under the Treaty, the first arms control agreement designed to
eliminate a whole class of nuclear weapons, the United States would destroy
some 400 deployed INF missiles and the Soviet Union about 1,700. Britain also
expressed support for the agreement of the superpowers to work towards a
treaty aimed at reducing strategic offensive arms by 50 per cent. However,
Britain believes that after the conclusion of such an agreement further
reductions in shorter-range nuclear weapons should only take place in
conjunction with an agreement establishing a balance of conventional forces
and armaments and the global elimination of chemical weapons.
Britain's nuclear deterrent is the minimum necessary for credible deterrence
and is very small in comparison with Soviet nuclear forces. It will continue to be
a minimum force after the replacement of the submarine-launched Polaris with
a modernised system known as Trident. In Britain's view the priority is therefore
for reductions in the arsenals of the two superpowers. If a treaty was concluded
reducing US and Soviet strategic missiles by 50 per cent, Trident would still
represent a smaller proportion of the remaining Soviet strategic warheads than
Polaris did in 1970. None the less, Britain has made it clear that, if the US and
Soviet strategic arsenals were to be reduced by more than 50 per cent and there
had been no significant changes in Soviet defensive capability, it would review
the position and consider how best it could contribute to arms control in the
light of the reduced threat.
Britain has played a leading part in strengthening the regime of non¬
proliferation of nuclear weapons. It is a party to the most widely supported arms
control agreement in existence, the 1968 Non-Proliferation Treaty, which is
designed both to stop the spread of nuclear weapons by providing an assurance
through international safeguards that nuclear facilities of non-nuclear-weapon
states will not be used for making such weapons, and to protect the right of all
countries to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. Britain was the first
nuclear-weapon state to conclude an agreement with the International Atomic
Energy Agency, which administers the safeguards. Britain reaffirmed its full
90
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Chemical
and Biological
Weapons
Conventional
Weapons
support for the Treaty at a review conference in 1985, and has been active in
strengthening it by seeking the widest possible adherence. It has also
undertaken not to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon states
which are parties to the Non-Proliferation Treaty or other internationally
binding commitments not to manufacture or acquire nuclear explosive devices:
this assurance would, however, not apply in the case of an attack on Britain, its
dependent territories, its armed forces or its allies by such a state in association
or alliance with a nuclear-weapon state. Britain believes that limiting the
security assurances to these states provides further support for nuclear
non-proliferation.
Britain is also fully committed to progress towards a comprehensive, verifiable
ban on all nuclear tests, and in recent years has tabled papers on verification at
the Conference on Disarmament. However, solutions to verification problems
need to be clearer before it would be appropriate to resume negotiations.
The British Government thinks that the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free
zones in certain parts of the world could contribute to regional security, to
non-proliferation and to disarmament in general, provided that nuclear
weapons do not already feature in the security of the region involved, that all
states concerned are prepared to participate on the basis of agreements freely
entered into and in keeping with internationally recognised principles, and that
the balance of security is maintained. Britain was the first nuclear-weapon state
to ratify the two additional protocols to the 1967 Treaty of Tlatelolco establishing
a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Latin America. Britain has announced that it is
not in its interests to become a party to the three additional protocols to the
1985 Treaty of Rarotonga, which establishes a nuclear-free zone in the South
Pacific. However, the Government has made it clear that Britain has no
intention of testing, manufacturing or basing nuclear weapons in the area.
Britain is committed to achieving a comprehensive and verifiable world-wide
ban on chemical weapons, having abandoned its own chemical warfare
capability in the late 1950s. Britain tabled a draft treaty in 1976 and in more
recent years has presented a number of major papers to the Conference on
Disarmament on compliance and verification of a convention banning chemical
weapons and on the organisation that would be needed to implement the
convention’s provisions.
As a result of a British initiative, biological weapons are the subject of the
1972 Convention on Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stock¬
piling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on their Destruc¬
tion. A review conference which took place in September 1986 reaffirmed the
value of the Convention and adopted measures which would involve the
exchange of information (the arrangements for which were finalised at a
meeting of experts in Geneva in 1987) aimed at increasing confidence between
the parties and thereby strengthening the authority of the Convention.
Conventional weapons are by far the largest component of national armouries.
In the Vienna negotiations on Mutual and Balanced Force Reductions (MBFR),
Britain, together with its NATO allies, is working for an agreement with the
Warsaw Pact participants which would contribute to a more stable relationship
and strengthen peace and security in Europe. This would require an approxi¬
mate parity between NATO and Warsaw Pact forces in Central Europe where the
Warsaw Pact forces far outnumber those of NATO. Progress in the talks has been
slow, mainly because of a long-standing disagreement over the size of Eastern
forces in the reduction area. In an attempt to break the deadlock, the West tabled
new proposals in December 1985 which, based on ideas put forward by Britain
and the Federal Republic of Germany, involve initial reductions of 5,000 US and
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
91
Keeping the
Peace
Human Rights
11,500 Soviet troops without insisting on prior agreement on force levels.
Britain is also participating with its NATO partners in discussions with the
Warsaw Pact in Vienna aimed at agreeing a mandate for new negotiations on
increased conventional stability at lower force levels throughout the whole of
Europe from the Atlantic to the Urals.
At the United Nations Britain submitted memoranda setting out its arms
control priorities at three special sessions of the General Assembly on
disarmament in 1978, 1982 and 1988. At the 1978 special session Britain
proposed the adoption of measures that would increase the flow of objective
information on military matters, including an international system for the
standardised reporting of military expenditure which has since been adopted by
the United Nations. Britain also contributes to the UN Disarmament Commis¬
sion, a deliberative body considering issues such as naval armaments and the
reduction of military budgets which are not on the agenda of the Conference on
Disarmament. Britain played an active and constructive role in the preparation
for the UN Conference on Disarmament and Development which took place in
New York in 1987.
Britain and the United Nations
Support for the United Nations and the purposes and principles of its Charter
has been a cornerstone of British policy since 1945. Britain sees a strong and
effective United Nations as a means of pursuing and achieving many of its
foreign policy objectives such as the peaceful resolution of disputes, disarma¬
ment and arms control, the protection of human rights and the promotion of the
rule of law. It believes that all member states have a responsibility to ensure that
the organisation’s efforts are devoted to the furtherance of the principles
enshrined in the Charter, and has suggested reforms to make it more effective.
The maintenance of international peace and security was the primary purpose
envisaged for the United Nations at the time of its establishment. Britain
believes that it is appropriate for the United Nations, as the only forum in which
almost the whole international community is represented, to seek to resolve
disputes which threaten peace and stability whether on a regional or world
scale. As a permanent member of the Security Council, Britain plays an active
part in the Council s work and has sought to develop and improve its role in the
peaceful settlement of disputes.
Britain has, for example, proposed a new form of Council meeting of a private
and formal nature which would include states engaged in the dispute under
discussion but would minimise opportunities for propaganda. Britain has also
encouraged financial and administrative reform aimed at rationalising the work
of the General Assembly.
Britain strongly supports the United Nations’ peacekeeping role, is the major
contributor to the UN Force in Cyprus and has provided logistic support to the
UN Interim Force in Lebanon.
Britain has consistently supported the efforts of the United Nations to promote
human rights throughout the world through the establishment of inter¬
nationally accepted standards. The UN Charter itself includes among the
purposes of the United Nations the achievement of international co-operation in
promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion. Britain
believes that this and the subsequent practice of the United Nations has
established human rights as a legitimate matter for international concern and
that the UN Charter imposes on member governments an obligation to
92
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Economic and
Social Affairs
co-operate with appropriate UN bodies in the pursuit of policies which promote
human rights.
Fundamental human rights provisions are set out in the Universal Declara¬
tion of Human Rights proclaimed by the General Assembly in 1948, and in the
two International Covenants (one on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and
the other on Civil and Political Rights) which impose legal obligations on those
who ratify them and which came into force in 1976. Britain played a large part in
their drafting and ratified the two Covenants in 1976. It also accepted the
optional Article 41 of the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights recognising the
competence of the Human Rights Committee established under this Covenant to
receive and consider state complaints. (It is not party to the Optional Protocol to
the Covenant which recognises the right of individuals to submit communica¬
tions to the Committee; Britain recognises the right of individual petition under
the European Convention on Human Rights.) Britain is also a party to other
international instruments, including conventions on the elimination of racial
discrimination and of discrimination against women, prevention of genocide,
the abolition of slavery, the status of refugees and stateless persons, the political
rights of women, and consent to marriage. In March 1985 Britain signed the UN
Convention against Torture which was adopted with British support by the
General Assembly in December 1984.
The adoption of conventions and covenants in itself is insufficient to secure
the protection of human rights. It is up to states themselves to do that. Britain
constantly urges states to adhere to those standards which have been agreed
internationally as the basis of that protection. Britain has also supported the
establishment of additional mechanisms such as the appointment of Special
Rapporteurs or Representatives of the UN Commission on Human Rights to
investigate human rights abuses in specific countries or globally.
Britain plays a leading part in the discussion of human rights in the various
multilateral forums provided by the United Nations. In 1987 it was re-elected to
the UN Commission on Human Rights for a further three-year term, and the
British delegation will continue to build on the initiatives taken there. There are
British experts on the UN Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination
and Protection of Minorities, on the Human Rights Committee (which monitors
the implementation of the provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights by the parties to it), on the Committee on the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination established under the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and on the UN Commission on the Status
of Women.
The UN Charter states that ‘the promotion of the economic and social advance¬
ment of all peoples’ is one of the principal aims of the United Nations, and an
estimated 90 per cent of the organisation’s efforts, in terms of resources and
personnel, is now employed to this end. With the growing concern over
problems of development, the main emphasis has become increasingly the pro¬
vision of direct assistance for member states. The UN system is now the largest
single source of technical assistance for developing countries, as well as provid¬
ing considerable emergency and relief aid, assistance for refugees and help in
combating the problems associated with drug production, trafficking and
abuse. (The provision of capital assistance has been generally confined to the
World Bank group and regional development banks whose operations are
usually considered separately from those of the rest of the UN system.)
Successive British governments have affirmed their support for the functional
and developmental work of the United Nations. Britain is the sixth largest
contributor to the UN’s regular budget, providing some £35-2 million, 4-8 per
cent of the total, in 1987. In addition, it contributed some £7-3 million to the
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
93
World Health Organisation, £3 million to the International Labour Organisation
and £5-7 million to the Food and Agriculture Organisation. Britain provides
considerable contributions to the UN’s voluntary funds, donating £23 million in
1987 for the UN Development Programme, £17-7 million for the UN High
Commissioner for Refugees, £5-2 million for the UN Relief and Works Agency for
Palestinian Refugees, £15 million for the UN Children’s Fund, £5 million for the
UN Fund for Population Activities, and about £500,000 for the World Food
Programme. Britain is also a major donor to the UN Fund for Drug Abuse
Control.
In the deliberations of the governing bodies of the various agencies and
programmes, Britain encourages the deployment of the resources towards the
poorest countries and the poorest communities in the developing world. It also
seeks to promote the most efficient use of UN development resources and
improvements in the co-ordination, control and effectiveness of the system, in
order to avoid unnecessary duplication by the various agencies.
In December 1985 Britain withdrew from the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO). The decision followed a period
of notice of withdrawal during which Britain worked within UNESCO to secure
its reform. Although Britain supports the ideals and objectives contained in
UNESCO's constitution, it had major doubts about the effectiveness with which
the Organisation was pursuing them. Aid amounting to £6-4 million, represent¬
ing funds saved from the withdrawal, has been allocated to a number of
educational, scientific and cultural programmes in developing countries.
Other International Organisations
Britain is a member of many other international organisations, including those
concerned with the management of the world economy. It is a founder member
of the International Monetary Fund, established in 1945 (along with the World
Bank) to regulate the international financial system and to provide a source of
credit for member countries facing balance of payments problems, and has
welcomed the creation by the Fund of facilities to provide special assistance to
developing countries experiencing financial or trading difficulties. The British
Government strongly supports the objectives of the current Uruguay Round of
negotiations conducted under the auspices of the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade; launched in 1986 they are designed to liberalise world trade further
and promote its growth especially for developing countries, and are focusing on
a number of specific areas such as agriculture and services.
Britain is also a member of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD), an instrument for intergovernmental co-operation among
24 industrialised countries. The basic objectives of the OECD are to promote the
economic growth of its members, to help less developed countries within and
outside its own membership and to encourage world-wide trade expansion.
Other organisations to which Britain belongs or extends support are more
restricted in their operations and include the regional development banks in
Africa, the Americas and Asia and specialist technical, agricultural and medical
institutions.
Britain was a founder member of the Council of Europe, which celebrates its
fortieth anniversary in 1989. The Council, which has 21 members, provides a
unique framework for co-operation in a broad range of activities (for example, on
social, cultural, legal, health, and crime and drug prevention issues) with a view
to achieving greater unity between its members. Membership is open to any
European parliamentary democracy which accepts the principles of the rule of
law and the protection of human rights. The Council was responsible for the
adoption in 1950 of the European Convention on Human Rights, which Britain
94
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Official and
Other Flows
was first to ratify in 1951. In January 1986 Britain renewed its acceptance for a
further five years of the optional articles of the Convention which recognise both
the right of individual petition and the compulsory jurisdiction of the European
Court of Human Rights.
Development Co-operation
The basic objective of Britain’s aid programme is the promotion of sustainable,
non-inflationary economic and social progress and the alleviation of poverty in
developing countries. Britain’s ability to support development overseas is
dependent on the state of its own economy, and, alongside development
objectives, due weight is given to political, commercial and industrial considera¬
tions in the deployment of aid resources.
Official aid is only one aspect of Britain’s support for overseas development.
Private investment is also important and benefited from the abolition of
exchange controls in 1979. Britain is one of the world’s largest overseas
investors: in 1986 estimated net outward direct investment by British com¬
panies in developing countries amounted to £1,100 million out of a total of
£11,600 million. Such investment is important not only because of the money
provided but because of the transfer of skills, management expertise and the
development of indigenous resources which accompany it. Trade, too, is vital,
developing countries providing 12 per cent of British imports in 1987.
Aid is also provided by voluntary agencies which concentrate their activities in
the poorest countries. Some of their activities receive substantial support from
the official aid programme.
In order to assist the poorest and most heavily indebted countries in
sub-Saharan Africa who pursue economic reform policies, Britain has proposed
international action to cut interest rates to well below market levels, to convert
aid loans into grants and to allow for more generous rescheduling of debt. These
proposals, and subsequent variations by other countries, were welcomed at the
1988 Economic Summit at Toronto where action was agreed to put them into
effect.
Britain’s aid represents part of a wider Western effort to help developing
countries. In 1987 total net official development assistance disbursed by the 18
countries belonging to the OECD’s Development Assistance Committee
amounted to $41,219 million. Arab countries provided $3,290 million and
countries belonging to the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (the Soviet
bloc countries) an estimated $5,250 million.
In 1987 total official flows1 of aid amounted to some £1,281 million net, of which
£1,151 million represented official development assistance and £130 million
other official flows. Of the former, bilateral aid accounted for £608 million
including technical co-operation funds of £282 million; some £543 million was
provided through multilateral agencies. Repayments of capital came to £121
million; another £24 million of capital repayments and £2 million of interest
were cancelled. Payments of interest came to £61 million.
Aid performance is commonly measured as a proportion of gross national
product (GNP), particularly with reference to the two UN targets for resource
transfers to developing countries: these state that net official development
1 ‘Total official flows' is an international reporting concept. Its main component—official
development assistance—is defined as official flows for development purposes with a grant
(concessional) element of 25 per cent or more. The main British reporting concept is ‘public
expenditure on overseas aid' which differs from total official flows by excluding certain British
flows which benefit developing countries but are not considered developmental, and by recording
some contributions to multilateral agencies at a different time. All concepts can be measured
before (gross) or after (net) deducting capital repayments.
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
95
Bilateral Aid
Financial Aid
Aid Projects
assistance should equal 07 per cent of GNP and that combined private and
official flows should equal 1 per cent of GNP. Britain accepts in principle the first
of these but is not committed to a timetable for reaching it. Successive
governments have made it clear that progress must depend on Britain’s
economic situation and upon other calls on its resources. In 1987 net official
development assistance amounted to £1,151 million, 0-28 per cent of GNP, close
to the total 0-36 per cent for donor countries belonging to the OECD’s
Development Assistance Committee. Total net financial flows from Britain to
developing countries amounted to £1,420 million, 0-35 per cent of GNP.
Britain’s aid programme began as part of the discharge of its responsibilities
towards dependent territories, and the main emphasis remains on the
Commonwealth, which includes among its members some of the world’s poorest
countries. In 1987, £744 million of gross public expenditure on overseas aid was
disbursed bilaterally. Some £414 million (70 per cent of that directly allocated to
countries) went to the Commonwealth, including £39 million to Britain’s
remaining dependencies, which are a first charge on the aid programme. Aid
was disbursed regionally as follows: Africa £294 million, Asia £203 million, the
Americas and the Caribbean £50 million. Pacific (Oceania) £25 million, Europe
£13 million and the Middle East £12 million. (A further £146 million was not
allocable by continent.)
The country receiving the largest amount (£73-4 million) was India. Other
major recipients included Bangladesh, Kenya, Malawi, Zambia, Tanzania,
Mozambique, Pakistan, Sudan and Ghana. In line with the policy of concentrat¬
ing aid on the poorest countries, 81 per cent of total gross bilateral aid was
provided to those with an average annual income per head of less than $800.
Gross bilateral financial aid in 1987 totalled £385 million. Aid for individual
projects totalled £257 million, the principal sectors supported being agriculture,
fisheries and forestry (£62 million), manufacturing (£4 million), energy (£53
million), mining (£35 million), transport and communications (£37 million) and
social and community services (£23 million). Non-project aid totalled £128
million, of which £71 million was for import financing, £12 million for food aid,
£26 million for debt relief, £6 million for budgetary support and £13 million for
disaster relief. About 99 per cent of the ODA's financial aid in 1987 was provided
in grants. Since 1975, development aid to the poorest countries has been on
grant terms. In 1984 these terms were extended to the majority of recipients of
British financial aid, and simplified loan terms were introduced for those
countries still not qualifying for grants. Britain has more than fulfilled the 1978
resolution of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development on
easing the terms of financial aid. Britain has concluded agreements to remove
the burden of past aid loans worth over £1,000 million from 22 of the poorest
countries.
Financial aid is normally tied to the purchase of goods, equipment and
services from Britain (83 per cent in 1987), although there may be a substantial
element for local costs and foreign content in contracts financed from tied aid in
appropriate cases. Commitments can be untied, if the recipient agrees, to the
extent that goods can be purchased either from the poorest developing countries
or from Britain.
Britain s aid programme aims to promote development by providing essential
economic infrastructure in areas such as communications and power supplies;
by improving human resources through education, health services or housing;
and by raising incomes directly through improvement of agricultural and
industrial productivity. Most aid projects also try to help local organisations to
96
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Disaster Relief
and Food Aid
Technical
Co-operation
take increasing responsibility for future development through training in the
country concerned or in Britain. Projects currently being supported by Britain
through the aid programme include the rehabilitation of the Sukkur Barrage on
the Indus river which controls the world's largest irrigation system, providing
water for 13-5 million acres of agricultural land in Sind Province in Pakistan,
and a fertiliser education project aimed at helping 200,000 small and marginal
farmers in the eastern part of India to increase food production. In Kenya,
Britain is supporting research into farming methods and forestry to conserve
and develop semi-arid lands of the Embu, Mem and Isiolo districts. Among other
aid projects are two in Southern Africa for the rehabilitation of the Limpopo
railway in Mozambique (costing £14 million) and improvements in transport
links between Malawi and Tanzania (£12-4 million).
Under the Aid and Trade Provision, which is designed to match the mixed
credit practices of other donors by providing aid in combination with export
credits to support sound investment projects which offer commercial opportuni¬
ties to British exporters, expenditure amounted to £30-2 million in 1987. In
1985 the Government introduced a new soft-loan facility under the Provision in
order to respond to the preferences of certain developing countries and to
counter the practices of competitors. Increased funds are being made available
to enable British companies to double by 1988-89 the business won annually
with the Provision. As a matter of general policy, however, the Government
would like to see a reduction in the use of tied-aid financing by all exporting
nations in the interests of more open competition and freer trade.
The Commonwealth Development Corporation is empowered to invest in
Commonwealth countries which have achieved independence since 1948, the
remaining British dependencies and, with ministerial approval, in other
developing countries. Its aim is to assist in the development of these countries’
economies. By the end of 1987, the Corporation had invested some £687 million
out of a total commitment of £1,011 million. Of this total, £459-2 million was in
Africa, £288 million in Asia, £151-8 million in the Caribbean and Latin America
and £106-7 million in the Pacific Islands. Commitments approved in 1987
totalled over £117-7 million, of which 44 per cent was allocated to agriculture,
fisheries and forestry.
Since 1984 Britain has increased its contributions to disaster relief and food aid
in order to assist countries throughout sub-Saharan and southern Africa to
combat drought and famine. In addition to its multilateral aid contributions to
UN agencies and the European Community (see p 97), Britain contributed
£73 -4 million in bilateral disaster relief between 1984 and 1987, compared with
£4-5 million for the period between 1982 and 1983. In addition, bilateral and
multilateral food aid by Britain amounted to £71-8 million and £25-1 million
respectively. The British Government responds to disasters by providing food,
medical equipment, blankets, shelters and clothing, power generators, boats,
bridges and other vital supplies.
Many African countries suffering from famine are also victims of a plague of
locusts; in response Britain has pledged more than £5 million for locust and
pest control in Africa since the beginning of 1987. A number of computer-based
systems which accurately pinpoint locust breeding areas are being offered to
control centres in Tunisia, Algeria and Morocco.
Britain also helps refugees and people displaced by famine, political upheaval,
civil war and invasion. Since 1979, for instance, some £50 million has been
contributed to assist Afghan refugees (see p 88).
Technical co-operation, the transfer of specialised knowledge and skills from
country to country, complements financial aid, expertise often being essential to
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
97
Aid Evaluation
Multilateral
Aid
the success of a programme of financial aid or investment. Expenditure on it has
increased in recent years and was £319 million, 43 per cent of gross bilateral
aid, in 1987. This included £76 million for the provision of expert personnel,
including volunteers, £66 million for students and trainees in Britain and
overseas, £39 million for the British Council’s education and training program¬
mes, £35 million for consultancy services, £24 million for research services and
projects, and £15 million for the provision of equipment and supplies.
At the end of 1987 there were 1,962 people financed by Britain (other than
volunteers) working in developing countries, of whom 929 were engaged in
education, 306 in agriculture and related areas, and 166 in health services. In
addition, there were 1,400 volunteers, mainly graduates or otherwise qualified,
working in developing countries, about half in education. Recruitment, training
and placing overseas is undertaken by voluntary bodies, the four main agencies
being the Catholic Institute for International Relations, International Voluntary
Service, United Nations Association International Service and Voluntary Service
Overseas; the bulk of their costs are met by the British Government.
Britain receives large numbers of students and trainees from developing
countries. Some 13,737 were financed in 1987 under regional programmes of
technical co-operation, by awards under the Commonwealth Scholarship and
Fellowship Plan, and under British Council schemes. In early 1983 the
Government decided to make an additional £46 million available (some outside
the aid programme) over the following three years for the support of overseas
students. A new scheme for students from Commonwealth developing countries
was introduced in 1986.
To support development overseas, the Government maintains a specialist
scientific organisation, the Overseas Development Natural Resources Institute
(formed in 1987 as the result of a merger between the Tropical Development and
Research Institute and the Land Resources Centre), and provides support for
many others, including overseas units/divisions of the government-financed
Transport and Road Research Laboratory, the Building Research Establish¬
ment, the British Geological Survey, the Overseas Surveys Directorate of the
Ordnance Survey, and of Hydraulics Research Ltd. These organisations provide
specialist information, advice and experts for service overseas, and undertake
field and laboratory research investigations.
To ensure the most effective use of aid resources, the objectives and content of
country aid programmes are determined through a systematic programming
exercise which takes account of the circumstances of the recipient country, its
development priorities, the activities of other donors, and what Britain can offer
by way of expertise, goods and services. In addition, individual projects are
carefully appraised before approval, monitored during progress against quantifi¬
able targets and assessed in a project completion report, while a programme of
special evaluation studies, often undertaken by independent evaluators,
examines in more detail the achievements of particular activities and of special
issues. The Overseas Development Administration also supports international
studies of aid effectiveness.
Britain is a major subscriber to the World Bank group of institutions—the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International
Development Association (IDA) and the International Finance Corporation. The
resources of the IDA, which provides interest-free loans to developing countries
unable to service loans on conventional terms, are replenished at roughly
three-year intervals. The British commitment to its Eighth Replenishment (July
1987 to June 1990) is £524 million towards a total of $12,000 million. Britain
contributes to the resources of the Asian Development Bank, the Inter-American
98
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Voluntary
Agencies
Development Bank, the Caribbean Development Bank and the African Develop¬
ment Bank. Its contribution to the United Nations Development Programme for
1987 was £23 million, and it is the largest source of expertise and the second
largest of fellowships and equipment provided under the Programme. There is
also a major British contribution to other UN agencies and programmes,
including the World Health Organisation's special programme for the prevention
and control of AIDS. Almost half of British multilateral aid is now channelled
through the European Community’s aid programme. Britain’s commitment to
the sixth European Development Fund established by the third Lome Conven¬
tion, covering the period from 1986 to 1990, is over £800 million at present
exchange rates.
Voluntary agencies provided an estimated £135 million net for work in
developing countries in 1987, mainly on agriculture, health and nutrition,
education projects, and emergency relief operations.
There are about 200 agencies in all, including church and missionary
societies; among the best known are Oxfam, Christian Aid, War on Want, the
Save the Children Fund, the British Red Cross Society and the Catholic Fund for
Overseas Development. The funds are raised largely through regular donations
and collections, legacies and trading activities and, particularly in response to
specific emergencies, through appeals in the media. The Government co¬
operates with the agencies in various ways, especially in immediate post¬
disaster relief and rehabilitation operations and through its Joint Funding
Scheme. Under this it meets half the cost of selected development projects
undertaken by the agencies and aimed at helping the poorest people. Such
projects include community health, non-formal education, the improvement of
food supplies, agricultural training, water supply and irrigation. Expenditure
on the Scheme in 1987 was nearly £7 million, which is to be increased by 50 per
cent in 1988.
Voluntary agencies' work on behalf of refugees overseas also receives official
support.
4 Defence
Organisation
and
Management
The primary objectives of Britain’s defence policy are to ensure the country's
security, to preserve peace with freedom, and to enable it to pursue, by just and
peaceful means, its legitimate interests both within Britain and overseas.
Britain's policy is based on the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO), a
defensive alliance whose collective strength prpvides each of its members1 with
far greater security than any could achieve alone. Britain is fully committed to
NATO and its strategy of deterrence and, in assigning directly or indirectly to
NATO the vast majority of its forces and over 95 per cent of its defence budget,
makes a major contribution to the Alliance’s deterrent capabilities. It also plays a
full part in the Alliance s efforts, complementary to its defence preparations, to
negotiate balanced and verifiable arms control agreements and to reduce
tension so as to achieve a more just and lasting peace in Europe.
The defence budget for 1988-89 is just over £19,200 million. Britain remains
one of the highest contributors to NATO, with over £330 per capita spent on
defence in 1987, and 4-7 per cent of gross domestic product was devoted to
defence expenditure, a proportion only exceeded in NATO by the United States
and Greece.
Improvements in defence output continue to be sought through measures
designed to achieve greater value for money and efficiency. The objective is to
maximise the proportion of defence resources devoted to front-line tasks by
rationalising support tasks and making better use of manpower. Increased
competition in the purchase of equipment has improved both quality and value
for money; and the more effective use of manpower means that some 43 per cent
of Britain's defence expenditure can be devoted to equipment.
Britain's defence programme is designed to ensure the most effective use of
these resources in pursuit of its commitment to Western security, the main
threat to which is posed by the nuclear, chemical and conventional forces of the
Warsaw Pact. In recent years the structure and balance of the defence forces
have been improved to increase their combat effectiveness and so enhance
Britain’s contribution to NATO. As a result of these improvements Britain also
has the flexibility to respond quickly and effectively to challenges to its interests
outside the NATO area.
The Ministry of Defence was reorganised in 1985 to improve policy formulation
and to tighten control over the defence budget, while devolving responsibility for
day-to-day management to the Services and the Procurement Executive.
An integrated military/civilian Defence Staff is responsible for defence policy
and strategy, operational requirements and commitments; it reports to the
Chief of Defence Staff and the Permanent Under-Secretary through a Vice-Chief
1 NATOs 16 member countries are Belgium, Britain, Canada, Denmark, France, the Federal
Republic of Germany, Greece, Iceland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal,
Spain. Turkey and the United States. France, Iceland (which has no military forces) and Spain do
not participate in NATO's integrated military structure.
100
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
NATO’s
Strategy
Britain’s
NATO
Contribution
of Defence Staff. An Office of Management and Budget reporting to the
Permanent Under-Secretary is concerned with budgetary control and resource
management. Each Service Chief of Staff reports through the Chief of Defence
Staff to the Secretary of State on matters related to the fighting effectiveness,
management, efficiency and morale of his Service. The management of the three
Services is exercised through executive committees of the Service Boards, which
are chaired by their respective Chiefs of Staff, and act in accordance with
centrally determined policy objectives and budgets. The Procurement Executive
deals with the purchase of equipment, including equipment collaboration with
allies and friendly nations.
A management information system is being developed which enables top
management to scrutinise the activities, costs and efficiency of all areas of the
Ministry. Increased awareness of the need to manage resources cost-effectively is
being promoted, and a budgetary system is being implemented which will
ensure that managers are held accountable for the resources allocated.
NATO’s security policy is based on deterrence and defence, its aims being to
prevent war or, should aggression occur, to respond at the right level to make
the aggressor quickly cease his attack and withdraw. This strategy, called
flexible response, is based on three key principles: a determination to act jointly
and to defend the Treaty area against all forms of aggression; a recognisable
capability to respond effectively at all levels of aggression, and to escalate, if
necessary, in order to convince the Warsaw Pact of NATO’s resolve; and a
flexibility that prevents the Soviet Union from predicting with confidence
NATO’s specific response to aggression but which would leave it in no doubt of
the grave risk it would run in resorting to the use or the threat of force against
the Alliance. These principles in turn are built on a combination of political will
and military capacity. The latter comprises adequate conventional forces
deployed well forward to deter any Soviet non-nuclear attack; theatre nuclear
forces to enhance deterrence by providing a link between conventional and
strategic nuclear forces, and deterring the use of similar weapons by the other
side; and strategic nuclear forces to provide the ultimate deterrent by having the
ability to inflict unacceptable damage against a potential enemy, even after
suffering a pre-emptive first strike.
The NATO members are determined to sustain the required efforts to ensure
the continued credibility and effectiveness of the Alliance’s conventional and
nuclear forces. Britain is fully involved in these efforts and has a continuing
programme of modernisation of its defences, including the updating of its own
strategic nuclear weapons.
The NATO allies have acknowledged the continuing Soviet threat to Western
interests outside the NATO area and recognised the need, in the last resort, for
those members with the means to do so to take action in consultation with their
allies. At the same time, the NATO allies recognise the right of regional countries
to self-determination and, as far as possible, to defend themselves. In the
Government's view, these principles can best be satisfied through the provision
of military assistance, including training courses in Britain, the loan of Service
personnel and the sale of defence equipment. Britain’s commitment to these
principles is also demonstrated by periodic deployments, exercises and the
maintenance of a capability to intervene militarily in the last resort.
Britain’s contribution to NATO is concentrated in areas where it can best help to
maintain Alliance security, principally NATO’s strategic nuclear deterrent and
the defence of the Central Region of Europe, the Eastern Atlantic and English
Channel, and the British ‘home’ base and its immediate approaches.
Britain’s strategic forces, now equipped with improved Polaris missiles (to be
DEFENCE
101
Europe and
the Alliance
replaced by a Trident force in the 1990s), represent an essential European
element in NATO’s deterrent strategy, by providing a second and independent
centre of decision-making within the Alliance and an important insurance
against any Warsaw Pact misconception that the United States would not be
prepared to use its nuclear forces in Europe’s defence. Britain has also
committed its other nuclear systems to NATO, and is continuing to provide
bases for ground-launched cruise missiles which, with Pershing II missiles, the
United States began deploying in Europe from 1983 in order to modernise
NATO’s intermediate-range nuclear forces. (Under the Intermediate Nuclear
Forces Treaty, ratified in May 1988, the United States and the Soviet Union
agreed to eliminate globally all US and Soviet ground-launched, intermediate-
range missiles in three years.)
Britain's decision to update its strategic deterrent has led to increased calls
from some groups within the country for unilateral nuclear disarmament, both
on the grounds of cost and as an example to others. While the Government
understands the widespread concern regarding nuclear war, it believes that the
best way of preventing war between East and West—nuclear and conventional—
is firm support for NATO's policy of nuclear deterrence and efforts to relax
East-West tensions, including the pursuit of arms control, which have helped to
maintain peace in Europe for more than 40 years. The Government believes that
unilateral nuclear disarmament by Britain would weaken NATO’s ability to deter
aggression in the face of the continuing Soviet nuclear and conventional threat,
without significantly altering the views on arms control of other states which
possess, or may think of acquiring, nuclear weapons.
Virtually all of the Royal Navy, the largest navy among the European NATO
partners, is earmarked for assignment to the Alliance and permanent contribu¬
tions are made to NATO’s two standing naval forces, in the Atlantic and the
Channel, and to its Mediterranean force when activated. The British Army of the
Rhine (BAOR) and Royal Air Force (RAF) Germany are stationed in the Federal
Republic of Germany. BAOR's combat element consists of three strong divisions
(with supporting artillery), two divisions containing three armoured brigades
and the other division containing two armoured brigades and an infantry
brigade. Additionally, a reinforcing division comprising one regular and two
Territorial Army brigades is located in Britain. On mobilisation, BAOR’s
peacetime strength of around 55,000 would be almost trebled by rapid
reinforcement from Britain. Nearly all the RAF’s combat and support aircraft are
assigned to NATO. RAF Germany’s 14 squadrons (two of helicopters) are
equipped for strike/attack, reconnaissance, close support, air defence and air
transport roles, while RAF Strike Command, which is based in Britain, provides
forces for these and for the maritime patrol and anti-submarine warfare roles.
Britain also provides important elements of NATO’s specialist reinforcement
forces, including shipping and marine commando units forming the bulk of a
British—Netherlands amphibious force, ground and air units for the Allied
Command Europe Mobile Force, and several squadrons for NATO’s Strategic Air
Reserve.
Forces from all three Services are stationed at Gibraltar, which, positioned at
the western entry to the Mediterranean, is an important base for NATO.
Britain’s contribution to NATO is part of the wider effort which the European
allies make to the defence of the West, including the protection of their common
interests outside the NATO area. Since the security of each NATO member is
inextricably linked to that of the others, substantial European forces are
essential to the defence of the North American continent. There is no substitute
for the United States’ nuclear guarantee nor for North American forces stationed
in Europe in peacetime; but, of NATO’s ready forces in Europe, the European
102
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Outside the
NATO Area
Northern
Ireland
THE ARMED
FORCES
Personnel
allies provide about 90 per cent of the manpower, 80 per cent of combat aircraft,
85 per cent of tanks and 95 per cent of artillery, as well as 70 per cent of the
fighting ships in European and Atlantic waters. They also provide some 7
million men and women on active and reserve duties and are able to supply
around 900 military facilities for United States forces and essential support
requirements such as communications and transport.
Britain and its European allies recognise the value of co-operation and
collaboration by playing a full part in the Independent European Programme
Group, a body committed to promoting intra-European arms collaboration, and
in the Conference of National Armament Directors, the forum for defence
equipment collaboration across the Atlantic. They also work together in the
Eurogroup, formed following a British initiative in 1968, to improve the
effectiveness of their contributions to the Alliance and to achieve better use of
available resources through closer co-ordination. In addition, the Western
European Union, which was created by the modified Brussels Treaty of 1954,
was reactivated in 1984 to provide further impetus towards European defence
and security co-operation. The Treaty, which was signed by Belgium, Britain,
the Federal Republic of Germany, France, Italy, Luxembourg and the Nether¬
lands, also commits Britain to maintaining ground and air forces on the
European mainland.
Britain is maintaining and improving its ability to operate outside the NATO
area to protect its interests without diminishing its central commitment to the
Alliance. It has an airborne brigade which can deploy to trouble spots should the
need arise. British garrisons are maintained in Belize, Brunei, Cyprus, the
Falkland Islands and Hong Kong. Britain also provides the largest national troop
contingent to the United Nations Force in Cyprus as well as giving support for
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. In addition, it contributes a
headquarters detachment to the Multinational Force and Observers in Sinai. A
Royal Navy force, which includes minesweepers, is deployed in the Arabian Sea
to assist British merchant shipping in the Gulf. Considerable effort is devoted to
the provision of military assistance and training to a large number of friendly
countries outside the NATO area (to Mozambique and Zimbabwe, for example),
and Britain deploys its forces on visits and exercises in important areas.
Within Britain, the armed forces’ main operational commitment is in support of
the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) in the fight against terrorism in Northern
Ireland. Although the Ulster Defence Regiment has assumed responsibility for
the military element of security in 85 per cent of Northern Ireland, ten major
infantry units are retained there. The Royal Navy, which carries out patrols to
prevent arms smuggling, and the RAF also make substantial contributions and
the Royal Marines continue to support Army and Navy operations. Following a
review of the deployment of the security forces within Northern Ireland, an
additional brigade headquarters is to be established in 1988 to be concerned
with the border areas. The two existing brigades will continue to be responsible
for supporting the RUC in the rest of Northern Ireland.
At the start of 1988 the total strength of the armed forces, all volunteers, was
317,300: 65,600 in the Royal Navy and the Royal Marines, 158,400 in the Army
and 93,300 in the Royal Air Force. The Ministry of Defence employed about
164,000 civilians (based in the United Kingdom) at the same date.
The 16,000 female personnel in the nursing and women’s services (3,300 in
the Royal Navy, 6,400 in the Army and 6,300 in the Royal Air Force) are integral
parts of the armed forces; they serve alongside servicemen in Britain and
overseas, mainly in support roles.
DEFENCE
103
Engagements for non-commissioned ranks range from 3 to 22 years, with a
wide freedom of choice on the length and terms of service. Subject to a minimum
period of service (varying from three to nine years, excluding training), entrants
may leave at any time, at 18 months’ notice (12 months for certain engage¬
ments). Discharge may also be granted on compassionate grounds, by purchase,
or on grounds of conscience. Commissions, either by promotion from the ranks
or by direct entry based on educational and other qualifications, are granted for
short, medium and long terms. All three Services have schemes for school,
university and college sponsorships.
Non-commissioned personnel receive basic training supplemented by further
and specialist training throughout their careers. Study for educational quali¬
fications is encouraged and Service trade and technical training, highly valued
by industry, leads to nationally recognised qualifications for large numbers of
Service personnel.
Commissioned ranks receive initial training at the Britannia Royal Naval
College, Dartmouth; the Royal Military Academy, Sandhurst; or the Royal Air
Force College, Cranwell. This is followed by specialist training, often including
degree courses at university or Service establishments. Higher training for
officers is provided by the Royal Naval College, Greenwich, the Army Staff College
at Camberley, and the Royal Air Force Staff College at Bracknell. Selected senior
officers and civilian officials from Britain and other countries attend the Joint
Services Defence College, Greenwich, and the Royal College of Defence Studies,
London, which provides the wider background necessary for those destined to
fill higher appointments.
Operational training includes Joint-Service and inter-allied exercises. Train¬
ing is provided for the armed forces of allied. Commonwealth and other
countries.
Reserve Forces Reserve and auxiliary forces are an integral part of the armed forces. In addition
to supplementing the regular forces on mobilisation with trained personnel able
immediately to take their places either as formed units or as individual
reinforcements, they form an important link between the Services and the civil
community. Some members of these forces have a reserve liability following a
period of regular service (regular reserve); others are volunteers who train in
their spare time. Volunteer reserve forces include the Territorial Army, whose
role is to reinforce the ground forces committed to NATO and help to maintain a
secure home base in the United Kingdom; its strength is being increased over
the remainder of the decade. Set up in 1985, a Home Defence Force, linked to the
Territorial Army and with a planned strength of about 5,000 by 1990, would on
mobilisation assist in guarding important civilian and military installations.
Other volunteer forces include the Royal Naval Reserve, the Royal Marines
Reserve, the Royal Naval Auxiliary Service, the Royal Auxiliary Air Force and the
Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve. All have been expanded substantially in
recent years or are planned to increase in strength in the near future. The Ulster
Defence Regiment (see p 102) is also a reserve force. At the start of 1988 regular
reserves totalled 226,500, and volunteer reserves and auxiliary forces 93,400.
Cadet forces, which make a significant contribution to recruitment to the
regular forces, totalled 146,800.
The Royal Navy’s Polaris force comprises four nuclear submarines, each of which
can remain on underwater patrol for long periods and is capable of carrying 16
nuclear-armed Polaris missiles. The missile system, now incorporating improve¬
ments designed to penetrate anti-ballistic missile defences, will maintain
the force’s effectiveness until it is replaced in the mid-1990s by a Trident nuclear
submarine force which will extend Britain’s nuclear deterrent into the twenty-
COMBAT
FORCES
Strategic
Nuclear Forces
104
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Royal Navy
General
Purpose
Combat Forces
Army Combat
Forces
first century. The Trident programme, which will cost an estimated £9,043
million (at 1987-88 prices), is expected to account on average for less than 3 per
cent of the defence budget (and less than 6 per cent of the equipment budget)
during its procurement period. It is also estimated that more than 60 per cent of
the money for the project will be spent in Britain. The first two Trident
submarines are being built.
Britain’s naval forces, while capable of operating throughout the world when
required, are concentrated in the Eastern Atlantic and the Channel where they
constitute the majority of forces immediately available to NATO. They include
three Invincible-class anti-submarine warfare carriers, carrying Sea King
anti-submarine and airborne early warning helicopters. Sea Harrier aircraft,
and Sea Dart defence missile systems; 16 nuclear-powered attack submarines
(with another two under construction or on order) equipped with torpedoes and
the Sub-Harpoon anti-ship missile, and 11 diesel electric-powered submarines,
which will be replaced by the more powerful Upholder class; and about 50
destroyers and frigates for air defence, anti-submarine and general purpose
duties. Most of these have weapon-carrying helicopters (principally the Lynx),
and armaments installed include the Exocet surface-to-surface. Sea Wolf point
air defence, Sea Dart area air defence and Sea Skua anti-ship missile systems,
and the Ikara anti-submarine guided weapons system. There is also an
amphibious capability comprising two assault ships, Fearless and Intrepid,
supporting vessels and the Royal Marines. Other ships include about 40 mine
counter-measures vessels, including 13 of the new Hunt and 12 of the River
classes, and offshore patrol vessels for protecting fishing interests and oil and
gas installations.
In coming years Britain’s contribution to NATO’s maritime defence will be
based increasingly on an enhanced anti-submarine warfare element made up
principally of nuclear-powered attack submarines and advanced diesel-electric
conventional submarines, of which four have been ordered, one being under
construction; the Type 23 frigate (the first of seven that have been ordered will
enter service in 1989); and Nimrod maritime patrol aircraft, equipped with
Searchwater radar and armed with Harpoon anti-ship missiles and Sting Ray
anti-submarine torpedoes. In addition, the surface fleet is being strengthened
by 14 multi-role Type 22 frigates: ten are already in service and the other four are
being built. New or improved weapons will include the Harpoon missile for the
last four Type 22 and for the new Type 23 frigates, the Sea Eagle anti-ship
missile, the Goalkeeper close-in weapon system, and the Spearfish torpedo for
submarines. The vertically launched Sea Wolf point-defence and the Sea Dart
surface-to-air missiles are also being developed or improved, while a lightweight
version of the Sea Wolf is to be developed.
Most of the Army’s combat forces, consisting of BAOR and the forces stationed
in Britain, have primary roles in support of NATO. Others are stationed overseas
in support of treaty commitments.
There are three armoured divisions in BAOR, equipped with Chieftain or
Challenger main battle tanks. The Chieftains are being replaced with the more
advanced Challengers, which will equip 7 out of the 12 regiments in BAOR. In
addition, improvements to the automotive and fire control systems of both main
tanks are being carried out, as well as the equipping with a new 120-mm main
gun and thermal imaging sights to enhance night and poor visibility perform¬
ance. The battlefield mobility of the infantry is being significantly improved with
the continuing introduction of Warrior and Saxon armoured personnel carriers;
the former is fitted with a 30-mm cannon providing integral fire support for the
infantry. The introduction into service of the SA80 family of small arms and of
DEFENCE
105
Royal Air
Force General
Purpose Forces
the manportable, light anti-tank weapon, LAW80, has further augmented the
infantry’s firepower.
Major improvements to the Army's air defences are planned for the 1990s to
counter the Warsaw Pact air threat. This includes the formation of a new air
defence regiment equipped with the Starstreak high velocity missile, a new air
defence command and control system and continuing improvements to the
Rapier system. The increased emphasis now being placed on mobile operations
led to the decision to convert a brigade to the air-mobile role during 1988, with
additional Lynx helicopters. Major improvements are being made to the Lynx
helicopter and its TOW missiles to maintain the helicopter’s anti-tank capability
through the 1990s. The multiple launch rocket system, capable of delivering a
variety of munitions over extended ranges, will enter service at the end of the
decade. Tactical nuclear support is provided by the Lance missile and
dual-capable artillery. The complexity of the modern battlefield dictates the need
for sophisticated command, control and communications systems, which is
being met by the PTARMIGAN secure communications, the WAVELL com¬
puterised battlefield information and the BATES artillery targeting systems
among others.
Tornado F3 and Phantom aircraft, together with Rapier and Bloodhound
surface-to-air missiles and Oerlikon guns directed by Skyguard radar, provide
Britain’s air defence, assisted by Shackleton airborne early warning aircraft and
the ground radars of the United Kingdom Air Defence Ground Environment
system. In addition, 72 Hawk trainer aircraft have been equipped with air-to-air
missiles and cannon for local air defence. The strike/attack fleet has been wholly
re-equipped with the Tornado GR1, which will, in due course, also replace some
Jaguars in the reconnaissance role. Close air support for ground troops is
provided by the Harrier GR3, soon to be replaced by the Harrier GR5. Nimrod
maritime aircraft form part of Britain’s anti-submarine warfare capability, and
also undertake long-range surveillance operations against surface ships,
offshore surveillance and fishery protection. Improved Buccaneers, armed with
Sea Eagle and Martel missiles, are employed in an anti-ship role. Victor, TriStar
and VC10 aircraft are used as tankers for in-flight refuelling. Tactical transport
is provided by VC 10 and Hercules aircraft, medium and light support being
given by Chinook, Puma and Wessex helicopters. Sea King and Wessex
helicopters perform search and rescue duties around the British Isles. Weapons
in service include Skyflash, Sparrow, Sidewinder, Martel and Sea Eagle missiles,
and guided and cluster bombs.
The Royal Air Force's comprehensive re-equipment programme is continuing.
Improvements to Britain’s air defences include the introduction of the Tornado
F3, which has now replaced the Lightning and is in the process of replacing the
Phantom FG1; and the modernisation of the radars and command, control
and communications systems for the United Kingdom Air Defence Ground
Environment.
From the early 1990s airborne early warning will be provided by Boeing E-3
aircraft. The air-to-air refuelling capacity has been increased by the entry into
service of converted VC 10s and TriStars in the tanker role. The Tornado GR1
has enhanced the offensive power of the Royal Air Force as will the new Harrier
GR5. All strike/attack and offensive support aircraft will be installed with
advanced electronic warfare equipment to increase their ability to survive, and
the Tornado GR1, already equipped with the British JP233 airfield attack
weapon, will have the anti-radiation missile (ALARM). Advanced air-to-air
missiles are also being developed. The Government has also announced its
intention to purchase the EH 101 helicopter to modernise the RAF's support
helicopter fleet in the 1990s.
106
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Research and
Development
Strategic
Defence
Initiative
Alliance
Co-operation
Defence Procurement
Responsibility for providing the armed forces with the equipment they need lies
with the Ministry of Defence's Procurement Executive. About 43 per cent of the
defence budget will be spent on equipment in 1988—89, making the Ministry
British industry’s largest customer. The Procurement Executive works with the
Service users and industry to obtain the best long-term value over a project’s life,
from concept formulation (drawing on the research programme) through
development and production to in-Service support.
Throughout the process, the Procurement Executive makes use of a commer¬
cial approach to the defence market to get the best value for money. The
keystone to this policy is to award contracts by competition wherever possible,
and to ensure that all contracts place companies under the maximum incentive
to perform efficiently. Thus the aim is to use the resources of industry as
effectively as possible, and also to promote competitiveness in British defence
manufacturers.
Research is undertaken by the Ministry’s research establishments, which have a
very wide technological capability, and under contract in industry and the
universities. Around £403 million is expected to be spent on defence research
and £1,869 million on development in 1988—89. Nearly all design and
development of defence equipment is carried out by industry. The Ministry is
seeking to involve industry in the research programme and to promote civil
applications. As part of the Government’s policy of improving the strength of
Britain’s science base, the Ministry, together with the research councils, makes
joint grants to academic institutions in areas of research relevant to defence.
Britain and other allies are participating in the United States’ Strategic Defence
Initiative (SDI), which was set up in 1983 to determine the feasibility of
establishing an effective defence against ballistic missile attack. In 1985 Britain
and the United States signed a Memorandum of Understanding to promote
British participation, and an SDI Participation Office in the Ministry of Defence
was formed to work in close concert with British firms and institutions. British
participation in the SDI programme, valued at $60 million by February 1988, is
intended to enhance Britain’s research in areas of high technology relevant to
both defence and civil programmes.
International co-operation has been a feature of armaments procurement for
over 20 years, and Britain was one of its pioneers in programmes such as the
Anglo-French Jaguar and Lynx/Puma/Gazelle helicopter package; the FH70
towed howitzer developed jointly with the Federal Republic of Germany and Italy;
and the highly successful Tornado aircraft developed and produced with the
same two partners. Britain also worked with the United States on the Harrier
GR5/AV8B programme.
In recent years there has been a growing recognition that more, and more
systematic, collaboration will be necessary for the future if Britain and its
Alliance partners are to eliminate wasteful duplication of effort and make better
use of limited resources. Britain is playing an active role in the promotion of
such co-operation in forums such as NATO, the Conference of National
Armaments Directors, and the Independent European Programme Group.
Major new programmes under way as part of this process include the EH 101
helicopter (with Italy), the new European Fighter Aircraft (with the Federal
Republic of Germany, Italy and Spain), the Multi-Rocket Launch System (with
France, the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy and the United States) and the
anti-tank guided weapon (with France and the Federal Republic of Germany).
DEFENCE
107
Production
Defence Sales
In accordance with its plans to introduce private capital into the company, the
Government sold Royal Ordnance pic to British Aerospace pic in April 1987. The
same principles were behind the Government’s decision to introduce from 1987
commercial management to two of the Royal Dockyards, at Devonport and
Rosyth, which carry out most of the refitting and repair of Royal Navy ships.
Sales of British defence equipment enable allies and friendly governments to
take advantage of Britain's extensive research and development programmes to
improve their own defence. The Defence Export Services Organisation of the
Ministry of Defence provides a wide range of assistance to industry in promoting
equipment and negotiating contracts with overseas customers. This includes
collecting market information, demonstrating equipment, providing expert
military advice, training and support, staging exhibitions and negotiating with
overseas governments. The Ministry of Defence owns International Military
Services Ltd, a commercial company, which secures and discharges export
contracts for British defence equipment and associated services.
Britain is one of the West's top three defence exporters, and new contracts
signed in 1987 amounted to some £3,500 million. Export orders for defence
equipment continue to maintain more than 100,000 jobs.
Civil Defence
Civil defence arrangements are based on the extended and adapted use of the
peacetime resources of government departments, local authorities, emergency
services and nationalised industries, supplemented by the efforts of voluntary
organisations and individual volunteers. Civil defence regulations introduced in
1983 require local authorities to make and keep up to date plans for a range of
essential functions in the event of war; to arrange training and exercises for civil
defence staff and volunteers; and to provide suitable emergency centres for
direction of civil defence in wartime. Following legislation in 1986, local
authorities may use their civil defence resources in responding to peacetime
emergencies.
Expenditure on civil defence has been growing steadily and was nearly £110
million in 1987-88. This is being used to improve the quality and readiness of
central and local government planning; increase training opportunities
arranged by the Home Office on staff college lines at the Civil Defence College,
Easingwold; help local authorities to plan for better community involvement in
civil defence; and improve the emergency system for decentralised government
control and communications. Improvements are also being made in the
communications, equipment and administrative facilities of the United King¬
dom Warning and Monitoring Organisation. This includes the civilian Royal
Observer Corps, which is organised to provide public warning of an attack, of
the location and strength of nuclear explosions, and of the distribution and level
of radioactive fall-out.
5 Justice and the
Law
The Law
Although the United Kingdom is a unitary state, England and Wales, Scotland
and Northern Ireland all have their own legal systems and law courts. There is
substantial similarity on many points, but considerable differences remain in
law, organisation and practice. In Northern Ireland procedure closely resembles
that of England and Wales but there are often differences in enacted law.
However, a large volume of modern legislation applies throughout the United
Kingdom and there is a common distinction between criminal law, concerned
with wrongful acts harmful to the community, and civil law, concerned with
individuals rights, duties and obligations towards one another.
The main sources of law are legislation, common law and European
Community law. Legislation consists of Acts of Parliament, Orders (rules and
regulations made by ministers under the authority of an Act of Parliament) and
by-laws made by local government or other authorities exercising powers
conferred by Parliament. Common law, the ancient law of the land deduced from
custom and interpreted in court cases by the judges, has never been precisely
defined or codified but forms the basis of the law except when superseded by
legislation. European Community law is confined mainly to economic and social
matters; in certain circumstances it takes precedence over domestic law. It is
normally applied by the domestic courts, but the most authoritative rulings are
given by the European Court of Justice.
Certain changes to United Kingdom law have been enacted as a result of
rulings of the European Court of Human Rights in particular cases where the
domestic law was in breach of the Council of Europe’s Convention for the
Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, to which the United
Kingdom is a party.
Criminal Justice
The Government’s strategy for dealing with crime is to sustain the rule of law by
preventing crime where possible; to detect culprits when crimes are committed;
to convict the guilty and acquit the innocent; to deal firmly, adequately and
sensibly with those found guilty; and to provide more effective support for the
victims of crime. It is also concerned with ensuring that public confidence in the
criminal justice system is maintained and that a proper balance between the
rights of the citizen and the needs of the community as a whole is maintained.
With continuing concern in Britain, as in many other countries, over rising
crime rates, public expenditure on the law and order programme reflects the
special priority given by the Government to these services. Recent increases have
been made to cover, in particular, greater police manpower, the probation
service and extra spending on prison building. More than two-thirds of total
expenditure is initially incurred by local authorities (with the help of central
government grants), mainly on the police service.
110
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Criminal
Law
Crime Statistics
A number of measures to strengthen the criminal justice system have been
taken. The Drug Trafficking Offences Act 1986 provides for the pre-trial freezing
of suspected drug traffickers' assets, backed up on conviction by immediate
confiscation of the assets to the value of the proceeds of the crime; similar
provisions are included in the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 1987. The Public
Order Act 1986 codifies the common law offences of riot, unlawful assembly and
affray; enhances the powers of the police to control public processions and
assemblies likely to result in serious disorder or disruption; strengthens the law
against incitement to racial hatred; and provides additional powers to combat
football hooliganism. Under the Criminal Justice Act 1987 a Serious Fraud
Office with wide powers to investigate and prosecute serious or complex fraud in
England, Wales and Northern Ireland was established in 1988.
The criminal law, like the law generally, is interpreted by the courts but changes
in the law are matters for Parliament. In practice most legislation affecting
criminal law is government-sponsored, but there is usually consultation
between government departments and the legal profession, the police, the
probation service (in Scotland, the social work agencies) and voluntary bodies.
Differences in the legal systems, police recording practices and statistical
classifications in the countries of the United Kingdom make it impracticable to
analyse in detail trends in crime for the country as a whole. Nevertheless, it is
clear that, as in Western Europe generally, there has been a substantial increase
in crime since the early 1950s. However, official statistics cover only crime
recorded by the police and may thus be affected by changes in the proportion of
crimes which are undiscovered or unreported. The level of police manning and
deployment of the force may also affect recording.
Table 4 shows the rate of notifiable offences recorded by the police in England
and Wales in 1985, 1986 and 1987.
Table 4: Notifiable Offences Recorded by the Police, per 100,000 Population
(England and Wales) 1985, 1986 and 1987
Offence group
1985 1986
1987
Homicide 111
Violence against the person (excluding homicide) 244 250 281
Sexual offences 43 45 50
Burglary 1,742 1,866 1,797
Robbery 55 60 65
Theft and handling stolen goods 3,786 4,014 4,098
Fraud and forgery 271 267 266
Criminal damage 1,083 1,169 1,176
Other offences 34 33 39
Source: Home Office.
The 1985 and 1986 figures have been revised to accord with changes in compilation.
Some 95 per cent of crime is against property, much of this being relatively
small scale. This reinforces the need, in the Government's view, to encourage the
development of crime prevention schemes.
The number of notifiable offences recorded by the police in England and Wales
in 1987 was 3 -9 million,1 of which 33 per cent were cleared up. Clear-up rates for
Excluding ‘other criminal damage' valued at £20 and under.
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
111
Crime
Prevention
Criminal
Injuries
Compensation
Measures to
Combat
Terrorism
certain very serious offences were much higher—over 90 per cent for homicide
and 75 per cent for violence against the person and for sexual offences. The
Scottish police recorded 481,230 crimes, of which 35 per cent were cleared up.
In the past four years the Government has placed greater emphasis on crime
prevention. Some 12 government departments have been brought together in a
ministerial group to deal with crime prevention strategies. These include efforts
to improve security on housing estates; to ensure that architects, planners and
designers make new dwellings less easy to burgle; and to understand the root
causes of crime. The Government is also seeking action by the European
Community to encourage car manufacturers to design their products in such a
way as to make it difficult for criminals to steal vehicles or their contents.
In 1986 five local projects were set up with support from the Home Office to see
how crime and the fear of crime could be reduced through co-ordinated action by
local government, private businesses, the police and voluntary agencies. As part
of the Government s safer cities programme, these successful projects are being
extended on the same basis to some other urban areas. The establishment of
local crime prevention panels has been encouraged and there are nearly 56,000
neighbourhood watch schemes, some of which have succeeded in reducing
crimes such as burglary. In 1988 Crime Concern, a national independent
voluntary body, was formed to support local crime prevention activity and to
promote best practices in it.
The Criminal Injuries Compensation Scheme provides compensation to victims
of violent crimes (including violence within the family), to people hurt while
trying to arrest offenders and prevent offences and to those bereaved as a result
of violence. Compensation is assessed on the basis of common law damages and
usually takes the form of a lump-sum payment. In 1986-87 just under 29,600
cases were resolved by the Criminal Injuries Compensation Board and over £48
million was paid in compensation. Under the Criminal Justice Act 1988 the
courts' powers to make compensation orders are to be extended and the
Criminal Injuries Compensation Scheme will be established on a statutory
basis; this means that victims of violent crime will be entitled—for the first
time—to compensation as of right.
In Northern Ireland there is separate, statutory provision in certain circum¬
stances for compensation from public funds for criminal injuries, and for
malicious damage to property including the resulting losses of profits.
There has been a rapid growth in the number of locally run victim support
schemes which offer practical help to the victims of crime on a voluntary basis.
The Government provides financial assistance, both to local schemes and to a
national association.
Legislation to protect the public against terrorism has given the authorities
certain exceptional powers for dealing with and preventing terrorist activities,
while taking account of the need to achieve a proper balance between the safety
of the public and the rights of the individual. While acknowledging that the
special powers make inroads into civil liberties, the Government believes that
they should continue in force as long as a substantial terrorist threat remains.
Nobody can be imprisoned for political beliefs; all prisoners, except those
awaiting trial, have been found guilty in court of criminal offences.
The Northern Ireland (Emergency Provisions) Acts 1978 and 1987 give the
security forces in Northern Ireland special powers to search, question and arrest
suspected terrorists; allow the Secretary of State to proscribe terrorist organisa¬
tions; and provide for certain serious offences to be tried by a judge sitting alone
without a jury to obviate the dangers of intimidation of jurors. The 1987 Act
112
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
THE POLICE
SERVICE
makes provision for statutory time limits to be imposed on the time an accused
person may be held in custody awaiting trial although these powers so far have
not been invoked. The maximum period for which the police can hold a
suspected terrorist on their own authority has been reduced from 72 to 48
hours. Statements obtained by the use or threat of violence are inadmissible in
court.
The Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act 1984 (first intro¬
duced in 1974), which is applicable throughout the United Kingdom, provides
for the exclusion from Great Britain, Northern Ireland or the United Kingdom of
people connected with terrorism related to Northern Ireland affairs and for the
proscription of terrorist organisations in Great Britain. It also gives the police
powers to arrest people suspected of being involved in terrorism (whether
international or relating to Northern Ireland) without warrant and hold them for
48 hours and, with the approval of the Secretary of State, for up to a further five
days.
Both Acts are reviewed annually by an independent person reporting to the
Government. The Emergency Provisions Acts are renewable each year by
Parliament and expire in 1992. The Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary
Provisions) Act expires in 1989 and the Government is proposing that its
replacement should have no limit on its time-span but should continue to be
reviewed annually by Parliament.
The security forces in Northern Ireland are subject to the law and can be
prosecuted for criminal offences. An independent commission deals with
complaints made against police officers (see p 114).
The Criminal Jurisdiction Act 1975 makes it possible to try in Northern
Ireland a person accused of certain offences committed in the Irish Republic. It
also enables evidence to be obtained in Northern Ireland for the trial of offences
in the Irish Republic. Reciprocal legislation is in force in the Irish Republic. One
of the aims of the Anglo-Irish Agreement signed in November 1985 is to improve
security co-operation in combating terrorism. The accession of the Irish
Government to the European Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism in
1986 is expected to increase the prospects of securing extradition from the
Republic of people accused or convicted of terrorist crimes in Britain.
Britain attaches importance to international action to combat terrorism and
plays an active part in the work of a group of European Community ministers
(known as Trevi ) which facilitates the confidential exchange of information and
intelligence about terrorism affecting member countries. Britain believes that
there should be no concessions to terrorist demands and that international
co-operation should take place on tracking down and arresting terrorists and on
impeding the movement of international terrorists from one country to another.
In enforcing the law, police action rests mainly upon common consent, for there
is only a small number of officers in relation to the population (roughly one
officer to every 400 or so people). Officers in Great Britain do not normally carry
firearms (their only weapon is a truncheon) and there are strict limitations on
police powers. Because of the emergency situation there, the police are armed in
Northern Ireland.
The powers of the police in England and Wales have been modernised and
clarified by the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, which at the same time
has enhanced safeguards for the citizen. The Act does not generally extend to
Scotland or Northern Ireland where separate legislation applies.
The interception of communications on behalf of the police is regulated by the
Interception of Communications Act 1985, which establishes a statutory
framework governing the interception of messages in the telecommunications
and postal services and sets out the grounds on which certain Secretaries of
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
113
Forces
Police
Authorities and
Chief
Constables
Central
Authorities
Status and
Duties
State are empowered to authorise interception. So far as the police are
concerned, these are the prevention and detection of serious crime, and, in some
instances, the protection of national security. The other ground for interception
is the safeguarding of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom.
Interception outside the procedures established by the Act is a criminal offence.
Each of Britain's 52 police forces is responsible for law enforcement in its area,
but there is constant co-operation among them.
Outside London most counties (regions in Scotland) have their own police
forces, though in the interests of efficiency several have combined forces. The
policing of London is in the hands of the Metropolitan Police Force, with
headquarters at New Scotland Yard, and the City of London force. The strength
of the regular police in Britain at the end of 1987 was over 145,800 (including
over 14,200 policewomen); of these nearly 27,300 belonged to the Metropolitan
Police Force and just over 8,260 to the Royal Ulster Constabulary. It is
recognised that the composition of the police forces should reflect the make-up
of a multiracial society and efforts are being made to encourage more members
of the ethnic minorities to join them.
Each regular police force is maintained by a police authority. In England and
Wales these are committees of local councillors and magistrates, and in Scotland
they are the regional and islands councils. The police authority for the
Metropolitan Police Force is the Home Secretary. In Northern Ireland the police
authority is appointed by the Secretary of State.
The police authority’s functions, some subject to ministerial approval, include
appointing the chief constable, deputy chief constable and assistant chief
constables; fixing the maximum permitted strength of the force; and providing
buildings and equipment. In the Metropolitan Police area the commissioner of
police and his immediate subordinates are appointed on the recommendation of
the Home Secretary. The police authorities are financed by central and local
government.
Chief constables are responsible for the direction and control of police forces
and for the appointment, promotion and discipline of all ranks below assistant
chief constable. They are generally answerable to the police authorities on
matters of efficiency, and must submit a report every year.
The Home Secretary and the Secretaries of State for Scotland and Northern
Ireland approve the appointment of chief, deputy and assistant chief constables,
and may require a police authority to retire a chief constable in the interests of
efficiency, call for a report from a chief constable on matters relating to local
policing or institute a local inquiry. They can make regulations covering such
matters as police ranks; qualifications for appointment, promotion and
retirement; discipline; hours of duty, leave, pay and allowances; and uniform.
Some of these regulations are first negotiable within the Police Negotiating
Board for the United Kingdom, which has an independent chairman and
representatives of the police authorities, police staff associations and the home
departments. Matters of a non-negotiable kind and general questions are
discussed by the Police Advisory Boards.
All police forces (except the Metropolitan Police, for which the Home Secretaiy
is directly responsible) are subject to inspection by inspectors of constabulary
reporting to the appropriate Secretary of State. Inspectors maintain close touch
with the forces they inspect and have advisory functions.
A British police officer is subject to the law and may be sued or prosecuted for
any wrongful act committed in carrying out duties. Police discipline codes are
114
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Common
Services
designed to prevent any abuse of the considerable powers enjoyed by a police
officer, to ensure the impartiality of the service in its dealings with the public
and to maintain public confidence. Statutory procedures, including an indepen¬
dent element, govern the way in which complaints from the public against the
police are handled. The establishment in 1985 of the independent Police
Complaints Authority, with powers to supervise the investigation of any serious
complaint against a police officer, substantially reformed the complaints system
in England and Wales. In Scotland complaints against police officers involving
allegations of any form of criminal conduct are investigated by independent
public prosecutors.
In Northern Ireland the Independent Commission for Police Complaints is
required to supervise any case involving death or serious injury and has the
power to supervise the formal investigation of any other complaint if it so
wishes; in certain circumstances the Secretary of State may direct the
Commission to supervise the investigation of matters that are not the subject of
a formal complaint.
Police work ranges from the protection of people and property, road or street
patrolling (the trend is increasingly away from the car patrol and back to
‘community’ policing on foot) and traffic control to crime prevention, criminal
investigation and arresting offenders. In urban areas, particularly, police
officers have to deal with social problems and may bring in other social agencies
and expert help.
Most forces have community liaison departments to co-ordinate their efforts
to produce good relations with the community. The Police and Criminal
Evidence Act 1984 requires arrangements to be made for obtaining the views of
people in the area about the policing of it and for obtaining their co-operation
with the police in preventing crime. Almost all areas have police/community
consultative groups which enable people to discuss issues of concern with the
police in a constructive spirit. Particular efforts are made to develop relations
with young people, through greater contact with schools, for example. Emphasis
is also placed on relations with ethnic minorities; racially discriminatory
behaviour by police officers is an offence under the Police Discipline Code, and
training in community relations is available to officers.
To release as many uniformed police officers as possible for operational duties,
police authorities employ over 41,500 civilians (including part-time employees)
in England and Wales and over 2,530 in Scotland. The number of civilian
support staff has been growing as forces secure economies by replacing police
officers with civilians where posts do not require police powers and training.
Traffic wardens (of whom there are over 4,700 in England and Wales and about
540 in Scotland) carry out specified duties concerned with traffic and parking.
Wardens are under the control of the chief constable.
Each force has an attachment of volunteer special constables who perform
police duties in their spare time, without pay, acting mainly as auxiliaries to the
regular force. In Northern Ireland there is a part-time and full-time paid reserve.
Members of the police service may not belong to a trade union nor may they
withdraw their labour in furtherance of a trade dispute. All ranks, however, have
their own staff associations to represent their interests.
There are a number of common services provided by central government and by
arrangements between forces. In England and Wales the most important of
these cover the forensic science, telecommunications and central and provincial
criminal records available to all forces. In Scotland the main common services
cover centralised police training, the Scottish Crime Squad and the Scottish
Criminal Record Office. Certain special services such as liaison with the
International Criminal Police Organisation (Interpol) are provided for other
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
115
Powers of
Arrest
Detention,
Treatment and
Questioning
British forces by the Metropolitan Police. The National Drugs Intelligence Unit
assists police forces and the Customs service throughout Britain. The services of
the Fraud Squad, run jointly by the Metropolitan Police and City of London
Police to investigate company frauds, are available in England and Wales.
In all areas of police work the use of scientific aids is widespread. A national
police computer helps to rationalise records and speed up the dissemination of
information.
In England and Wales arrests may be made with or without a warrant issued by a
magistrate. The police may arrest a person without a warrant under the arrest
scheme established by the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, which
provides a general conditional power to arrest a person reasonably suspected of
any offence. However, a person can only be arrested under the scheme if it is
necessary in order to ensure that he (or she) can be brought before a court (for
example, because of failure to give a satisfactory address for service of a
summons or in order to prevent injury to persons or property). Furthermore, the
Act categorises certain offences as ‘arrestable’ or ‘serious arrestable’ and
provides a full power of arrest without warrant in respect of them for the
protection of the public.
A code of practice on detention, treatment and questioning is one of four codes
which the Home Secretary has issued under the 1984 Act. Failure to comply
with the provisions of these codes can render a police officer liable to disciplinary
proceedings.
An arrested person has a statutory right to consult a solicitor and to ask the
police to notify a named person likely to take an interest in his or her welfare
about the arrest. Where a person has been arrested in connection with a serious
arrestable offence, but has not yet been charged, the police may delay for up to
36 hours the exercise of these rights in the interests of the investigation if
certain criteria are met. The police must caution a person whom there are
grounds to suspect of an offence before any questions are put for the purpose of
obtaining evidence. Questions relating to an offence may normally not be put to
a person after he or she has been charged with that offence or informed that he
or she may be prosecuted for it.
The detention scheme in the Police and Criminal Evidence Act provides for a
person to be detained only if, and for as long as, necessary for a purpose
specified by law up to a maximum of 96 hours before charge. A person can only
be detained beyond 36 hours if a warrant is obtained from a magistrates’ court.
Reviews must be made of a person's detention (whether before or after charge)
at regular intervals—six hours after initial detention and thereafter every nine
hours as a maximum—to check whether the criteria for detention are still
satisfied. If they are not, the person must be released immediately.
As a practical means of developing public confidence in the treatment of
people detained by the police, the Government is encouraging the establishment
of schemes in England and Wales whereby lay visitors make random checks on
the treatment of persons detained in police stations and the conditions in which
they are held. Lay visitor schemes have been established in the majority of
Greater London boroughs and more are being set up in other parts of the
country. The schemes have helped improve relations between the police and the
local community, particularly in inner city areas.
A draft Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order was published
by the Government in July 1988; under the Order a number of major reforms
would be made to the criminal law (as distinct from the emergency legislation;
see p 111) to bring it broadly in line with that adopted in England and Wales by
the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (see above).
116
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Charging
Grant of Bail
by the Court
Scotland
A person who thinks that the grounds for detention are unlawful1 may apply
to the High Court for a writ of habeas corpus against the person who detained
him or her, requiring the person to appear before the court to justify the
detention. An application for this writ is normally made by the person detained
or by someone acting on his or her behalf. Similar procedures apply in Northern
Ireland.
As soon as there is sufficient evidence to charge a person, the police must decide
on an appropriate method of dealing with him or her. As an alternative to
charging immediately, they can, for example, decide to defer charging, to
caution, to deal with the matter by summons or to take no further action and
release the person with or without bail. Where an immediate charge is
appropriate the person may continue to be held in custody if the name or
address furnished is considered suspect, if there are grounds for believing that
detention is necessary for his or her own protection, to prevent harm to people or
property, or if there is a risk that the person would otherwise fail to appear in
court or could interfere with the administration of justice. When no such
considerations apply, the person must be released with or without bail
depending on the circumstances of the case. Where a person is detained after
charge, there is provision in the Act for him or her to be brought before a
magistrates’ court quickly. This will usually be no later than the following day.
Under the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 there is provision for statutory
time limits on the period from arrest to the beginning of trial in England and
Wales: time limits are in force in 13 English counties and throughout Wales and
are to be phased in elsewhere with the aim of their being in force throughout
England by the end of 1990. The limits are 56 days from first appearance before
magistrates to summary trial or 70 days to committal for trial in the Crown
Court. The limit is 112 days from committal to taking of the plea in the case of
the Crown Court.
It is a basic principle of the British criminal justice system that accused people
should not be remanded in custody except where strictly necessary. Under the
Bail Act 1976 which applies to England and Wales the court decides whether a
defendant should be released on bail pending trial. Bail may only be withheld in
certain specified circumstances, for instance, if the court has substantial
grounds for believing that the accused person would abscond, commit an
offence, interfere with witnesses, or otherwise obstruct the course of justice if
released on bail. A court may also impose conditions before granting bail. If bail
is refused, the defendant may apply to a High Court judge or to the Crown Court
for bail, and application can be made to the Crown Court for conditions imposed
by a magistrates' court to be varied. The majority of people remanded by
magistrates are given bail. There are 265 places in 16 bail hostels for people
awaiting trial in England and Wales.
In Scotland the police may detain and question a suspected person for a period
of up to six hours. Thereafter the person must either be released or charged. An
arrest must be accompanied by a criminal charge. Once a person has been
charged only voluntary statements will normally be allowed in evidence at the
trial. The court will reject statements unless satisfied that they have been fairly
obtained. Anyone arrested must be brought before a court with the least possible
delay (generally not later than the first day after being taken into custody),
or—in less serious cases—liberated by the police, often on a written undertaking
1 Detention is lawful in pursuance of criminal justice, for contempt of court or of either House of
Parliament and when expressly authorised by Parliament. It is also sometimes lawful in the case
of the mentally disordered.
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
117
CRIMINAL
COURTS
England and
Wales
Scotland
to attend court on a specified date. Where a prosecution on indictment is
intended (that is, where an accusation of a more serious offence is to be made),
the accused is brought before the sheriff to be committed, either for further
examination or until liberated in due course of law. A judicial examination may
take place. Eight days may elapse between commitment for further examination
and commitment until liberated in due course of law. The latter—which is also
described as full committal’—is commitment for trial. No evidence needs to be
presented to the sheriff for such commitment. Anyone accused of a crime, except
murder or treason, is entitled to apply for release on bail. Even in cases of
murder or treason, bail may be granted at the discretion of the Lord Advocate or
a quorum of the High Court. Money bail has been virtually abolished and the
courts, or the Lord Advocate, may release an accused person on conditions.
Breach of any of the conditions without reasonable excuse is a separate
offence. There is a right of appeal to the High Court by the accused person
against the refusal of bail, or by the prosecutor against the granting of bail, or by
either party against the conditions imposed. The writ of habeas corpus does not
aPPty in Scotland but if a person is to be prosecuted on indictment and has been
kept in custody pending trial, the trial must begin within 110 days of the date of
full committal. The trial of a person charged with a summary offence and held in
custody must begin within 40 days of the date of first appearance in court.
In England and Wales the initial decision to begin criminal proceedings
normally lies with the police. Once the police have brought a criminal charge,
the papers are passed to the Crown Prosecution Service which decides whether
the case should be accepted for prosecution in the courts or whether the
proceedings should be discontinued. In Scotland public prosecutors (procura¬
tors fiscal) decide whether or not to bring proceedings. In Northern Ireland there
is a Director of Public Prosecutions. In England and Wales (and exceptionally
in Scotland) a private person may institute criminal proceedings. Police may
issue cautions, and in Scotland the procurator fiscal may warn, instead of
prosecuting.
In April 1988 the Serious Fraud Office, a government department, was
established to investigate and prosecute the most serious and complex cases of
fraud in England, Wales and Northern Ireland.
The Crown Prosecution Service was established in England and Wales by the
Prosecution of Offences Act 1985. The Director of Public Prosecutions is the
head of the Service, which is responsible for the prosecution of criminal offences
in magistrates’ courts and the Crown Court. The Service is divided into 31
areas, each headed by a locally based Chief Crown Prosecutor appointed by the
Director of Public Prosecutions. The Service provides lawyers to prosecute cases
in the magistrates’ courts and briefs barristers to appear in the Crown Court.
Although the decision to prosecute is generally delegated to the Chief Crown
Prosecutors, some cases are dealt with by the headquarters of the Service; these
include cases of national importance, exceptional difficulty or great public
concern and those which require that suggestions of local influence be avoided.
Such cases might include terrorist offences, breaches of the Official Secrets Act,
large-scale conspiracies to import drugs and the prosecution of police officers.
Discharging his duties through the Crown Office, the Lord Advocate is
responsible for prosecutions in the High Court of Justiciary, sheriff courts and
district courts. There is no general right of private prosecution; with a few minor
exceptions crimes and offences may be prosecuted only by the Lord Advocate or
his deputes or by the procurators fiscal, who are the Lord Advocate’s local
officials. The permanent adviser to the Lord Advocate on prosecution matters is
118
Northern
Ireland
Courts in
England and
Wales
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the Crown Agent, who is head of the procurator fiscal service and is assisted in
the Crown Office by a staff of legally qualified civil servants, all of whom have had
experience as depute procurators fiscal. Prosecutions in the High Court are
prepared by procurators fiscal and Crown Office officials and prosecuted by
the Lord Advocate, the Solicitor-General for Scotland (the Lord Advocate’s
ministerial deputy) and advocates depute who are collectively known as Crown
Counsel. Crimes tried before the sheriff and district courts are prepared and
prosecuted by procurators fiscal. The police and other law enforcement agencies
investigate crimes and offences and report to the procurator fiscal, who decides
whether or not to prosecute, subject to the directions of Crown Counsel.
Under the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 1987 a procurator fiscal may make
a conditional offer of fixed penalty to an alleged offender in respect of certain
minor offences as an alternative to prosecution: the offender is not obliged to
accept an offer but if he or she does so the prosecution loses the right to
prosecute.
The Director of Public Prosecutions for Northern Ireland, who is responsible to
the Attorney General, prosecutes all offences tried on indictment, and may do so
in summary cases of a serious nature. Other summary offences are prosecuted
by the police.
Criminal offences maybe grouped into three categories. Offences triable only on
indictment—the very serious offences such as murder, manslaughter, rape and
robbery—are tried only by the Crown Court presided over by a judge sitting with
a jury. Summary offences—the least serious offences and the vast majority of
criminal cases—are tried by unpaid lay magistrates sitting without a jury. A
third category of offences (such as theft, burglary or malicious woundings) are
known as ‘either way’ offences and can be tried either by magistrates or by the
Crown Court depending on the circumstances of each case and the wishes of the
defendant.
In addition to dealing with summary offences and the ‘either way’ offences
which are entrusted to them, the magistrates’ courts commit cases to the Crown
Court either for trial or for sentence. Committals for trial are either of indictable
offences or of ‘either way’ offences which it has been determined will be tried in
the Crown Court. Committals for sentence occur when the defendant in an
‘either way’ case has been tried summarily but the court has decided to commit
him or her to the Crown Court for sentence.
Magistrates must as a rule sit in open court to which the public and the media
are admitted. A court normally consists of three lay magistrates—known as
justices of the peace—advised on points of law and procedures by a legally
qualified clerk or a qualified assistant. Magistrates are appointed by the Lord
Chancellor, except in Lancashire, Greater Manchester and Merseyside where
appointments are made by the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster. There are
nearly 28,000 lay magistrates.
There are 63 full-time, legally qualified stipendiary magistrates who may sit
alone and usually preside in courts in urban areas where the workload is heavy.
Cases involving people under 17 are heard in juvenile courts. These are
specially constituted magistrates’ courts which either sit apart from other
courts or are held at a different time. Only limited categories of people may be
present and media reports must not identify any juvenile appearing either as a
defendant or a witness. Where a young person under 17 is charged jointly with
someone of 17 or over, the case is heard in an ordinary magistrates’ court or the
Crown Court. If the young person is found guilty, the court may transfer the
case to a juvenile court for sentence unless satisfied that it is undesirable to
do so.
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
119
Appeals
Scotland
The Crown Court deals with trials of the more serious cases, the sentencing of
offenders committed for sentence by magistrates’ courts, and appeals from
magistrates’ courts. It sits at about 90 centres and is presided over by High
Court judges, full-time ‘circuit judges’ and part-time recorders. All contested
trials take place before a jury. Magistrates sit with a circuit judge or recorder to
deal with appeals and committals for sentence.
The Government is planning to alter court procedures regarding cases of
serious or complex fraud with a view to by-passing full committal proceedings in
magistrates' courts at the discretion of the prosecution, but with a special
procedure under which the accused would be able to apply to the Crown Court to
be discharged on the ground that there was no case to answer.
A person convicted by a magistrates’ court may appeal to the Crown Court
against the sentence imposed if he has pleaded guilty; or against the conviction
or sentence imposed if he has not pleaded guilty. Where the appeal is on a point
or procedure of law, either the prosecutor or the defendant may appeal from the
magistrates’ court to the High Court (see p 130). Appeals from the Crown Court,
either against conviction or against sentence, are made to the Court of Appeal
(Criminal Division). The House of Lords is the final appeal court for all cases,
from either the High Court or the Court of Appeal. Before a case can go to the
Lords, the court hearing the previous appeal must certify that it involves a point
of law of general public importance and either that court or the Lords must grant
leave for the appeal to be heard. The nine Lords of Appeal in Ordinary are the
judges who deal with Lords appeals.
The Attorney General may seek the opinion of the Court of Appeal on a point of
law which has arisen in a case where a person tried on indictment is acquitted;
the court has power to refer the point to the House of Lords if necessary. The
acquittal in the original case is not affected, nor is the identity of the acquitted
person revealed without his or her consent. Under a provision in the Criminal
Justice Act 1988, which has not yet been implemented, the Attorney General
would be empowered, where he considered that a sentence passed by the Crown
Court was over-lenient, to refer the case to the Court of Appeal, which would be
able, if it thought fit, to increase the sentence within the statutory maximum
laid down by Parliament for the offence.
In Scotland the High Court of Justiciary tries such crimes as murder, treason
and rape; the sheriff court is concerned with less serious offences and the
district court with minor offences. Criminal cases are heard either under solemn
procedure, when proceedings are taken on indictment and the judge sits with a
jury of 15 members, or under summary procedure, when the judge sits without a
jury. All cases in the High Court and the more serious ones in sheriff courts are
tried by a judge and jury. Summary procedure is used in the less serious cases in
the sheriff courts, and in all cases in the district courts. District courts are the
administrative responsibility of the district and the islands local government
authorities; the judges are lay justices of the peace and the local authorities may
appoint up to one-quarter of their elected members to be ex officio justices. In
Glasgow there are four stipendiary magistrates who are full-time salaried
lawyers and have equivalent criminal jurisdiction to a sheriff sitting under
summary procedure. Children under 16 who have committed an offence or are
for other reasons specified in statute considered to need compulsory care may be
brought before a children's hearing comprising three members of the local
community (see p 128).
Scotland’s six sheriffdoms are further divided into sheriff court districts, each
of which has one or more sheriffs, who are the judges of the court.
The High Court of Justiciary, Scotland’s supreme criminal court, is both a
120
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Northern
Ireland
Trial
trial and an appeal court. Any of the following judges is entitled to try cases in
the High Court: the Lord Justice General (the head of the court), the Lord
Justice Clerk (the judge next in seniority) or one of the Lord Commissioners of
Justiciary. The main seat of the court is in Edinburgh, although the High Court
also tries cases in other towns.
All appeals are dealt with by the High Court in Edinburgh. In both solemn and
summary procedure, an appeal may be brought against conviction, or sentence,
or both. The Court may authorise a retrial if it sets aside a conviction. There is
no further appeal to the House of Lords. In summary proceedings the prosecutor
may appeal on a point of law against acquittal or sentence. The Lord Advocate
may seek the opinion of the High Court on a point of law which has arisen in a
case where a person tried on indictment is acquitted. The acquittal in the
original case is not affected.
The structure of Northern Ireland courts is broadly similar to that in England
and Wales. The day-to-day work of dealing summarily with minor cases is
carried out by magistrates’ courts presided over by a full-time, legally qualified
resident magistrate. Young offenders under 17 and young people under 17 who
need care, protection and control are dealt with by juvenile courts consisting of
the resident magistrate and two lay members (at least one of whom must be a
woman) specially qualified to deal with juveniles. Appeals from magistrates’
courts are heard by the county court.
The Crown Court deals with criminal trials on indictment. It is served by High
Court and county court judges. Proceedings are heard before a single judge, and
all contested cases, other than those involving offences specified under
emergency legislation, take place before a jury. Appeals from the Crown Court
against conviction or sentence are heard by the Northern Ireland Court of
Appeal. Procedures for a further appeal to the House of Lords are similar to those
in England and Wales.
Criminal trials in the United Kingdom take the form of a contest between the
prosecution and the defence. Since the law presumes the innocence of an
accused person until guilt has been proved, the prosecution is not granted any
advantage, apparent or real, over the defence. A defendant (in Scotland, called
an accused) has the right to employ a legal adviser and may be granted legal aid
from public funds. If remanded in custody, the person may be visited by a legal
adviser to ensure a properly prepared defence. In England, Wales and Northern
Ireland during the preparation of the case, the prosecution usually tells the
defence of relevant documents which it is not proposed to put in evidence and
discloses them if asked to do so. The prosecution should also inform the defence
of witnesses whose evidence may help the accused and whom the prosecution
does not propose to call. The defence or prosecution may suggest that the
defendant’s mental state renders him or her unfit to be tried. If the jury (or in
Scotland, the judge) decides that this is so, the defendant is admitted to a
specified hospital.
Criminal trials are normally in open court and rules of evidence (concerned
with the proof of facts) are rigorously applied. If evidence is improperly admitted,
a conviction can be quashed on appeal. During the trial the defendant has the
right to hear and cross-examine witnesses for the prosecution, normally
through a lawyer; to call his or her own witnesses who, if they will not attend
voluntarily, may be legally compelled to attend; and to address the court in
person or through a lawyer, the defence having the right to the last speech at the
trial. The defendant cannot be questioned without consenting to be sworn as a
witness in his or her own defence. When he or she does testify, cross-
examination about character or other conduct may be made only in exceptional
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
121
circumstances; generally the prosecution may not introduce such evidence.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland the Criminal Justice Act 1987
provides that in complex fraud cases there should be a preparatory open Crown
Court hearing at which the judge will be able to hear and settle points of law and
to define the issues to be put to the jury.
The Jury In jury trials the judge decides questions of law, sums up the evidence for the
jury and instructs it on the relevant law, and discharges the accused or passes
sentence. Only the jury decides whether the defendant is guilty or not guilty. In
England and Wales, if the jury cannot reach a unanimous verdict, the judge may
direct it to bring in a majority verdict provided that, in the normal jury of 12
people, there are not more than two dissentients. In Scotland, where the jury
consists of 15 people, the verdict may be reached by a simple majority, but as a
general rule, no person may be convicted without corroborated evidence. If the
jury returns a verdict of ‘not guilty’ (or in Scotland ‘not proven', which is an
alternative verdict of acquittal), the prosecution has no right of appeal and the
defendant cannot be tried again for the same offence. In the event of a ‘guilty’
verdict, the defendant has a right of appeal to the appropriate court.
A jury is completely independent of the judiciary. Any attempt to interfere with
a jury once it is sworn in is punishable under the Contempt of Court Act 1981.
Although the right of the defence to challenge up to three potential members of
a jury without giving any reason is to be abolished in England and Wales, it will
remain open to both parties to challenge potential jurors by giving reasons
where they believe that an individual juror is likely to be biased.
People between the ages of 18 and 65 whose names appear on the electoral
register, with certain exceptions, are liable for jury service and their names are
chosen at random. (Proposals to increase the upper age limit from 65 to 70 in
England and Wales are contained in the Criminal Justice Act 1988.) Ineligible
persons include the judiciary, priests, people who have within the previous ten
years been members of the legal profession, the Lord Chancellor’s Department,
or the police, prison and probation services, and certain sufferers from mental
illness. Persons disqualified from jury service include those who have, within
the previous ten years, served any part of a sentence of imprisonment, youth
custody or detention, or been subject to a community service order, or, within
the previous five years, been placed on probation. Anyone who has been
sentenced to five or more years’ imprisonment is disqualified for life.
Coroners’
Courts
Coroners investigate violent and unnatural deaths or sudden deaths where the
cause is unknown. Deaths may be reported to the local coroner (who is either
medically or legally qualified, or both) by doctors, the police, the registrar,
various public authorities or members of the public. If the death is sudden and
the cause unknown, the coroner need not hold an inquest if, after a
post-mortem examination has been made, he or she is satisfied that the death
was due to natural causes. Where there is reason to believe that the deceased
died a violent or unnatural death or died in prison or in other specified
circumstances, the coroner must hold an inquest and it is the duty of the
coroner’s court to establish how, when and where the deceased died. A coroner
may sit alone, or in certain circumstances, with a jury. In Scotland the local
procurator fiscal inquires privately into all sudden and suspicious deaths and
may report the findings to the Crown Office. In a minority of cases a fatal
accident inquiry may be held before the sheriff. For certain categories (such as
deaths in custody) a fatal accident inquiry is mandatory. In addition, the Lord
Advocate has discretion to instruct an inquiry in the public interest in cases
where the circumstances give rise to public concern.
122
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
TREATMENT
OF
OFFENDERS
Sentencing
Custody
Non-custodial
Treatment
The sentence passed on an offender is entirely a matter for the courts, subject to
the maximum penalty enacted by Parliament for each offence. The Government
ensures that the courts have available an adequate range of sentences to suit the
circumstances of each case and that they are well informed about the purpose
and nature of each available sentence. The Court of Appeal (see p 119) issues
guidance to the lower courts on sentencing issues when points of principle have
arisen on individual cases which are the subject of appeal.
The Government believes that custody should be a sanction of last resort used
only when the gravity of the offence means that there is a positive justification
for a custodial sentence, or where the public needs to be protected from a
dangerous offender. The Court of Appeal has stated that sentencers in England
and Wales should examine each case in which custody is necessary to ensure
that the term imposed is as short as possible, consistent with the courts’ duty to
protect the interests of the public and to punish and deter the criminal. A
magistrates’ court in England and Wales cannot impose a term of more than six
months’ imprisonment for each offence tried summarily, but may impose
consecutive sentences subject to an overall maximum of 12 months’ imprison¬
ment. If an offence carries a higher maximum penalty, it may commit the
defendant for sentence at the Crown Court which may impose—within the
permitted statutory maximum—any other custodial penalty. As in the rest of
Britain there is a mandatory sentence of life imprisonment for murder; this is
also the maximum penalty for a number of serious offences such as robbery,
rape, arson and manslaughter.
The death penalty has been repealed for almost all offences. It remains on the
statute book for the offences of treason, piracy with violence and some other
treasonable and mutinous offences; it has, however, not been used for any of
these offences since 1946.
In Scotland the maximum penalty is determined by the status of the court
trying the accused unless the sentence is limited by statute. In trials on
indictment, the High Court may impose a sentence of imprisonment for any
term up to life, and the sheriff court any term up to three years but may send any
person to the High Court for sentence if the court considers its powers are
insufficient. In summary cases, the sheriff may normally impose up to three
months’ imprisonment or six months’ for some repeated offences, although his
powers are extended by statute in some exceptional cases. In the district court
the maximum term of imprisonment is 60 days.
In Northern Ireland the position is generally the same as for England and
Wales. A magistrates’ court, however, cannot commit an offender for sentencing
at the Crown Court if it has tried the case; for certain summary offences, a
magistrates’ court may impose a term of imprisonment for up to 12 months.
There are also other circumstances when a magistrates’ court can impose
imprisonment of more than six months.
Since successive British Governments have believed that non-custodial treat¬
ment should be used by the courts wherever possible, there has been an
expansion in the range of such penalties; these include fines, probation,
supervision, community service, suspended prison sentences and absolute or
conditional discharge. In 1988 the Government issued a consultative document
on punishment within the community suggesting that courts should be able to
impose a new supervision and restriction order (instead of a prison sentence) on
an offender which could include compensation to the victim, community
service, residence at a hostel or other appointed place, prescribed activities at a
day centre or elsewhere, curfew or house arrest, or tracking an offender’s
whereabouts.
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
123
Fines
Probation
The most common sentence is a fine, which is imposed in more than 80 per cent
of cases. There is no limit to the fine which may be imposed on indictment; on
summary conviction the maximum limit, except in certain exceptional cir¬
cumstances, is £2,000 in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, and in Scotland
£2,000 in the sheriff court and £1,000 in the district court.
At present in the United Kingdom the number of offenders subject to
supervision in the community considerably exceeds the number in custody. The
purpose of probation is to protect society by the rehabilitation of the offender,
who continues to live a normal life in the community while subject to the
supervision of a probation officer. Before placing an offender on probation,
which may last from six months to three years, the court must explain the order
in ordinary language, ensuring that the offender consents to the requirements
of the order and understands that a failure to comply with them will make him
or her liable to a penalty or to be dealt with for the original offence. In England
and Wales such an order can be made only for offenders aged 17 years or more.
In Scotland the minimum age is 16 years and in Northern Ireland 10 years.
About 17 per cent of orders in England and Wales contain a variety of additional
requirements concerning place of residence, attendance at day centres or
treatment for mental illness.
The probation service in England and Wales also administers supervision
orders, the community service scheme and parole. In addition, social work
services are provided in custodial establishments.
In England and Wales the cost of the probation service is shared between
central and local government and it is administered locally by probation
committees of magistrates and members co-opted from the local community. In
Scotland probation services are integrated with local authority social work
departments, and in Northern Ireland the service is administered by a probation
board, whose membership is representative of the community and which is
funded by central government.
The probation service provides and maintains day centres and hostels
together with schemes and programmes designed to meet the needs of a broad
range of offenders, and, if possible, drawing the community into partnership in
responding to offending.
Offenders aged 16 or over (17 in Northern Ireland) convicted of imprisonable
offences may, with their consent, be given community service orders. The court
may order between 40 and 240 hours' unpaid service (the maximum in England
and Wales is 120 hours for 16-year-olds) to be completed within 12 months.
(This does not apply in Northern Ireland.) Examples of work done include
decorating the houses of old or disabled people and building adventure
playgrounds. The number of community service orders made in England and
Wales increased from 28,040 in 1981 to 34,580 in 1986 and in Scotland from
1,083 in 1981 to 3,150 in 1986. In Northern Ireland the number rose from 811
in 1986 to 841 in 1987.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland a court is free to pass a suspended
sentence of not more than two years. (A draft Treatment of Offenders (Northern
Ireland) Order will allow sentences for serious offences to be suspended for up to
five years.) The sentence is not served unless the offender is convicted of a
further offence punishable with imprisonment; in that event the suspended
sentence normally takes effect and another sentence may be imposed for the new
offence. In England and Wales an offender receiving a suspended sentence of
more than six months may be placed under the supervision of a probation officer
for all or part of the period: courts also have the power, when passing a sentence
of between three months' and two years’ imprisonment, to order that part
should be served and the rest held in suspense.
124
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Compensation
and
Reparation
Other Measures
Prisons
The courts may order an offender to pay compensation for personal injury, loss
or damage resulting from an offence. The Government favours the courts
making full use of their compensation powers. Under the Criminal Justice Act
1988 courts in England and Wales will be required to give reasons for not
awarding compensation to a victim who has suffered loss, injury or damage.
Experimental schemes have been started to enable offenders to make direct
reparation to their victims, either by paying financial compensation or by
undertaking some service for them.
Courts may order the confiscation of proceeds gained by a criminal from drug
trafficking and this principle is to be extended to other very serious offences. In
certain circumstances courts may also order forfeiture of property involved in
the commission of crime.
The court in England and Wales may discharge a person absolutely or
conditionally if it believes that punishment should not be inflicted and a
probation order is not appropriate. If he or she is conditionally discharged, the
offender remains liable to punishment for the offence if convicted of another
offence within a period specified by the court (not more than three years). The
Crown Court may ‘bind over’ an offender by requiring him or her to keep the
peace and/or be of good behaviour; if this requirement is not complied with, the
offender may be brought before the court and dealt with for the original offence.
Alternatively the ‘binding over’ may take the form of a recognition that a sum of
money will be forfeit if conditions stated by the court are not complied with.
In Scotland the same effects of conditional discharge and binding over are
achieved by a system of deferral of sentence until a given future date to enable
the accused person to be of good behaviour in the interim and to meet other
conditions stipulated by the court.
Police cautions are used particularly for young offenders; the caution is a form
of warning and no court action is taken.
The Government aims to provide a humane, efficient and effective prison
service. The average inmate population in 1987 in England and Wales was
nearly 49,000 and, if past trends continue, is projected to rise to between 63,000
and 69,000 by 1996. The figure for Scotland was 5,588 in 1986. In Northern
Ireland the daily average inmate population reached a peak of almost 3,000 in
1978 but fell to 1,950 in 1987.
Prisons to which offenders may be committed directly by a court are known as
‘local prisons’; all are closed. Other prisons, open or closed, receive prisoners on
transfer from local prisons. (Open prisons do not have physical barriers to
prevent escape.) In England, Scotland and Wales sentenced prisoners are
classified into groups for security purposes. There are separate prisons for
women.
There are no open prisons in Northern Ireland, where the majority of offenders
are serving sentences for terrorist offences.
People awaiting trial in local prisons or in remand centres are entitled to
privileges not granted to convicted prisoners and, as far as practicable, are
separated from convicted prisoners. Those under 21 awaiting trial are, where
possible, separated from older prisoners. In 1988 the Government set out
proposals in a consultative document under which the private sector would be
brought into the management of new remand prisoner facilities subject to
certain conditions such as security and the humane treatment of inmates: the
Government believes that this step could make new remand accommodation
available and reduce overcrowding in existing remand centres and local prisons.
Feasibility is being examined by a group of management consultants.
Many of the prisons in England and Wales were built in the nineteenth
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
125
Remission of
Sentence
Parole and
Life Licence
Repatriation
century, and are now in need of major repairs. Others are housed in converted
premises which are expensive to maintain. In order to reduce overcrowding and
ensure that all prisoners are housed in decent conditions, a major programme of
building and refurbishment is now in progress. This includes the construction
of 26 new prisons, six of which are already complete and in use. In Northern
Ireland there is no overcrowding in the six prison establishments, five of which
have been built since 1970; two new prisons—one for women—opened in 1986.
Most prisoners in Great Britain are eligible for remission of one-third of their
sentence provided it does not reduce the sentence to less than five days.
Remission for those serving sentences of a year or less has been increased from a
third to one-half of sentence. Remission may be forfeited for serious miscon¬
duct. There is no remission for prisoners serving sentences under civil law and
those serving sentences of unspecified length (for example, the criminally
insane, whose release depends upon improvement in their mental condition).
In Northern Ireland prisoners serving a sentence of more than five days are
eligible for remission of half their sentence. A prisoner serving a sentence of
more than 12 months who is released from prison with remission is liable to be
ordered to serve the remainder of this sentence if convicted of fresh imprison-
able offences during this period.
In England and Wales prisoners serving determinate sentences of more than 12
months become eligible for consideration for release on parole licence when they
have served one-third of the sentence, or six months, whichever expires the
later. (In Scotland they also qualify after 12 months.) About three-quarters of
prisoners serving sentences of less than two years receive parole. However, for
those serving sentences of over five years for violence or drug trafficking parole is
granted only in exceptional circumstances, or otherwise for a few months at the
end of the sentence. The parole licence remains in force until the date on which
the prisoner would otherwise have been released from prison. It prescribes the
conditions, including the maintenance of contact with a supervising officer,
with which the offender must comply. In 1987 about 5-2 per cent of prisoners
granted parole in England and Wales, and virtually none in Scotland, were
recalled to prison. Parole is not available in Northern Ireland, which has more
generous remission terms.
The release of prisoners serving life sentences is at the discretion of the Home
Secretary or in Scotland the Secretary of State for Scotland, subject to a
favourable recommendation by the Parole Board or the Parole Board for Scotland
and after consultation with the judiciary. The Secretaries of State are not,
however, bound to accept such a recommendation for release, nor are they
bound by the views of the judiciary. At the discretion of the Home Secretary,
people serving life sentences for the murder of police and prison officers,
terrorist murders, murder by firearms in the course of robbery and the sexual or
sadistic murder of children are normally detained for at least 20 years. At the
end of 1987 there were about 2,400 life sentence prisoners detained in prisons
in England and Wales of whom about 140 had been detained for 15 years or
more. On release, life sentence prisoners remain on licence for the rest of their
lives and are subject to recall should their behaviour suggest that they might
again be a danger to the public. In Northern Ireland the Secretary of State
reviews life sentence cases on the recommendation of an internal review body in
such a way as to reflect their gravity and to take account of Northern Ireland’s
special circumstances.
Sentenced prisoners who are nationals of countries which have ratified the
Council of Europe Convention on the Transfer of Sentenced Persons may apply
to be returned to their own country to serve the rest of their sentence there.
126
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Prison
Industries,
Physical
Education
and Education
Medical and
Psychological
Services
Privileges and
Discipline
Welfare
Prison industries aim to give inmates work experience which will assist them
when released and to secure a return which will reduce the cost of the prison
system. The main industries are clothing and textile manufacture, engineering,
woodwork, laundering, farming and horticulture. Most production caters for
internal needs and for other public services. A few prisoners are employed
outside prison. Small payments are made for work; in some prisons, schemes
provide an opportunity for higher earnings on the basis of output and skill.
Education is financed by the prison service and staffed by local education
authorities. In every establishment the education officer is assisted by a team of
teachers. Education is compulsory, full time, for young offenders below
school-leaving age. For older offenders it is voluntary. Some prisoners study for
public examinations (including those of the Open University). Within the
resources available there is an adult education curriculum. Library facilities,
provided through the local public library authority, are available in all
establishments. Vocational training courses are taught by civilian instruction
officers. Physical education is voluntary for adult offenders but compulsory for
young offenders. Some 50 per cent of prisons have purpose-built physical
education facilities while all but two of the remainder use gymnasia converted
from other buildings.
Education in Northern Ireland prisons is traditionally an evening activity, but
governors may and do permit prisoners who need help in basic education and
those preparing for public examinations to spend part of their working week on
educational pursuits. Recently, the distance-learning mode of study has been
introduced in a wide range of subjects, lessening the need for evening classes.
Prison education is provided by full-time and part-time staff. A wide range of
educational and vocational training facilities, from remedial education to Open
University level, is available.
The prison medical service has a general responsibility for the physical and
mental health of all those in custody. Each establishment has accommodation
for sick people and patients can also be transferred to National Health Service
hospitals. Psychiatric care is available.
The work of psychologists includes evaluating treatment programmes,
studying management practices, contributing to the management and treat¬
ment programmes of individuals and groups, taking part in advisory and
training work with staff, and making assessments for treatment or allocation
purposes.
Prisoners may write and receive letters and be visited by relatives and friends,
and those in open establishments may make telephone calls. Privileges include a
personal radio, books, periodicals and newspapers, and the opportunity to make
purchases from the canteen with money earned in prison. Depending on
facilities prisoners may be granted the further privileges of dining and
recreation in association, and watching television.
Breaches of discipline are dealt with by the prison governor, or by the boards
of visitors (visiting committees in Scotland), who have power to order forfeiture
of remission. Boards of visitors (and visiting committees) consist of lay people,
two of whom must be magistrates.
The welfare of prisoners is the concern of all prison staff. Much of this work is
the responsibility of probation officers (in Scotland, social workers) stationed in
prisons who help prisoners in their relations with individuals and agencies
outside and play a leading part in helping prisoners to make constructive
resettlement plans before their release. Prisoners may also receive visits from
specially appointed prison visitors whose work is voluntary.
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
127
Discharge and
After-care
Children in
Trouble
England and
Wales
Chaplains give spiritual help and advice to inmates and are increasingly
involved in management decisions affecting their needs and quality of life.
All prisons in England and Wales make pre-release preparations. Prisoners
serving four years or more are considered for outside employment before release.
For those selected, work is found outside the prison for about the last six
months of sentence; during the period prisoners may live in a separate part of
the prison or in a hostel outside. Normal wages are paid so that they can resume
support for their families. (In Scotland pre-release arrangements differ from
these in some respects.) Periods of home leave may be granted to those serving
medium- or longer-term sentences to help them maintain family ties and to
assist them with their resettlement. In Northern Ireland arrangements exist for
prisoners serving fixed sentences to have short periods of leave near the end of
their sentences and at Christmas; life sentence prisoners are given a nine-
month pre-release programme which includes employment outside the prison.
The aim of after-care, run by the probation service (in Scotland, the local
authority social work departments), is to assist offenders on return to society.
Compulsory supervision is given to most offenders under 21 when released,
adult offenders released on parole, and those released on licence from a life
sentence. A voluntary system is offered to others. Assistance is also provided by
voluntary societies, some of which are affiliated to the National Association for
the Care and Resettlement of Offenders. There is also a Scottish Association for
the Care and Resettlement of Offenders. Hostels and accommodation may be
provided, often with government financial help. The Northern Ireland Associa¬
tion for the Care and Resettlement of Offenders, also a voluntary group, is
mainly concerned with assisting petty criminals and alcoholics towards
rehabilitation and social awareness.
The age of criminal responsibility.in England and Wales is ten years and it is not
possible to bring criminal proceedings against children below this age. Children
between the ages of 10 and 17 charged with committing a criminal offence may
be brought before a court, usually a juvenile court. A local authority may bring a
child of any age under the age of 17 to a juvenile court in a procedure known as
care proceedings if, for example, it suspects that he or she is in moral danger or
beyond the control of his or her parents. Under both care and criminal
proceedings a court may make a care order or a supervision order or, if the
parents consent, an order requiring them to exercise proper care or control over
the child. Before an order may be made in care proceedings or a care order made
in criminal proceedings, it must be shown that the child is in need of care or
control which he or she is unlikely to receive unless the order is made.
Under a care order a local authority becomes responsible for deciding where
the child should be accommodated. It may allow him or her to remain at home
under supervision or place him or her with foster parents or in a voluntary or
community home. For children too severely disturbed or disruptive to be treated
m local authority homes, there are two special Youth Treatment Centres run by
the Department of Health. The authority must review each care order every six
months and consider whether an application should be made to the court to end
it; the order normally expires when the child reaches 18 or 19. When a child who
is already under a care order as a result of an offence commits a further offence
(for which an adult could be punished by imprisonment) a court may attach a
charge and control condition to the order. This suspends for up to six months
the local authority’s discretion to place the child in his or her own home, but
does not oblige the authority to place the child in a community home. The local
authority may, for example, place the child with foster parents.
Under a supervision order (which may remain in force for not more than three
128
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Scotland
Northern
Ireland
years) a child normally lives at home under the supervision of a social worker or
a probation officer, though the court may require him or her to live with a
specified person. The court has power to require that the child comply with
directions given by his or her supervisor or, in criminal proceedings, with
requirements made by the court itself. By either of these means, the supervision
order can be used to provide for a programme of ‘intermediate treatment',
consisting of participation, under a supervisor, in a variety of constructive and
remedial activities through a short residential course or, more usually,
attendance at a day or evening centre.
In criminal proceedings, the courts may order payment of compensation, or
impose a fine or grant a conditional or absolute discharge. Payment of fines,
compensation or costs incurred by juvenile offenders is normally the responsi¬
bility of their parents or guardians. Offenders, both boys and girls, may be
ordered to spend a total of up to 24 hours of their Saturday leisure time (up to
three hours on any one occasion) at an attendance centre. The centres, which
provide physical education and instruction in practical subjects, are for those
found guilty of offences for which older people could be sent to prison. Offenders
aged 16 may be ordered to perform up to 120 hours of community service.
Boys aged between 14 and 16, for whom a non-custodial sentence would not
be appropriate, may be sent to a young offender institution; for those aged 14
the period is between three weeks and four months and for those aged 15 or 16
the maximum is 12 months. Girls aged 14 may not be so detained and there is
no provision for custodial sentences of four months or less for girls aged 15 or
16. In the case of a very serious crime, detention in a place approved by the Home
Secretary may be ordered and must be ordered in the case of homicide.
In Scotland the age of criminal responsibility is eight years but prosecution of
children under the age of 16 years in court is rare and can take place only as
instructed by the Lord Advocate; court proceedings normally take place only
where the offence is of a serious nature, or where a child is prosecuted together
with an adult. Instead, children under 16 (or in certain circumstances those
aged between 16 and 18 if subject to a supervision requirement) who have
committed an offence or are considered to be in need of care and protection may
be brought before a children’s hearing. The hearing, which consists of three lay
people drawn from a panel for each region or islands area, determines in an
informal setting whether compulsory measures of care are required and, if so,
the form they should take. An official ‘reporter’ decides whether a child should
come before a hearing. If the grounds for referral are not accepted by the child or
parents, or if for any reason the child is not capable of understanding the
explanation of the grounds, the case goes to the sheriff for proof. If he finds the
grounds established, the sheriff remits the case to the reporter to arrange a
hearing. The sheriff also decides appeals against any decision of a children’s
hearing.
The age of criminal responsibility in Northern Ireland is ten. Children between
the ages of 10 and 13 and young persons between the ages of 14 and 16 who are
charged with a criminal offence may be brought before a juvenile court. If found
guilty, the child or young person may be placed in the care of a fit person, placed
under supervision or on probation, ordered to attend a day attendance centre
(Belfast only) or sent to a training school. Penalties may also include conditional
or absolute discharge, a fine, or payment of compensation for damage caused.
Parents may be required to ensure the person’s good behaviour. Where care and
protection are needed away from home, the court may place the child or young
person in a welfare home or a training school; the latter also serves as a remand
home.
I
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
129
Young Adult
Offenders
The Civil Law
CIVIL COURTS
England and
Wales
Offenders aged 17 to 20 years (16 to 21 years in Scotland) form a separate
category from juvenile and adult offenders. In England and Wales the penalties
for young adults are fines and compensation, attendance centre orders and
probation orders; offenders may also be sentenced to up to 240 hours of
community service. As in the case of juvenile offenders, a custodial sentence may
be imposed only when no other measure would be appropriate. The custodial
sentences for offenders of this age are the detention centre order (for young men
sentenced to a term of four months or less) and the youth custody sentence (for
both sexes). For the most serious offences young adults may be sentenced to
custody for life. Detention centres, which receive offenders directly from the
courts, operate a consistent regime which is geared to the short sentences
involved. This inculcates a high standard of discipline and effort; in senior
centres it includes a full working week; younger offenders receive at least 15
hours of education a week. Both junior and senior centres provide one hour of
physical training each day. The youth custody centre regime is designed for
offenders who are usually serving a minimum sentence of over four months, and
for those allocated from a local prison. The aim is to provide flexible but coherent
programmes of activities which are as constructive as possible and can include
an element of vocational training. Some young offenders sentenced to youth
custody are held in local prisons and remand centres in special accommodation
where as full a regime as possible is provided. The Criminal Justice Act 1988
provides for a unified custodial sentence for young and young adult offenders
under the age of 21 in England and Wales: from October 1988 the detention
centre order and the youth custody sentence are being replaced by detention in a
young offender institution. Young offenders are eligible for parole on the same
terms as adults and all are supervised after release.
In Scotland young offenders aged under 21 sentenced to detention serve their
sentences in a young offenders’ institution. Remission of part of the sentence for
good conduct, release on parole, and supervision after release are available. In
Northern Ireland offenders aged between 17 and 21 who are sentenced to three
years or less are sent to a young offenders’ centre.
Civil Justice
The main sub-divisions of the civil law of England, Wales and Northern Ireland
are: family law, the law of property, the law of contract and the law of torts
(covering injuries suffered by one person at the hands of another irrespective of
any contract between them and including concepts such as negligence,
defamation and trespass). Other branches of the civil law include constitutional
and administrative (particularly concerned with the use of executive power),
industrial, maritime and ecclesiastical law. Scottish civil law has its own, often
analogous, branches.
A review body was set up in 1985 to consider improving the machinery of civil
justice in England and Wales. Its report was published in June 1988 and it
recommended reforms designed to reduce delays in the handling of cases,
ensure the best use of court resources and reduce the cost of litigation.
The limited civil jurisdiction of magistrates’ courts extends to matrimonial
proceedings for custody and maintenance orders, adoption orders and affilia¬
tion and guardianship orders. The courts also have jurisdiction regarding
nuisances under the public health legislation and the recovery of rates.
Committees of magistrates license public houses, betting shops and clubs.
The jurisdiction of the 274 county courts covers actions founded upon
contract and tort (with minor exceptions); trust and mortgage cases; and
actions for the recovery of land. Cases involving claims exceeding set limits may
130
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Appeals
Scotland
be tried in the county court by consent of the parties, or in certain circumstances
on transfer from the High Court.
Other matters dealt with by the county courts include hire purchase, the Rent
Acts, landlord and tenant, and adoption cases. Divorce cases are determined in
those courts designated as divorce county courts, and outside London bank¬
ruptcies are dealt with in certain county courts. The courts also deal with
complaints of race and sex discrimination. Where small claims are concerned
(especially those involving consumers), there are special arbitration facilities
and simplified procedures.
All judges of the Supreme Court (comprising the Court of Appeal, the Crown
Court and the High Court) and all circuit judges and recorders have power to sit
in the county courts, but each court has one or more circuit judges assigned to it
by the Lord Chancellor, and the regular sittings of the court are mostly taken by
them. The judge normally sits alone, although on request the court may,
exceptionally, order a trial with a jury.
The High Court of Justice is divided into the Chancery Division, the Queen’s
Bench Division and the Family Division. Its jurisdiction is both original and
appellate and covers civil and some criminal cases. In general, particular types of
work are assigned to a particular division. The Family Division, for instance, is
concerned with all jurisdiction affecting the family, including that relating to
adoption and guardianship. The Chancery Division deals with the interpreta¬
tion of wills and the administration of estates. Maritime and commercial law is
the responsibility of admiralty and commercial courts of the Queen’s Bench
Division. A consultative paper examining the issues involved in setting up a
unified jurisdiction in family and domestic matters—a single ‘family court’—was
published in mid-1986.
Each of the 80 or so judges of the High Court is attached to one division on
appointment but may be transferred to any other division while in office.
Outside London (where the High Court sits at the Royal Courts of Justice)
sittings are held at 26 county court centres. For the hearing of cases at first
instance, High Court judges sit alone. Appeals in civil matters from lower courts
are heard by courts of two (or sometimes three) judges, or by single judges of the
appropriate division, nominated by the Lord Chancellor.
Appeals in matrimonial, adoption and guardianship proceedings heard by
magistrates’ courts go to a divisional court of the Family Division of the High
Court. Affiliation appeals are heard by the Crown Court, as are appeals from
decisions of the licensing committees of magistrates. Appeals from the High
Court and county courts are heard in the Court of Appeal (Civil Division),
consisting of the Master of the Rolls and 27 Lords Justices of Appeal, and may go
on to the House of Lords, the final court of appeal in civil and criminal cases.
The judges in the House of Lords are the nine Lords of Appeal in Ordinary,
who must have a quorum of three, but usually sit as a group of five, and
sometimes even of seven. Lay peers do not attend the hearing of appeals (which
normally take place in a committee room and not in the legislative chamber), but
peers who hold or have held high judicial office may also sit. The president of the
House in its judicial capacity is the Lord Chancellor.
The main civil courts are the sheriff courts and the Court of Session. The civil
jurisdiction of the sheriff court extends to most kinds of action and is normally
unlimited by the value of the case. Much of the work is done by the sheriff,
against whose decisions an appeal may be made to the sheriff-principal or
directly to the Court of Session.
The Court of Session sits only in Edinburgh, and in general has jurisdiction to
deal with all kinds of action. The main exception is an action exclusive to the
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
131
Northern
Ireland
Civil
Proceedings
sheriff court, where the value claimed is less than a set amount. It is divided into
two parts: the Outer House, a court of first instance, and the Inner House,
mainly an appeal court. The Inner House is divided into two divisions of equal
status, each consisting of four judges—the first division being presided over by
the Lord President and the second division by the Lord Justice Clerk. Appeals to
the Inner House may be made from the Outer House and from the sheriff court.
From the Inner House an appeal may go to the House of Lords. The judges of the
Court of Session are the same as those of the High Court of Justiciary. The Lord
President of the Court of Session holds the office of Lord Justice General in the
High Court of Justiciary (see p 119).
The Scottish Land Court is a special court which deals exclusively with
matters concerning agriculture. Its chairman has the status and tenure of a
judge of the Court of Session and its other members are lay specialists in
agriculture.
Minor civil cases in Northern Ireland are dealt with in county courts, though
magistrates’ courts also deal with certain classes of civil case. The superior civil
law court is the High Court of Justice from which an appeal may be made to the
Court of Appeal. These two courts, together with the Crown Court, comprise the
Supreme Court of Judicature of Northern Ireland and their practice and
procedure are similar to those in England and Wales. The House of Lords is the
final civil appeal court.
In England and Wales civil proceedings are instituted by the aggrieved person;
no preliminary inquiry on the authenticity of the grievance is required. Actions
in the High Court are usually begun by a writ of summons served on the
defendant by the plaintiff, stating the nature of the claim. A defendant intending
to contest the claim informs the court. Documents setting out the precise
question in dispute (the pleadings) are then delivered to the court. County court
proceedings are initiated by a summons served on the defendant by the court;
subsequent procedure is simpler than in the High Court.
A decree of divorce must be pronounced in open court, but a procedure for
most undefended cases dispenses with the need to give evidence in court and
permits written evidence to be considered by the registrar.
Civil proceedings, as a private matter, can usually be abandoned or ended by
compromise at any time. Actions brought to court are usually tried without a
jury, except in defamation, false imprisonment, or malicious prosecution cases,
when either party may, except in certain special circumstances, insist on trial by
jury, or a fraud case, when the defendant may claim this right. The jury decides
questions of fact and damages awarded to the injured party; majority verdicts
may be accepted.
An action in a magistrates’ court is begun by a complaint on which the court
may serve the defendant with a summons. This contains details of the complaint
and the date on which it will be heard. Parties and witnesses give their evidence
at the court hearing. Domestic proceedings are normally heard by not more than
three lay justices including, where practicable, a woman; members of the public
are not allowed to be present. The court may order provision for custody, access
and supervision of children, as well as maintenance payments for spouses and
children.
Judgments in civil cases are enforceable through the authority of the court.
Most are for sums of money and may be enforced, in cases of default, by seizure
of the debtor’s goods or by a court order requiring an employer to make periodic
payments to the court by deduction from the debtor’s wages. Other judgments
can take the form of an injunction restraining someone from performing an
illegal act. Refusal to obey a judgment may result in imprisonment for contempt
132
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Restrictive
Practices Court
Administrative
Tribunals
of court. Arrest under an order of committal may be effected only on a warrant.
Normally the court orders the costs of an action to be paid by the party losing
it, but, in the case of family law maintenance proceedings, a magistrates’ court
can order either party to pay the whole or part of the other’s costs.
In Scotland proceedings in the Court of Session or ordinary actions in the
sheriff court are initiated by serving the defender with a summons (an initial
writ in the sheriff court). In Court of Session actions the next step is the
publication of the action in the court lists. A defender who intends to contest the
action must inform the court; if he or she does not appear, the court grants a
decree in absence in favour of the pursuer. In ordinary actions in the sheriff
court the defender is simply required to give a written notice of intention to
defend within a certain number of days after service of the initial writ, and this
is followed by a formal appearance in court by the parties to the dispute or their
solicitors.
In summary cases (involving small sums) in the sheriff court the procedure is
less formal. The statement of claim is incorporated in the summons. The
procedure is designed to enable most actions to be carried through without the
parties involved having to appear in court. Normally they (or their representa¬
tives) need appear only when an action is defended. A new small claims
procedure is about to be introduced.
Proceedings in Northern Ireland are similar to those in England and Wales.
County court proceedings are commenced by a civil bill served on the defendant;
there are no pleadings in the county court. Judgments of civil courts are
enforceable through a centralised procedure administered by the Enforcement
of Judgments Office.
The Restrictive Practices Court is a specialised United Kingdom court which
deals with monopolies and restrictive trade practices. It comprises five judges
and up to ten other people with expertise in industry, commerce or public life.
Administrative tribunals exercise judicial functions separate from the courts.
Generally, they are set up under statutory powers which govern their constitu¬
tion, functions and procedure. Compared with the courts, they tend to be more
accessible, less formal and less expensive. They also have expert knowledge in
their particular jurisdictions.
The expansion of the tribunal system in the United Kingdom is comparatively
recent, most tribunals having been set up since 1945. Independent of the
Government, tribunals rule on certain rights and obligations of private citizens
towards one another or towards a government department or other public
authority. A number of important tribunals decide disputes between private
citizens—for example, industrial tribunals have a major part to play in
employment disputes. Some (such as those concerned with social security)
resolve claims by private citizens against public authorities. A further group
(including tax tribunals) decide disputed claims by public authorities against
private citizens, while others decide issues and disputes which do not directly
affect financial rights or liabilities (such as the right to enter or visit the United
Kingdom).
Tribunal members are normally appointed by the minister concerned with the
subject, but other authorities have the power of appointment in some cases. For
example, the Lord Chancellor (and, in Scotland, the Lord President of the Court
of Session) makes most appointments where a lawyer chairman or member is
required.
In many tribunal jurisdictions, a two-tier system operates with an initial right
of appeal to a lower tribunal and a final right of appeal, usually on a point of law,
to a higher tribunal. Appeals on a point of law only from some of the higher
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
133
GOVERNMENT
RESPONSI¬
BILITIES
England and
Wales
tribunals may be made to the High Court in England and Wales, to the Court of
Session in Scotland, and to the Court of Appeal in Northern Ireland. There are a
few exceptions including, for example, immigration appeals where there is no
right of appeal directly from the Immigration Appeals Tribunal to the courts.
The Council on Tribunals (an independent body established in 1958)
exercises general supervision over most tribunals, advising on draft legislation
and rules of procedure, monitoring their activities and reporting on particular
matters. A Scottish Committee of the Council exercises the same function in
Scotland. The Council has a similar responsibility with regard to public
inquiries.
Administration of the Law
The United Kingdom judiciary is entirely independent of the Government and is
not subject to ministerial direction or control. Responsibility for the administra¬
tion of justice rests with the Lord Chancellor, the Home Secretary and the
Secretaries of State for Scotland and Northern Ireland. Also concerned is the
Prime Minister, who recommends the highest judicial appointments to the
Crown.
The Lord Chancellor is the head of the judiciary (and sometimes sits as a judge
in the House of Lords); he is concerned with court procedure and is responsible
for the administration of all courts other than magistrates' and coroners’ courts,
and for a number of administrative tribunals. He appoints magistrates, and has
general responsibility for the legal aid and advice schemes. He is also responsible
for the administration of civil law reform.
The Home Secretary is concerned with the criminal law, the police service,
prisons, and the probation and after-care service; and has general supervision
over magistrates’ courts, together with some specific responsibilities (such as
approving the appointment of justices’ clerks). Prison policy and the administra¬
tion of custodial centres are functions of the Home Office Prison Department,
and the Home Secretary appoints to each prison establishment a Board of
Visitors representing the local community who need to satisfy themselves as to
the state of prison premises, administration and treatment of inmates. They are
required to report to the Home Secretary any abuse or matter of concern which
comes to their attention. Boards have disciplinary powers in relation to serious
breaches of discipline and hear applications or complaints from inmates. The
Home Secretary is advised by a special Parole Board on the release of prisoners
on licence.
Responsibility for the treatment of offenders under 17 is shared between the
Home Office and the Department of Health. The Home Secretary is also
responsible for advising the Queen on the exercise of the royal prerogative of
mercy to pardon a person convicted of a crime or to remit all or part of a penalty
imposed by a court.
The Attorney General and the Solicitor General are the Government’s principal
advisers on English law, and represent the Crown in appropriate domestic and
international cases. They are senior barristers, elected members of the House of
Commons and hold ministerial posts. The Attorney General is also Attorney
General for Northern Ireland. As well as exercising various civil law functions,
the Attorney General has final responsibility for enforcing the criminal law; the
Director of Public Prosecutions is subject to the Attorney General’s superinten¬
dence. The Attorney General is concerned with instituting and prosecuting
certain types of criminal proceedings, but must exercise an independent
discretion, and must not be influenced by government colleagues. The Solicitor
General is, in effect, the deputy of the Attorney General.
134
Scotland
Northern
Ireland
THE
PERSONNEL
OF THE LAW
Judges
The Legal
Profession
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Secretary of State for Scotland recommends the appointment of all judges
other than the most senior ones, appoints the staff of the High Court of
Justiciary and the Court of Session, and is responsible for the composition,
staffing and organisation of the sheriff courts. District courts are staffed and
administered by the district and islands local authorities. The Secretary of State
is also responsible for the criminal law of Scotland, crime prevention, and the
police and the penal system, and is advised on parole matters by the Parole
Board for Scotland. The Secretary of State is also responsible for legal aid in
Scotland.
The Lord Advocate and the Solicitor General for Scotland are the chief legal
advisers to the Government on Scottish questions and the principal representa¬
tives of the Crown for the purposes of litigation in Scotland. Both are
government ministers. The Lord Advocate is closely concerned with questions of
legal policy and administration and is also responsible for the Scottish
parliamentary draftsmen. He has overall responsibility for the prosecution of
crime in Scotland and, although he holds a ministerial post, he must exercise an
independent discretion in carrying out this responsibility.
The administration of all courts is the responsibility of the Lord Chancellor,
while the Northern Ireland Office, under the Secretary of State, deals with the
police and the penal system. The Lord Chancellor has general responsibility for
the legal aid and advice scheme in Northern Ireland.
The courts of the United Kingdom are the Queen’s Courts since the Crown is the
historic source of all judicial power. The Queen, acting on the advice of
ministers, is responsible for all appointments to the judiciary.
Full-time judges do not engage in politics, except for the Lord Chancellor, who is
head of the judiciary, speaker of the House of Lords and a Cabinet minister. With
the exception of lay magistrates, judges are normally appointed from practising
barristers, advocates (in Scotland), or solicitors (see below). Lay magistrates in
England and Wales need no legal qualifications but on appointment undergo
basic training to give them sufficient knowledge of the law, including the rules of
evidence, and to enable them to understand the nature and purpose of
sentencing. The Scottish district court justices of the peace likewise need no
legal qualifications. In Northern Ireland members of a lay panel who serve in
juvenile courts undertake training courses; resident magistrates are drawn from
practising solicitors or barristers. In certain circumstances (for instance, in
cases of misconduct or proven incapacity) judges of the inferior courts may be
removed from their positions but, in order to safeguard the independence of the
judiciary from the executive, superior judges in England and Wales and
Northern Ireland (other than the Lord Chancellor who changes with the
Government) are subject to removal only by the Queen on an address presented
by both Houses of Parliament; in Scotland there is no statutory provision for
removing judges of the Court of Session or High Court of Justiciary from office
and special legislation would probably be needed to secure a dismissal.
The legal profession is divided into two branches: barristers (advocates in
Scotland) and solicitors. Barristers are known collectively as the ‘Bar’, and
collectively and individually as ‘counsel’. Solicitors undertake legal business for
individual and corporate clients, while barristers advise on legal problems
submitted through solicitors and present cases in the higher courts; certain
functions are common to both. Although people are free to conduct their
own cases, most people prefer to be legally represented in the more serious
cases.
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
135
LEGAL AID,
ADVICE AND
ASSISTANCE
Legal Advice
and Assistance
Aid in Civil
Proceedings
Aid in Criminal
Proceedings
The professional organisations for barristers are: the General Council of the
Bar (in England and Wales), the Faculty of Advocates (in Scotland), and the
General Council of the Bar of Northern Ireland and the Executive Council of the
Inn of Court of Northern Ireland. For solicitors they are: the Law Society of
England and Wales, the Law Society of Scotland and the Law Society of Northern
Ireland.
A person in need of legal advice or legal representation in court may qualify for
help with the costs out of public funds, either free or with a contribution
according to his or her means. Ministerial responsibility for legal aid rests with
the Lord Chancellor and, in Scotland, the Secretary of State for Scotland. Civil
legal aid schemes are administered by the Law Society (to be replaced in 1989 by
the Legal Aid Board), the Law Society of Northern Ireland and the Scottish Legal
Aid Board.
People whose income and savings are within certain limits are entitled to help
from a solicitor on any legal matter as it affects the applicant’s particular
circumstances. Such help includes advice on the relevant law, writing letters on
the client’s behalf, and taking the opinion of a barrister or advocate. In England
and Wales it may be extended to cover representation in civil proceedings in the
magistrates’ court. Mental Review Tribunal hearings and certain disciplinary
proceedings before prisons’ Boards of Visitors.
The scheme provides for initial work to be done up to a specified cost limit.
Legal aid, which covers representation before the court, may be available for
most civil proceedings to those who satisfy the financial eligibility conditions.
An applicant for legal aid must also show not only that he or she has reasonable
grounds for taking or defending proceedings but also that it is reasonable in all
the circumstances of the case that he or she should receive, or continue to
receive, legal aid. If legal aid is granted the case is conducted in the normal way
except that in England and Wales no money passes between the client and the
solicitor; all payments are made through the legal aid fund.
In certain limited circumstances the successful unassisted opponent of a
legally aided party may recover his or her costs in the case from the legal aid
fund. Where the assisted person recovers or preserves money or property in the
proceedings the legal aid fund may have a first charge on that money or property
to recover the sums it has expended on the assisted person’s behalf.
In criminal proceedings in England and Wales a legal aid order may be made by
the court concerned if it appears to be in the interests of justice and if a
defendant qualifies for financial help. An order must be made (subject to means)
when a person is committed for trial on a murder charge or where the prosecutor
appeals or applies for leave to appeal from the Court of Appeal (Criminal
Division) to the House of Lords. No person who is unrepresented can be given a
custodial sentence foi- the fir^t time unless given the opportunity to apply for
legal aid.
Under the Police and Criminal Evidence Act the Law Society makes arrange¬
ments for duty solicitors to be available at magistrates’ courts to provide initial
advice and representation to unrepresented defendants, and also for duty
solicitors to be available, on a 24-hour basis, to give advice and assistance to
suspects at police stations. The services of a duty solicitor are free.
The arrangements for aid in criminal proceedings in Northern Ireland are
broadly similar. In Scotland there is a duty solicitor scheme for accused people
in custody in sheriff and district court cases, and the ‘interests of justice’ test
applies only in summary cases, where decisions on applications for legal aid are
136
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Law Centres
LAW REFORM
taken by the Scottish Legal Aid Board. In Northern Ireland a duty solicitor
scheme has been introduced at the principal magistrates’ court in Belfast. Legal
aid for criminal cases in Scotland and Northern Ireland is free; the assisted
person is not required to make any contributions towards the cost of his or her
legal representation.
In a number of urban areas law centres provide free legal advice and
representation. These law centres, which are financed from various sources
often including local government authorities, usually employ full-time salaried
lawyers and many have community workers. Much of their time is devoted to
housing, employment, social security and immigration problems. Free advice is
also available in Citizens Advice Bureaux, consumer and housing advice centres
and in specialist advice centres run by various voluntary organisations.
While changes in the law are matters for Parliament, the duty of keeping the law
under review lies with the Law Reform Committee, the Criminal Law Revision
Committee and the Law Commission in England and Wales, and with the
Scottish Law Commission in Scotland. The Law Reform Committee and the
Criminal Law Revision Committee comprise judges and practising and
academic lawyers, appointed respectively by the Lord Chancellor and the Home
Secretary, to examine aspects of the civil and criminal law in England and Wales.
The Law Commission, a permanent body reporting to the Lord Chancellor and
consisting of a High Court judge and four other members who are required to be
practising or academic lawyers, scrutinises the law with a view to its systematic
development and reform, and its simplification and modernisation. The
Scottish Law Commission is similar, and reports to the Lord Advocate. Law
reform in Northern Ireland is a matter for the Law Commission and the Office of
Law Reform.
POLLUTION CONTROL
Scientists at the Electricity Council
Research Centre have developed a
highly efficient method of destroying
undesirable factory smells, using a
technique which combines ultra-violet
light and ozone gas.
Johnson Matthey is a major supplier of
autocatalysts, designed to tackle the
three primary pollutants from car
exhausts by converting them into
nitrogen, water and carbon dioxide.
URBAN REGENERATION
;
Nineteenth-
century
warehouses in
Liverpool’s Albert
Dock have been
converted into
shops, offices,
restaurants and
flats; others in the
same complex
house the Tate
Gallery Liverpool
and a maritime
museum.
An extensive
programme of
restoration is
providing new
housing in the
Merchant City, an
inner city area of
Glasgow.
CONSERVATION AND RESTORATION
Restoration work on one of
12 ceiling panels above the
nave of Ely Cathedral,
Cambridgeshire, where a
major conservation project
is in progress.
A new technique for
mounting mosaics devised
by the British Museum’s
Department of
Conservation employs
synthetic resin to provide a
strong but lightweight
backing.
Social Welfare
The British social welfare system comprises the National Health Service, the
personal social services and social security. The National Health Service provides
a comprehensive range of medical services which are available to all residents,
irrespective of means. Local authority personal social services and voluntary
organisations provide help and advice to elderly people, disabled people and
children in need of care. The social security system is designed to secure a basic
standard of living for people in financial need by providing income during
periods of inability to earn, help for families and assistance with costs arising
from disablement.
Central government is directly responsible for the National Health Service,
administered by health authorities and boards acting as its agents, and for the
social security system. It has an indirect responsibility for the personal social
services administered by local authorities. Joint finance and planning between
health and local authorities aims to prevent overlapping of services and to
encourage the development of community services.
Planned spending on social welfare in 1988-89 is: health £21,000 million and
personal social services £3,700 million (together representing 13 per cent of
general government expenditure); and social security benefits just over £46,000
million (30 per cent).
Expenditure on the health service has increased substantially in real terms
since 1980, and current spending is planned to grow further over the next two
years. More patients are now being treated than ever before. Spending on social
security is rising because of increased numbers of beneficiaries, especially
retirement pensioners, the long-term sick and disabled, and the unemployed,
and the value of retirement and most other long-term benefits has been
increased in real terms since 1980. Major reforms to the social security system
have been introduced under the Social Security Act 1986; these are designed to
provide a clearer, simpler system more capable of meeting genuine need (see
p 157). Spending on the personal social services is determined by local
authorities, and while constraints are placed by central government on the total
expenditure of individual local authorities, spending has risen subtantially in
real terms since the late 1970s, thus reflecting the priority given to this sector.
National Health Service
The National Health Service (NHS) is based upon the principle that there should
be a comprehensive range of publicly provided services designed to help the
individual stay healthy and to provide effective and appropriate treatment and
care where necessary while making the best use of available resources. All
taxpayers, employers and employees contribute to its cost so that those
members of the community who do not require health care help to pay for those
who do. Some forms of treatment, such as hospital care, are provided free of
charge; others (see p 139) may be charged for.
Growth in real spending on the health service is being used to meet the needs
of increasing numbers of elderly people (over 45 per cent of health authority
expenditure on hospital and community services is spent on care of the elderly);
to take full advantage of advances in medical technology and to remedy shortfalls
138
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
ADMINIS¬
TRATION
in such areas as renal services; to provide more appropriate types of care, often
in the community rather than in hospital, for priority groups such as the elderly,
the mentally ill and people with mental handicaps; to combat the growing health
problems arising from alcohol and drug misuse; and to remedy disparities in
provision between the regions of Britain.
The Government emphasises the importance of preventive health services,
and the responsibility of individuals for their own health. While great progress
has been made in eliminating infectious diseases such as poliomyelitis and
tuberculosis, there has been less success in controlling the major causes of early
death and disability—heart disease, cancer and stroke. Most recently the threat
of AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome, see p 147) has proved a
serious problem to public health. Because of the close link between such
diseases and individual life-styles or social habits, emphasis is placed on helping
people to adopt healthier ways of living through education and other policies. A
£3-8 million campaign was launched in 1987 to inform the public of the main
risks of heart disease.
The Government stresses the need for a partnership between the public and
private health sectors and for improving efficiency in order to secure the best
value for money and the maximum patient care. In order to secure more effective
management of resources in the National Health Service, general managers
drawn from inside and outside the Service have been appointed at regional,
district and unit levels. Further measures have included improving the
accountability of health authorities for the way in which they plan and manage
their resources, increasing the proportion of total staff who provide direct
patient care, such as doctors and nurses, and the introduction of a range of
programmes to provide existing services at lower cost. Considerable savings—
£105 million in 1987—have been generated through the policy of putting
hospital cleaning, catering and laundry services out to competitive tender.
Economies are also made in prescribing by restricting the use of expensive
branded products in favour of cheaper but equally effective generic equivalents.
A wide-ranging internal review of the NHS was announced in January 1988.
Chaired by the Prime Minister, this will examine the resources, state and
management of the Service.
The health ministers (the Secretary of State for Health in England and the
Secretaries of State for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland) are respon¬
sible for all aspects of the health services in their respective countries. The
health departments (the Department of Health1 in England, the Scottish Home
and Health Department, the Welsh Office and the Department of Health and
Social Services in Northern Ireland) are responsible for national strategic
planning. District health authorities in England and Wales and health boards in
Scotland are responsible for planning and operational control of all health
services in their areas. England, because of its greater size and population, has a
tier of regional authorities responsible for regional planning, resource alloca¬
tion, major capital building work and certain specialised hospital services best
administered on a regional basis. The authorities and boards co-operate closely
with local authorities responsible for social work, environmental health,
education and other services. Family practitioner committees (health boards in
Scotland), accountable to the Secretary of State, arrange for the provision of
services by doctors, dentists, pharmacists and opticians. Community health
councils represent local opinion on the health services provided. (In Scotland
this function is exercised by local health councils.)
1 In July 1988 the former Department of Health and Social Security was divided into two separate
departments—the Department of Health and the Department of Social Security, each with its own
Secretary of State.
SOCIAL WELFARE
139
Health Service
Commissioners
Finance
PRIMARY
HEALTH
CARE
In Northern Ireland health and social services boards are responsible for all
health and personal social services in their areas. The representation of public
opinion on these services is provided for by district committees.
There are three Health Service Commissioner posts (for England, Scotland and
Wales) for dealing with complaints from members of the public about the health
service. All three posts are held by the Parliamentary Commissioner for
Administration (Ombudsman). The jurisdiction of the Health Service Commis¬
sioner covers the failure of a health authority or family practitioner committee to
carry out its statutory duties, a failure in a service provided, or maladministra¬
tion causing injustice or hardship, but not actions taken solely in the exercise of
clinical judgment or the actions of family practitioners, for which separate
complaints procedures exist. The Commissioner reports annually to ministers
who lay the reports before Parliament, and may make other reports when
necessary. In Northern Ireland the Commissioner for Complaints has a similar
role.
About 83 per cent of the cost of the health service in Great Britain is paid for
through general taxation; the rest is met from the National Health Service
contribution paid with the National Insurance contribution and from the
charges towards the cost of certain items such as drugs prescribed by a family
doctor, and dental treatment. Health authorities may raise funds from voluntary
sources. Certain hospitals increase their revenue by taking private patients who
pay the full cost of their accommodation and treatment.
The charges for medical prescriptions do not apply to children under 16 years
(or students under 19 and still in full-time education), expectant mothers and
women who have had a baby in the last 12 months, women aged 60 and over and
men aged 65 and over, patients suffering from certain specified medical
conditions, war and armed forces disablement pensioners (for treatment of their
disability), people in receipt of income support or family credit (see p 163) and
families with low incomes. Around 75 per cent of prescription items are supplied
free of charge. Some groups of patients receive entirely free dental treatment, for
example, women who are pregnant or who have had a baby in the last year,
anyone under the age of 18, or 19 if in full-time education, and people receiving
income support or family credit. Patients with low incomes may have their
charges remitted. Some groups also receive grants towards the cost of
spectacles.
Hospital medical staffs are salaried and may be employed full time or part
time. Hospital doctors may accept private patients. Family practitioners
(doctors, dentists, opticians and pharmacists) are self-employed contractors.
Family doctors (also known as general practitioners) are paid by a system of fees
and allowances designed to reflect responsibilities, workload and practice
expenses. Dentists providing treatment in their own surgeries are paid on a
prescribed scale of fees. Pharmacists dispensing on their own premises are
reimbursed for the cost of the items supplied together with professional fees.
Ophthalmic medical practitioners and ophthalmic opticians taking part in the
general ophthalmic service receive approved fees for each sight test made.
A new initiative for generating additional income for health authorities was
launched in early 1988. Legislation is before Parliament to clarify health
authorities’ powers to act in a more commercial manner in selling facilities and
services for non-NHS use to the public and outside organisations.
Primary health care is offered by doctors, dentists, opticians and pharmacists
working within the Service as independent practitioners, and by health visitors,
district nurses and midwives employed by the health authorities. A wide range
140
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Family
Practitioner
Services
Health Visitors,
District
Nurses and
Midwives
Group Practices
and Health
Centres
of other services is also available, including the school health service and the
chiropody service. The remedial professions of physiotherapy, occupational
therapy and speech therapy are making an increasingly important contribution
to primary care.
There have been substantial increases in primary health care staff in recent
years; for example, in England between 1979 and 1987 the number of family
doctors increased by 17 per cent (and by 19 per cent in Wales), with 55 per cent
more support staff in general practice; dentists increased by 22 per cent (27 per
cent in Wales) and opticians by nearly 11 per cent (18 per cent in Wales). In 1986
nursing and midwifery staff in primary care stood at 42,200 with 134 per cent
more nurses specialising in mental illness and nearly 400 per cent more in
mental handicapped services. The trend in Scotland has been similar.
Special funds have been earmarked by the Government for improving the
quality of primary health care in inner city areas.
The first comprehensive review of primary health care services has recently
been completed. Following a period of consultation, the Government issued a
White Paper, Promoting Better Health, in late 1987 setting out plans for
improvement. These are to make the services more responsive to the needs and
wishes of the consumer and to raise the quality and quantity of the services
available; to promote health and prevent illness; and to improve value for money.
The family practitioner services are those given to patients by doctors, dentists,
opticians and pharmacists of their own choice. Family doctors provide the first
diagnosis in the case of illness and either prescribe a suitable course of
treatment or refer a patient to the more specialised services and hospital
consultants. Only ophthalmic medical practitioners and ophthalmic opticians
may test sight; patients requiring treatment for a defect in sight or an eye
disease are dealt with through the Hospital Eye Service. Spectacles are supplied
by registered ophthalmic and dispensing opticians but unregistered opticians
may also sell spectacles to adults under carefully prescribed conditions.
Children, those on low incomes and people requiring complex lenses are
provided with vouchers which may be exchanged for low-priced spectacles or put
towards the cost of higher-priced frames.
Health visitors are responsible for the preventive care and health education of all
families, particularly those with young children. They work closely with general
practitioners, district nurses and other professions. District nurses give skilled
nursing care to people at home or elsewhere outside hospital; they also play an
important role in preventive care and health education. Although almost all
babies are born in hospital, some antenatal care and most postnatal care is
given in the community by midwives and general practitioners, who also care for
women having their babies at home. All midwives are responsible for educating
and supporting women and their families during the childbearing period.
About four-fifths of family doctors in Britain work in partnerships or group
practices, often as members of primary health-care teams which also include
health visitors and district nurses and sometimes midwives, social workers and
other professional staff. About a quarter in Great Britain and over a half in
Northern Ireland work in modern and well-equipped health centres, where
medical and nursing services are provided. Health centres may also have
facilities for health education, family planning, speech therapy, chiropody,
assessment of hearing, physiotherapy and remedial exercises. Dental, pharma¬
ceutical and ophthalmic services, hospital out-patient and supporting social
work services may also be provided.
SOCIAL WELFARE
141
HOSPITALS
AND
SPECIALIST
SERVICES
Private
Medical
Treatment
A full range of hospital services is provided by district general hospitals
including treatment and diagnostic facilities for in-patients, day-patients and
out-patients, maternity departments, infectious disease units, psychiatric and
geriatric facilities, rehabilitation facilities, convalescent homes and all forms of
specialised treatment. There are also specialist hospitals or units for children,
people suffering from mental illness or mental handicaps and elderly people, and
for the treatment of specific diseases; examples include the world-famous
Hospital for Sick Children, Great Ormond Street, and the Brompton Heart and
Chest Hospital in London. Hospitals designated as teaching hospitals combine
treatment facilities with training medical and other students, and research
work.
Many of the hospitals in the NHS were built in the nineteenth century; some
trace their origins to much earlier charitable foundations, such as the famous
St Bartholomew's and St Thomas’ hospitals in London. Much has been done to
improve and extend existing buildings and many new hospitals have been or are
being opened. Since 1979 in England over 270 health building schemes, each
costing £1 million or more, have been started and completed. Nearly 500
schemes, worth in total £3,500 million, are at various stages of planning, design
and construction. Of these, about 140 schemes costing a total of some £900
million are planned for completion over the next three years. In Scotland 53
major health building schemes, providing over 6,000 beds, have been completed
since 1979. A further 33 schemes are at various stages of development.
Recent policy in England and Wales has been to provide a well-balanced
hospital service centred around a district general hospital complemented as
necessary by smaller, locally based hospitals and facilities.
The latest development in hospital planning in England is the nucleus
hospital designed to accommodate a comprehensive range of district general
hospital facilities and capable of being built and commissioned in self-contained
phases or as an extension to an existing hospital. Many nucleus hospitals are
being developed and those already open have proved economical to build and are
providing high-quality and cost-effective services to patients. The world’s first
low-energy nucleus hospital, which is expected to use less than half the energy of
a conventional nucleus hospital, is under construction on the Isle of Wight. A
similar hospital is planned for Northumberland.
National Health Service hospitals provide nearly half a million beds and in
England have over 393,000 medical, dental, nursing and midwifery staff. The
hospital service is now treating more patients a year than ever before: in
England between 1978 and 1986 the number of in-patient cases treated rose by
over 1 million (19 per cent); the number of day case attendances by 476,000 (88
per cent); and there were 3-64 million (13 per cent) more out-patient
attendances. Newer forms of treatment and diagnosis, such as kidney dialysis,
hip replacements, laser treatment for certain eye conditions, and body
scanning, are being made more widely available.
In mid-1986 the Government launched a three-year drive to reduce hospital
waiting lists and times and has set up a fund of £55 million over two years to
finance a variety of projects, including mobile operating theatres and the
purchase of equipment, to improve waiting times for patients.
Community services such as the psychiatric nursing service, day hospitals,
and local authority day centres have expanded so that more patients remain in
the community and others are discharged sooner from hospital.
It is the Government’s policy to encourage the private sector to meet a larger
share of the nation s health needs in the belief that this will benefit the National
Health Service by adding to the total resources devoted to health care for all
people and offering flexibility to health authorities in the delivery of services.
142
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Organ
Transplants
Blood
Transfusion
Some health authorities share expensive facilities and equipment with private
hospitals, and NHS patients are sometimes treated (at public expense) in the
private sector to reduce waiting lists. The scale of private practice in relation to
the NHS is, however, small. Seven per cent of acute hospital beds are in private
hospitals, and approximately 3,000 beds in health service hospitals in Britain
are authorised for the treatment of private patients. It is estimated that about
three-quarters of those receiving acute treatment in private hospitals or hospital
pay-beds are covered by provident schemes which make provision for private
health care in return for annual subscriptions. Over 2-5 million people
subscribe to such schemes, the majority of them being involved in group
schemes, some arranged by firms on behalf of employees. Subscriptions often
cover more than one person (for example, members of a family) and the total
number of people covered by private medical insurance in Britain is estimated at
nearly 5-5 million. Private practice is also undertaken by family doctors and
dentists. Many overseas patients come to Britain for treatment in private
hospitals and clinics, and Harley Street in London is an internationally
recognised centre for medical consultancy.
There is growing interest in alternative therapies such as homeopathy,
osteopathy and acupuncture, which are mainly practised outside the NHS.
Over the past 25 years there have been significant developments in transplant
surgery in Britain. The United Kingdom Transplant Service provides a
centralised organ matching and distribution service. At the end of 1986 about
6,800 people were living with functioning kidney transplants and during 1987
just under 1,500 kidney transplants were performed. In 1983 a similar service
was initiated for corneas, about 1,750 being transplanted each year. Heart
transplant operations have been conducted at Papworth Hospital in Cam¬
bridgeshire since 1979 and at Harefield Hospital, West London, since 1980. A
third heart transplant centre was opened at the Freeman Hospital in Newcastle
upon Tyne in 1986 and a fourth centre was established at Wythenshawe
Hospital, Manchester, in 1988. By the end of 1987 over 800 transplants had
been performed, the one-year survival rate being 80 per cent. A programme of
combined heart and lung transplants is in progress at Harefield and Papworth,
some 170 having been performed in 1987, while the world's first combined
heart, lungs and liver transplant operation was carried out at Papworth in early
1987. About 170 liver transplants were also performed in 1987. Other organs
and tissues now being transplanted include the pancreas and bone marrow. A
voluntary organ donor card system enables people to indicate their willingness
to become organ donors in the event of their death. Several million people now
participate in the scheme.
The blood transfusion service collects over 2 million donations of blood and over
65,000 donations of plasma each year from voluntary unpaid donors. Regional
transfusion centres recruit donors and organise donor sessions in towns and
villages, factories and offices, and within the armed forces. Donors must be
between the ages of 18 and 65. The centres are also responsible for blood
grouping and testing, maintaining blood banks, providing a consultancy service
to hospitals, teaching in medical schools, and instructing doctors, nurses and
technicians. Central laboratories manufacture blood products and undertake
research. While the use of whole blood for transfusions remains an important
part of the Service's work, there is increasing emphasis on the most efficient and
effective use of blood and in particular its separation into components such as
plasma for specific uses. A new blood products laboratory at Elstree, Hertford¬
shire, was opened in 1987 with the aim of making England and Wales
self-sufficient by the end of 1988.
SOCIAL WELFARE
143
Ambulance
Services
Rehabilitation
Hospices
Parents and
Children
Where necessaiy on medical grounds free transport by ambulance is provided by
the health authorities. The ambulance service performs emergency work,
dealing with sudden illness, urgent maternity cases, and accidents of all kinds;
and non-urgent work, providing transport for people needing out-patient
treatment at hospitals, clinics and day hospitals. In some areas the service for
non-urgent cases is augmented by voluntary organisations using their own
vehicles or by volunteers using their own cars. In Scotland an air ambulance
service is available in the islands and in the remoter parts of the mainland.
Rehabilitation begins at the onset of illness or injury and continues throughout
with the aim of helping people to adjust to changes in life-style and to live as
normally as possible. It is especially important for elderly, young, disabled,
mentally ill and mentally handicapped people who need such help to resume life
in the community. Rehabilitation activities are carried out in hospitals, centres
in the community and in people's own homes through co-ordinated work by a
range of professional workers including doctors, nurses, physiotherapists,
occupational therapists, speech therapists, hearing therapists, clinical psycho¬
logists, dietitians and social workers. These staff may also work closely with the
disablement resettlement service of the Department of Employment (the
Department of Economic Development in Northern Ireland), housing, education
and social services departments of local authorities, and with the voluntary
sector. J
Medical services may provide, free of charge, artificial limbs and eyes, hearing
aids, surgical supports, wheelchairs, and other appliances. Following assess¬
ment, very severely physically handicapped patients may be provided with
environmental control equipment which enables them to operate devices such
as alarm bells, radio and television, a telephone, and heating appliances.
Nursing aids may be provided on loan for use in the home.
Local authorities may provide a range of facilities to help patients in the
transition from hospital to their own homes, including the provision of aids and
adaptations, domiciliaiy care from home helps, and professional help from
occupational therapists and social workers. Voluntary organisations also
provide valuable help in complementing the work of the statutory agencies and
in widening the range of available services.
A number of hospices provide care for the dying (including children) either
directly in residential homes or through nursing and other assistance in the
patient s own home. Control of symptoms and psychological support for patients
and their families form the central features of the modern hospice movement,
which originated in Britain and is now world-wide. Some hospices are
administered entirely by the NHS; the remainder, some of which receive support
from public funds, are run by independent charities. The Government is
encouraging a greater co-operation between the voluntary sector and health
authorities in this field.
Special preventive services are provided under the health service to safeguard
the health of expectant mothers and mothers with young children. Services
include free dental treatment, dried milk and vitamins; health education, which
is available to parents before and after childbirth through talks, discussion
groups and demonstrations; and vaccination and immunisation of children
against certain infectious diseases (see p 148). Pregnant women are given
antenatal care by their family doctor and hospital clinics, and working women
have the right to visit the clinics during working hours. Some 98 per cent of
women have their babies in hospital, returning home shortly afterwards to be
attended by the family doctor, a midwife and a health visitor. The Government
144
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Human
Fertilisation
and
Embryology
Family
Planning
attaches great importance to improving the quality of maternity services, and to
making them more sensitive to the needs and wishes of mothers and their
families. In Wales a special two-year initiative to identify significant causes of
perinatal mortality and to stimulate improvements in maternity and neonatal
care has resulted in over 50 recommendations for action which the NHS in Wales
has been asked to implement. The perinatal mortality rate (the number of
stillbirths and deaths in the first week of life) has fallen in recent years and in
1986 stood at 9-5 per thousand births in England and Wales, compared with
15-5 per thousand in 1978. In Scotland the rate fell from 15-4 to 10-2 per
thousand births in the same period.
A network of child health clinics run by district health authorities, and also by
some general practices, provides facilities for surveillance by doctors, dentists
and health visitors of the physical and mental health and development of
pre-school children. Information on preventive services is given and welfare
foods are distributed. About 95 per cent of babies under one year are taken to
the clinics. The school health service offers health care and advice for
schoolchildren, including medical surveillance and dental inspection and
treatment where necessary.
Child guidance and child psychiatric services provide help and advice for
children with psychological or emotional problems.
In recent years special efforts have been made to improve co-operation
between the community-based child health services and local authority social
services for children. This is particularly important in the prevention of child
abuse and for the health and welfare of children in care.
The birth of the world's first ‘test-tube baby’ in Britain in 1978, using the
technique of in vitro fertilisation, opened up new horizons for the alleviation of
infertility and for the science of embryology, but also gave rise to unease at the
apparently uncontrolled advances of science and the new possibilities of
manipulating the early stages of human development. In view of this public
concern, a committee of inquiry was established in 1982 under Baroness
Warnock to examine the social, ethical and legal implications of developments in
this field. Reporting in 1984, the committee concluded that certain specialised
forms of infertility treatment, including artificial insemination by donor and in
vitro fertilisation, were ethically acceptable, but that surrogate motherhood (the
practice whereby one woman bears a child for another) organised by agencies
should be prohibited; that research on human embryos was acceptable, but only
up to the fourteenth day after fertilisation; and that a licensing authority should
be established to regulate infertility services and research. Following the first
birth to be arranged by a commercial surrogacy agency in Britain in January
1985, legislation to ban commercial surrogacy agencies, and advertising of or for
surrogacy services, was passed later that year. Following the issue of a
consultative document in 1986, the Government published a White Paper,
Human Fertilisation and Embryology: A Framework for Legislation, in late 1987.
This contains proposals for implementing the main recommendations of the
Warnock report, including the setting up of a licensing authority to regulate
certain infertility treatments and giving Parliament a free vote on whether to ban
human embryo research or to allow it under strict controls. The Government has
announced its intention to legislate on these issues during the present
Parliament. If implemented, these proposals would constitute one of the most
comprehensive and wide-ranging pieces of legislation on this subject in the
world
Free iamily planning facilities are available through family planning clinics,
hospitals and a domiciliary service. Most family doctors provide a similar service
for women only.
SOCIAL WELFARE
145
Abortion
Drug
Misuse
The Abortion Act 1967 allows the termination of pregnancy by a registered
doctor if two registered doctors consider that its continuance would involve a
greater risk to the life of the pregnant woman (or of injury to her physical qr
mental health or that of any existing children in the family) than if th6
pregnancy were ended. Termination may also be allowed if two doctors consider
there is a substantial risk that if the child were born it would suffer from such
physical or mental abnormalities as to be seriously handicapped. Abortions are
carried out in NHS hospitals or in private premises approved for the purpose by
the Secretary of State. Over half of the 156,200 legal abortions to women
resident in England and Wales in 1987 were performed in private hospitals and
clinics; in Scotland, 98 per cent of abortions take place in NHS hospitals. The
Act does not apply in Northern Ireland.
The growing misuse of dangerous drugs such as heroin and cocaine has
emerged as a serious social and health problem and the Government has made
the fight against such misuse a major priority. Its strategy comprises action to
reduce the supply of illicit drugs from abroad; to provide even more effective law
enforcement by the police and customs services; to tighten controls on drugs
produced and supplied in Britain; to increase the deterrent effects of the law; to
develop effective programmes to treat and rehabilitate misusers; and to
discourage young people from experimenting with drugs. An interdepartmental
ministerial group on the misuse of drugs was established in 1984 to oversee,
develop and review the implementation of this strategy. As part of its prevention
policy, the Government opened a major publicity campaign in 1985 to dissuade
young people from drug-taking and to advise parents, teachers and other
professional staff on how to recognise and combat the problem. In 1987 the
campaign was developed to warn of the risks of transmitting the AIDS virus (see
p 147) through the sharing of injecting equipment (see below). Over £17-5
million has been provided for local treatment and rehabilitation projects for up
to six years and an additional £6-5 million has been made available in 1988—89
through the health authorities in England for the further expansion of services
for drug misusers. This includes £1 million to enable services to respond to the
spread of HIV infection among drug misusers. Similar projects are in progress in
Wales where £2-8 million has been provided for voluntary groups and health
authorities since 1985, and a separate programme is in progress in Scotland
where about £2-8 million has been provided for locally based drug projects since
1985. A number of trial schemes—subject to careful safeguards and
monitoring—are in progress involving the counselling of drug misusers and the
exchange of clean for used injecting equipment, since the sharing of equipment
is one of the major ways by which the AIDS virus is spread among drug misusers
and from them to the general population. The Government has set up a drugs
advisory service to advise district health authorities on the development of
facilities in their areas, and has made funds available for local education
authorities in England and Wales to appoint staff to promote and co-ordinate
preventive work in their areas. Separate measures have been introduced in
Scotland to discourage drug misuse through publicity campaigns and action in
the education service and the community.
Treatment for drug dependence is mainly provided on an out-patient basis.
Many hospitals provide specialist treatment for drug misusers, mainly in
psychiatric units, or have special drug treatment units. Some drug misusers
have a period of in-patient treatment when necessary. An increasing number of
family doctors also treat drug misusers but only certain specialist doctors are
licensed to prescribe heroin, cocaine and dipipanone (Diconal). All doctors have
a duty to notify the authorities of any patient they consider to be addicted to
certain controlled drugs, and guidelines on good medical practice in the
146
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Solvent Misuse
Smoking
treatment of drug misuse have been issued to all doctors in Great Britain. The
Home Secretary has statutory powers for dealing with doctors found to have
prescribed irresponsibly.
A number of non-statutory agencies work with and complement the health
service provision; advice and rehabilitation services including residential
facilities, for example, are provided mainly by voluntary organisations. Support
in the community is provided by the probation service and local social services
departments.
Research on various aspects of drug misuse is funded by several government
departments.
The Government is advised on a wide range of matters relating to drug misuse
and connected social problems by the Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs.
Action is also being taken by the Government to curb the incidence of solvent
abuse (the inhaling of vapour from glue, lighter fuel and other solvents) by young
people. Voluntary guidelines were drawn up in 1983 in co-operation with
retailers to curb the sale of solvents, and legislation passed in Scotland added
solvent misuse to the list of grounds on which a child may be considered to need
compulsory care. In 1985 legislation was passed making it an offence in England
and Wales to supply such substances to children under 18 knowing or having
reason to believe they are to be used to cause intoxication. (Such sales have been
prosecuted successfully under common law in Scotland.) In 1987 a campaign
aimed at retailers was launched, with government support, to explain the
legislation and give advice on the sale of solvent-based products. Information
and guidance material have been distributed to parents, teachers and other
professional workers to help them educate young people on the dangers of the
habit and dissuade them from experimenting.
Cigarette smoking is the greatest preventable cause of illness and death in
Britain. It accounts for no fewer than 100,000 premature deaths each year and
costs the NHS an estimated £500 million a year for the treatment of diseases
attributable to smoking (for example, heart disease, lung cancer and bronchi¬
tis). Concerned at these harmful effects, the Government is following an active
health education policy based on advice and education, supported by voluntary
agreements with the tobacco industry aimed at reducing the level of smoking.
National publicity and media campaigns form the main thrust of official
efforts to discourage smoking. Work is in progress on a campaign to discourage
smoking by young people. The Government also supports the work of the
voluntary organisation Action on Smoking and Health (ASH), and supports the
voluntary restriction on smoking in trains, buses, theatres and other public
places. Health authorities have been encouraged to promote non-smoking as the
normal practice on health service premises and to give help and advice to people
who want to give up smoking.
Voluntary agreements between the Government and the tobacco industry
regulate the advertising and promotion of tobacco products, tobacco product
modification and sports sponsorship by the industry. A new agreement on
tobacco advertising came into effect in 1986. This provides for the use of six
different health warnings about the dangers of smoking. It also contains
measures to protect particularly vulnerable groups, such as children, young
people and young women in early childbearing years, and provides a mechanism
for monitoring implementation of the agreement. Cigarette advertising is
banned on television and radio by law. The 1986 Protection of Children
(Tobacco) Act makes the sale of any type of tobacco product to children illegal. In
1987 a new voluntary agreement on sports sponsorship came into force. This
covers levels of overall expenditure, restrictions on sponsorship of events
principally for spectators under 18 years and controls over the siting of signs at
SOCIAL WELFARE
147
Alcohol
Misuse
AIDS
televised events. Proposals to ban certain oral tobacco products known to be
causally linked with oral cancer have been announced.
The proportion of adults in Great Britain who smoke cigarettes continues to
fall. Among men this fell from 46 per cent in 1976 to 35 per cent in 1986; among
women it fell from 38 per cent in 1976 to 31 per cent in 1986.
The far-reaching effects of alcohol misuse in terms of illness, family disruption,
inefficiency at work, loss of earnings, accidents and crime are widely acknow¬
ledged. The Government considers that the reduction of such misuse requires a
range of action by central and local government, voluntary and community
bodies, the health professions, business and trade unions. Of great importance
is the need for individuals to recognise and accept responsibility for their own
health, while attempts to influence the minority who misuse alcohol must, to be
realistic, respect the freedom of the majority who use alcohol responsibly.
The Government believes that emphasis should be placed on policies to
prevent alcohol misuse and continues to seek better information about the
causes of problem drinking, to encourage healthier life-styles, and to provide
earlier identification and help for the problem drinker.
Treatment and rehabilitation include in-patient and out-patient services in
general and mental hospitals and specialised alcoholism treatment units.
Primary care teams (general practitioners, nurses and social workers) and
voluntary organisations providing hostels, day centres and counselling services
also play an important role. There is close co-operation between statutory and
voluntary organisations, and the national voluntary agency. Alcohol Concern,
which received a government grant of £520,000 in 1987-88, plays a prominent
role in prevention of misuse, training for professional and voluntary workers
and improving the network of local voluntary agencies and their collaboration
with statutory bodies. The Scottish Council on Alcohol undertakes similar
activities in Scotland. Research and surveys on various aspects of alcohol
misuse are funded by several government departments.
In 1987 the Government established an interdepartmental group to review
and develop strategy for combating the misuse of alcohol. Measures planned
include legislative changes as well as steps to secure better health education and
more effective action by local services and organisations. Legislation came into
force in August 1988 to strengthen the law prohibiting the sale of alcohol to
people under 18 years.
Government measures to limit the spread of the disease AIDS (Acquired Immune
Deficiency Syndrome) have included steps to maintain the safety of blood and
blood products through publicity aimed at blood donors, the screening of blood
donations and the heat treatment of blood products for haemophiliacs, and the
launch in late 1986 of a £20 million public education campaign. This involved
national press, television, radio, cinema and poster advertising, a free national
telephone advisory service and the delivery of leaflets to all households in
Britain. In early 1988 two new campaigns were launched, one aimed at the
general population and the other at people travelling on business both in Britain
and overseas. The Government has made additional funding available to health
authorities for treatment and counselling services, experimental needle ex¬
change schemes for drug misusers (see p 145) and training counsellors. A grant
of £10 million to the Haemophilia Society has established a trust fund (the
Macfarlane Trust) to help haemophiliacs in Britain who have become infected
with the AIDS virus as a result of treatment with infected blood products. In
early 1987 the launch of a new £14-5 million research programme was
announced; this aims to develop both a vaccine to prevent HIV infection and new
anti-viral drugs to treat people already infected. A new drug ‘Retrovir’
(zidovudine-AZT), which can prolong the life and improve the health of some
148
Infectious
Diseases
Cancer
Screening
Health
Education
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
AIDS sufferers, has been developed by a British pharmaceutical company. A
number of voluntary agencies, among them the Terrence Higgins Trust and the
London Lighthouse project, are active in promoting knowledge about the
disease and counselling people with AIDS. The voluntary sector receives
financial support from the Government.
Britain also plays an active role in international efforts to combat the spread of
AIDS. Following a British initiative at the European Council in London in
December 1986, the European Community decided to exchange information
about the spread of the disease, its prevention and treatment, and to consider
what further co-operative measures should be taken by member states and the
scope for further co-operation in research. Britain fully supports the work of the
World Health Organisation (WHO) in leading and co-ordinating the international
fight against the disease, and in 1988 gave £4-5 million to WHO’s global
programme on AIDS to help developing countries set up national AIDS control
programmes. Britain is also giving about £1-6 million over three years to the
International Planned Parenthood Federation for AIDS-related activities.
Britain also gives bilateral support to the AIDS control programmes of other
countries. In January 1988 Britain and the WHO organised jointly the World
Summit of Ministers of Health on Programmes for AIDS Prevention which
issued the London Declaration stressing the need for governments to take
urgent action in the face of the global threat from AIDS, the central role of
education and the need to protect human rights.
District health authorities (health boards in Scotland) carry out programmes of
immunisation against diphtheria, measles, rubella (women of child-bearing age
and girls only), poliomyelitis, tetanus, tuberculosis and whooping cough. A new
combined vaccine against measles, mumps and rubella is to be introduced in
October 1988. Immunisation is voluntary. Parents are encouraged to protect
their children since the benefits of immunisation far outweigh the small risk of
adverse reactions. The proportion of children being vaccinated has been
increasing since the end of 1978 following an earlier decline.
The Public Health Laboratory Service provides a network of bacteriological and
virological laboratories throughout England and Wales which conduct research
and assist in the diagnosis, prevention and control of communicable diseases.
Its largest establishment is the recently rebuilt Central Public Health Laboratory
at Colindale, in north-west London, which includes the National Collection of
Type Cultures, the Food Hygiene Laboratory, and reference laboratories
specialising in the identification of infective micro-organisms. Two surveillance
centres, one in England and one in Scotland, investigate and monitor human
communicable diseases. Microbiological work in Scotland and Northern Ireland
is conducted mainly in hospital laboratories.
The cervical screening programme aims to reduce deaths from cancer of the
cervix by inviting women at risk to be screened regularly to identify and treat
conditions that might develop into cancer. All health authorities have had
computerised call and recall systems for women aged between 20 and 64 for
cervical cancer screening since 1988. The Government is setting up a
nation-wide breast cancer screening service for all women aged between 50 and
64. Each region had brought at least one centre into operation by 1988, and it is
planned to extend the service to cover all eligible women in England, Wales and
Northern Ireland by 1990 (and in Scotland by 1991).
Health education in England is promoted by the Health Education Authority, an
integral part of the National Health Service with the major executive responsi¬
bility and appropriate budget for public education in Britain about the disease
SOCIAL WELFARE
149
Healthier
Eating
ENVIRON¬
MENTAL
HEALTH
Safety of Food
AIDS (see p 147). In addition, in England the Health Education Authority’s
functions are to advise the Government on health education, plan and carry out
national, regional or local programmes in co-operation with health authorities
and other bodies concerned with health education, sponsor research and
evaluation, assist the provision of training, publish and distribute material and
provide a national centre of information and advice on health education. In
Wales these functions are undertaken by the Welsh Health Promotion Authority.
Health education in Scotland is promoted by the Scottish Health Education
Group. New arrangements for health education support services in Northern
Ireland are being considered.
Almost all health authorities now have their own health education service,
which works closely with health professionals, health visitors, community
groups, local employers and others to determine the most suitable local
programmes. Increased resources in the health service are being directed
towards health education and preventive measures.
There has been a growing public awareness in recent years of the importance of
a healthy diet. In 1984 a report on diet and cardiovascular disease produced by
the government Committee on Medical Aspects of Food Policy advised that a
reduction of fat in the diet could help to reduce the incidence or delay the onset
of cardiovascular disease. To help people reduce their fat intake, the Govern¬
ment plans to introduce statutory requirements for the labelling of food to
indicate fat content. Full nutritional labelling indicating the energy, protein and
carbohydrate content of food is being encouraged on a voluntary basis. Some
supermarket chains have already introduced voluntary labelling schemes. In
addition, the British Nutrition Foundation has produced practical dietary
advice based on the Committee’s report. Current studies by the Committee
include the role of dietary sugars in human disease; the relationship between
diet and cardiovascular disease; and matters relating to infant and child
nutrition. The Scottish Health Education Group (see above) has also produced a
guide to healthier eating.
Environmental health officers employed by local authorities are responsible for
the control of air pollution and noise, food hygiene and safety, occupational
health and safety aspects of a variety of premises including offices and shops,
the investigation of unfit housing, and in some instances for refuse collection
and home safety. Doctors who specialise in community medicine and are
employed by the health authorities advise local authorities on the medical
aspects of environmental health, infectious diseases and food poisoning. They
may also co-operate with the authorities responsible for water supply and
sewerage. Environmental health officers at ports and airports carry out duties
concerned with shipping, inspection of imported foods and disease control. In
Northern Ireland district councils are responsible for noise control, collection
and disposal of refuse, clean air, and food composition, labelling and hygiene.
It is illegal to sell food unfit for human consumption or to apply any treatment,
process or additive to food which makes it injurious to health. Premises where
food or drink is prepared, handled, stored or sold must conform to certain
hygiene standards. Environmental health officers may take for analysis or for
bacteriological or other examination samples of any food on sale or in the
distribution chain. Special regulations control the safety of particular foods
such as milk, meat, ice-cream and shellfish. The Department of Health, the
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, the Scottish Office, the Welsh Office
and the Department of Health and Social Services in Northern Ireland are the
central departments responsible for giving advice and making regulations.
150
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
SAFETY OF
MEDICINES
RESEARCH
THE HEALTH
PROFESSIONS
Under the Medicines Act 1968 the health and agriculture ministers are
responsible for licensing the manufacture, marketing and importation of
medicines for human and veterinary use. The Medicines Commission advises
the ministers on policy regarding medicinal products. The Committees on
Safety of Medicines, on Dental and Surgical Materials and on the Review of
Medicines advise on the safety, quality and efficacy of medicinal products. The
Committee on Safety of Medicines also monitors adverse drug reactions. The Act
also controls the advertising, labelling, packaging, distribution, sale and supply
of medicinal products.
In 1987-88 the health departments spent about £43-7 million on health
research, in addition to expenditure by the Medical Research Council (the main
government agency for the support of biomedical research). Priority areas
include primary care, mental health and handicap, physical handicap and
rehabilitation, care of the elderly and children, and dental and nursing research.
For England and Wales the Chief Scientist of the Department of Health advises
health ministers on the scientific validity of the Department’s directly funded
research programmes. He is supported by a number of advisers from a wide
range of disciplines. In Scotland the directly funded programme is administered
by the Chief Scientist of the Scottish Home and Health Department. Health
departments are involved in international research and development, and all
participate in the European Community’s medical and public health research
programme.
Only people whose names are on the medical or dentists' registers may practise
as doctors or dentists in the National Health Service. University medical and
dental schools are responsible for teaching; the National Health Service provides
hospital clinical facilities for training. Full registration as a doctor requires five
or six years’ training in medical school and hospital, with an additional year’s
experience in a hospital; for a dentist, four or more years’ training at a dental
school is required. The regulating body for the medical profession is the General
Medical Council and for dentists, the General Dental Council. The main
professional associations are the British Medical Association and the British
Dental Association.
The minimum period of training required to qualify for registration as a first
level nurse in general, mental or mental handicapped nursing (and sick
children’s nursing in Scotland) is normally three years. Registration as a nurse
at second level (enrolled nurse) takes two years (in Scotland 18 months).
Midwifery training for registered general nurses takes 18 months, and for other
student midwives in England three years. Health visitors are registered general
nurses with midwifery or approved obstetric experience who have successfully 1
completed a one-year course in health visiting. District nurses are registered
general nurses who have successfully completed a six-month course followed by
a period of supervised practice in district nursing. The examining bodies for all
nurses, midwives and health visitors are the National Boards for Nursing, ;
Midwifery and Health Visiting established in England, Scotland, Wales and
Northern Ireland. The regulation and registration of these professions is the
responsibility of the United Kingdom Central Council for Nursing, Midwifery
and Health Visiting.
Pharmacists in general practice and in hospital must be registered with the
Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain or the Pharmaceutical Society of
Northern Ireland. A three-year degree course approved by the Pharmaceutical
Society followed by a year’s approved training is necessary before registration, i
The majority of medicines can be sold or dispensed only by, or under the
supervision of, a registered pharmacist.
SOCIAL WELFARE
151
ARRANGE¬
MENTS
WITH OTHER
COUNTRIES
The General Optical Council regulates the professions of ophthalmic optician
and dispensing optician; only registered ophthalmic opticians (or registered
medical practitioners) may test sight. Training of ophthalmic opticians takes
four years including a year of practical experience under supervision. Dispens¬
ing opticians take a two-year full-time course with a year’s practical experience
or a part-time day-release course while employed with an optician.
State registration may be obtained by chiropodists, dietitians, medical
laboratory scientific officers, occupational therapists, orthoptists, physiothera¬
pists and radiographers. The governing bodies are seven boards, corresponding
to the professions, under the general supervision of the Council for Professions
Supplementary to Medicine. Training lasts one to four years and only those who
are state registered may be employed in the National Health Service and some
other public services.
Dental therapists (who have undergone a two-year training course) and dental
hygienists (who have undergone a training course of about a year) may carry out
some simple dental work under the direction of a registered dentist.
The member states of the European Community have special health arrange¬
ments under which Community nationals resident in a member state are
entitled to receive any immediately necessary treatment, either free or at a
reduced cost, during visits to other Community countries. There are also
arrangements to cover people who go to work or live in other Community
countries. In addition, there are reciprocal arrangements with some other
countries under which immediately necessary medical treatment is available to
visitors. Visitors are generally expected to pay if the purpose of their visit is to
seek medical treatment. Visitors to or from countries with whom reciprocal
arrangements have not been made are obliged to pay for any medical treatment
they receive.
Personal Social Services
Responsibility for personal social services rests with the social services
authorities (local authority social services departments in England and Wales,
social work departments in Scotland and health and social services boards in
Northern Ireland). Their services are directed towards elderly people, children
and young people, families, people with mental illness or with physical or mental
handicap, young offenders and other disadvantaged people and their carers. The
major services include residential care, day care, domiciliary services and
various forms of social work. Close co-operation is maintained between local
authority social services departments and health authorities (and other
agencies).
In Scotland local authorities also undertake duties similar to those of the
separate probation and prison after-care service in England and Wales.
Much of the care given to elderly and disabled people is provided in the
community itself, by their families, self-help groups and through voluntary
agencies. The statutory sector offers the skilled care needed in particular
services. The importance of the contribution made by the voluntary organisa¬
tions is recognised especially when economies are being made in public
expenditure and the demand on the statutory services is heavy.
The demand for personal social services is expected to rise over the next few
years, owing to the increasing number of elderly people and the changing
pattern of care for people suffering from mental illness or mental handicap and
the chronically sick. The Government’s policy, embodied in a ‘Care in the
Community’ programme, is the transfer from hospital to care in the community
of patients who do not specifically need hospital care. It believes that groups
152
The Elderly
Disabled
People
People with
Mental
Handicaps
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
such as the elderly, the disabled, and mentally ill or handicapped people can lead
more normal lives in the community, given appropriate support and facilities.
A review of the way in which public funds are used to support community care
policy was published in March 1988; the Government is considering its
proposals.
Services for elderly people are provided by statutory and voluntary bodies to help
them to live at home whenever possible. (Only about 5 per cent of the elderly over
65 live in institutional accommodation.) These services may include advice and
help given by social workers, domestic help, the provision of meals in the home,
sitters-in, night attendants and laundry services as well as day centres,
luncheon clubs and recreational facilities. Appropriate adaptations to the home
can overcome problems of restricted mobility, and a wide range of environmental
aids is available for people with impaired hearing or vision. Dispersed alarm
systems have been developed to help elderly housebound people obtain
assistance in an emergency. In some areas ‘good neighbour’ and friendly visiting
services are arranged by the local authority or a voluntary organisation. Many
local authorities provide free or subsidised travel to elderly people within their
areas. Social services authorities also provide residential home care for the
elderly and infirm and register and inspect homes run by voluntary organisa¬
tions or privately.
As part of their responsibility for public housing, local authorities provide
accommodation specially designed for elderly people; some of these develop¬
ments have resident wardens. Housing associations and private builders also
build this type of accommodation.
Local social services authorities provide a wide range of personal social services
for disabled people to help with social rehabilitation and adjustment to
disability. They are also required to establish the number of disabled people in
their area and to publicise services, which may include counselling on personal
and social problems arising from disability; occupational, educational, social
and recreational facilities, either at day centres or elsewhere; adaptations to
homes (such as ramps for wheelchairs, and ground-floor toilets); aids to daily
living; the delivery of cooked meals; and domestic or care attendant help. In
cases of special need, assistance may be given with the installation of a
telephone or a television set. For severely disabled people residential accom¬
modation or respite care may be provided by local authorities and voluntary
organisations, and specially designed housing may be available for those able to
look after themselves. Some authorities provide free or subsidised travel for
disabled people on public transport, and they are encouraged to provide special
access facilities to public buildings.
The Independent Living Fund was set up in June 1988 to provide financial
help to very severely disabled people who need paid domestic support if they are
to live in their own homes. The Fund, for which the Government is to provide
£5 million in 1988, will run for five years.
Social services authorities make arrangements for a wide range of support
services for people with mental handicaps and their families. These include
short-term care, support for families in their own homes, provision for
accommodation in ordinary housing for adults with a mental handicap and a
variety of types of day care. The principal aims of the services are to help ensure
that people with mental handicaps of all ages can lead normal lives in their own
communities; and that no person should be admitted to hospital on the grounds
of mental handicap alone. A recent priority has been to transfer mentally
handicapped children from institutional care to ordinary living arrangements.
SOCIAL WELFARE
153
Mentally 111
People
Help to
Families
Child Care
Arrangements made by social services authorities for providing preventive and
after care for mentally ill people in the community include day centres as well as
social centres and a variety of residential care. Social workers help patients and
their families to deal with social and family problems arising from mental illness
and in certain circumstances can make an application for a mentally disordered
person s compulsory admission to and detention in hospital. The rights of
compulsorily detained patients were extended by legislation in 1983, and a
Mental Health Act Commission was set up to provide better safeguards.
Corresponding legislation was introduced for Scotland in 1984, although the
Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland was first established in 1962. Similar
legislation came into force in Northern Ireland in 1986.
An important role in provision of services for both of these groups of people is
played by the many voluntary organisations concerned with mental illness and
mental handicap.
The Government believes in the central importance of the family to the
well-being of society and considers that stable adult relationships are necessary
to support and enhance family life. Social services authorities, through their
own social workers and other workers, give help of various kinds to families
facing special problems. This help includes services for children at risk of injury
or neglect who require care away from their own families, and support for family
carers who look after elderly and other family members in order to give them a
respite. They also help lone parents, including unmarried mothers. There are
now many refuges run by local authorities or voluntary organisations for
women, often with young children, whose home conditions have become
intolerable. The refuges provide short-term accommodation and support while
attempts are made to alleviate the women’s problems. Many authorities also
contribute to the cost of social work with families (such as marriage guidance)
carried out by voluntary organisations.
An initiative was launched by the Government in 1983 with funds to run until
1988 with the aim of increasing voluntary sector provision in England for
disadvantaged families with children under five. A similar initiative was
launched in Wales in 1985. In 1983 the Family Policy Studies Centre was
established with official funding to review the impact of public policies on the
family and to bring together research findings. The Self-help and Families
Project provides funding for nine voluntary agencies to develop the capacities of
groups of families to help themselves.
Day care facilities for children under five are provided by local authorities, by
voluntary agencies and privately. In allocating places in the day nurseries and
other facilities they themselves provide, local authorities give priority to children
with special social or health needs for day care. They also register, and provide
support and advice services for, childminders, private day nurseries and
playgroups operating in their areas.
The authorities are empowered to offer advice, guidance and assistance to
families in difficulties to promote the welfare of children. The aim is to intervene
at an early stage to reduce the need to receive children into care or bring them
before a court.
The recognition, prevention and management of cases of child abuse are the
joint concern of many authorities, agencies and professions, and local review
committees provide a forum for discussion and co-ordination and draw up
policies and procedures for handling these cases.
Authorities must receive into their care any child under the age of 17 who has
no parent or guardian, who has been abandoned, or whose parents are unable to
provide for him or her, if they are satisfied that such intervention is in the best
154
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
interests of the child. The child remains in care until the age of 18 unless
discharged to the care of parents, other relatives or friends. The local authority
may find it necessary to assume the rights and duties of one or both parents.
The parents must be notified and if they object the matter is decided in a court of
law. When taking a decision concerning a child in care, the authorities have to
give first consideration to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of the
child. Where children are in care, every effort is made to work with their families
in order, where appropriate, to enable the children to return home.
Children in England and Wales may be brought before a juvenile court if they
are neglected or ill-treated, exposed to moral danger, are beyond the control of
parents, not attending school or (if ten years or over) have committed an offence
other than homicide. At the same time it must be shown that the children need
care or control which they are unlikely to receive unless a care order or other
relevant order is made by the court. Local authorities are responsible for
undertaking inquiries through social workers and consultation with parents,
schools and the police. Children may be committed to the care of a local
authority under a care order if the court considers this appropriate. As an
alternative the court may order supervision by a social worker or a probation
officer for up to three years.
Legislation is proposed to reform the law on child care in England and Wales
so as to provide a clearer and fairer framework for the provision of services for
families and for protecting children at risk.
Increasing use is being made of intermediate treatment, especially for young
offenders. This is a community-based service which provides supervised
activities, groupwork and individual counselling; a short, residential period may
sometimes be included. A requirement to attend a programme of intermediate
treatment may be added to a supervision order by the court.
In Northern Ireland the court may send children to a training school, commit
them to the care of a fit person (which includes a health and social services
board), or make a supervision order. The law relating to children is being
reviewed and the intention is to make a distinction between young offenders and
children in need of care and protection. Strong emphasis is placed on preventive
work.
In Scotland children in trouble or in need may be brought before a children’s
hearing, which can impose a supervision requirement on a child if it thinks that
compulsory measures of care are appropriate, binder these requirements most
children are allowed to remain at home under the supervision of a social worker
but some may live with foster parents or in a residential establishment while
under supervision. Supervision requirements are reviewed at intervals of not
more than one year until terminated by a children’s hearing or by the Secretary
of State.
When appropriate, children in care are boarded out with foster parents, who
receive an allowance to cover the cost of maintenance. If a foster home is not
considered appropriate or cannot be found, the child may be placed in a
children’s home, voluntary home or other suitable residential accommodation.
Community homes for children in care in England and Wales comprise local
authority and some voluntary children’s homes, and include community homes
with education on the premises which provide long-term care usually for the
more difficult children. In Scotland local authorities are responsible for placing
children in their care in foster homes, in local authority or voluntary homes, or
in residential schools. In Northern Ireland there are residential homes for
children in the care of the health and social services boards; training schools
and remand homes are administered separately. Regulations concerning
registered voluntary homes and the boarding out of children in care are made by
central government.
SOCIAL WELFARE
155
Adoption
Custodianship
Social Workers
It is generally accepted that adoption is an appropriate way to find a new family
for a very wide range of children of all age groups, including those with physical
and mental handicaps. Local authorities are required by law to provide an
adoption service, either directly or by arrangement with a voluntary organisa¬
tion. About 20 per cent of the 8,000 or so children adopted each year were
previously in the care of a local authority. Agencies may offer prospective
adoptive parents an allowance if this would help to find a family for a child.
Adoption is strictly regulated by legislation, and adoption societies must be
approved by the respective social services minister. The Registrars-General keep
confidential registers of adopted children. Adopted people may be given details of
their original birth record on reaching the age of 18, and counselling is provided
to help them understand the circumstances of their adoption.
A person who has cared for a child for some time (for example, a foster parent
step-parent or relative) may apply to a court for a custodianship order giving
him or her legal custody of the child. On the making of such an order the
custodian will have most of the parental rights and duties of a natural parent
and will be able to make decisions about a child’s day-to-day care and
upbringing, in the same way as a parent. Unlike an adoption order, a
custodianship order may be revoked. In Northern Ireland the law is being
reviewed to introduce custodianship provisions similar to those in England and
Wales.
The effective operation of the social services largely depends on the appointment
of professionally qualified social workers trained in the methods of social work.
Training courses in social work are provided by universities, polytechnics (in
Scotland, central institutions) and colleges of further education; their length
depends upon educational qualifications and previous experience and can
extend from one to four years. The Central Council for Education and Training
in Social Work is the statutory body responsible for social work training and
offers advice to people considering entering the profession. The Council has
proposed a range of improvements to the present system of qualifying training.
Professional social workers (including those working in the NHS) are mainly
employed by the social services departments of local authorities. Others
work in the probation service, the education welfare service, or in voluntary
organisations.
A review of the role of residential care and the changes required to enable
services to respond more effectively to changing social needs was published in
March 1988. The Government is considering its response.
Voluntary Social Services
There is a long tradition in Britain of voluntary service to the community, and
the partnership between the voluntary and statutory sectors is encouraged by
the Government. It has been estimated that just over a half of all adults take part
in some form of voluntary work during the course of a year. Local and health
authorities plan and carry out their duties taking account of the work of
voluntary organisations, and include them in the planning process. Voluntary
provision enables these authorities to continue the trend towards local
community care rather than institutional care for the elderly, and mentally ill
and mentally handicapped people.
An Opportunities for Volunteering Scheme, together with an Unemployed
Voluntary Action Fund in Scotland and a Community Volunteering Scheme
in Northern Ireland, has provided support for almost 3,000 local voluntary pro¬
jects to enable unemployed volunteers to help disadvantaged groups in the
156
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Voluntary
Organisations
community. Voluntary organisations also participate in several other govern¬
ment schemes, including the Employment Training Programme and the Youth
Training Scheme.
Voluntary organisations derive their income from several sources including
voluntary contributions, central and local government grants, and earnings
from commercial activities and investments. Some 500 bodies receive direct
grants from government health and social services departments; in 1986—87
these amounted to over £35 million out of a total government funding of £282
million to voluntary organisations. Tax changes in recent budgets have helped
the voluntary movement secure a larger flow of funds from industry and
individuals.
Many voluntary organisations are charities, and in England and Wales the
Charity Commission gives advice to trustees of charities, initiating schemes to
modernise their purposes or facilitate their administration where necessary.
The Commission also maintains a register of charities, gives consent to land
transactions by charities and holds investments for them. Voluntary organisa¬
tions may qualify for charitable status if they are established for such purposes
as the relief of poverty, the advancement of education or religion or the
promotion of certain other purposes of public benefit including good community
relations, the prevention of racial discrimination, protection of health and the
promotion of equal opportunity. Legislation to strengthen the powers of the
Charity Commissioners and improve the supervision and monitoring of
charities is proposed.
The Charities Aid Foundation, an independent body, aids the flow of funds to
charity from individuals, companies and grant-making trusts.
Co-ordination of government interests in the voluntary sector throughout
Britain is the responsibility of the Home Office Voluntary Services Unit.
There are thousands of voluntary organisations concerned with health and
social welfare, ranging from national bodies to small individual local groups.
‘Self-help’ groups have been the most rapidly expanding part of the voluntary
sector over the last 20 or so years—examples include bodies which provide
playgroups for pre-school children, or help their members to cope with a
particular disability. Groups representing ethnic minorities and women’s
interests have also developed significantly in recent years. Many organisations
belong to larger associations or are represented on local or national co¬
ordinating councils or committees. Some are chiefly concerned with giving
personal service, others with the formation of public opinion and exchange of
information. Some carry out both functions. They may be staffed by both
professional and voluntary workers. While a majority of voluntary organisations
are concerned with social welfare in the ways described, there is a growing
interest among voluntary groups in cultural and environmental issues and in
participating in schemes to promote employment.
The main co-ordinating body in England, which aims to provide central links
between voluntary organisations and official bodies, is the National Council for
Voluntary Organisations; this acts as a resource, representative and develop¬
ment agency for the voluntary sector. It works to extend the involvement of
voluntary organisations in dealing with a broad range of social issues, to protect
the interests and independence of voluntary agencies, and to provide them with
a range of advice, information and other services. The Scottish Council for
Community and Voluntary Organisations, the Wales Council for Voluntary
Action and the Northern Ireland Council for Voluntary Action perform similar
functions. Councils for Voluntary Service—National Association is another
resource network, with over 200 local councils for voluntary service throughout
England encouraging the development of local voluntary action in urban areas.
SOCIAL WET FARE
157
The rural equivalent is Action with Rural Communities in England, represent¬
ing 38 rural community councils.
The Volunteer Centre is a national voluntary organisation and centre for
information and research on voluntary work. There are many full-time and
part-time local volunteer bureaux which direct volunteers to opportunities for
voluntary service in both the voluntary and statutory sectors.
Specialist voluntaiy organisations concerned with personal and family
problems include the family casework agencies like the Family Welfare Associa¬
tion, Family Service Units and the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty
to Children; marriage guidance centres affiliated to Relate: National Marriage
Guidance; Child Care (the National Council of Voluntary Child Care Organisa¬
tions); the National Council for One Parent Families; Child Poverty Action Group
and the Claimants Union, which provide advice on social security benefits; and
the Samaritans, which helps the lonely, the depressed and the suicidal.
Community service of many kinds is given by young people; this is often
channelled through national and local organisations such as Community
Service Volunteers, Scouts and Girl Guides, and the ‘Time for God’ scheme run
by a group of churches.
Voluntary service to both sick and disabled people is given by—among
others—the British Red Cross Society, St John Ambulance, the Women’s Royal
Voluntary Service and the Leagues of Hospital Friends. Societies which help
people with particular disabilities and difficulties include the Royal National
Institute for the Blind, the Royal National Institute for the Deaf, the Royal
Association for Disability and Rehabilitation, the Disabled Living Foundation,
the Disablement Income Group, MIND (National Association for Mental Health),
MENCAP (Royal Society for Mentally Handicapped Children and Adults), the
Spastics Society, Alcoholics Anonymous, Age Concern, Help the Aged and their
equivalents in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland.
National organisations whose work is specifically religious in inspiration
include the Salvation Army, the Church Army, Toe H, the Board of Social
Responsibility of the Church of Scotland, the Church of England Children’s
Society, the Church of England Council for Social Aid, the Young Men’s
Christian Association, the Young Women’s Christian Association, the Catholic
Marriage Advisory Council, the Jewish Welfare Board and the Church’s Urban
Fund.
A wide range of voluntary personal service is given by the Women’s Royal
Voluntary Service, which brings meals on wheels’ to housebound invalids and
old people, provides flats and residential clubs for the elderly, helps with family
problems, and assists in hospitals and clinics and during emergencies.
Over 1,100 Citizens Advice Bureaux give explanation and advice to people who
are in doubt about their rights or who do not know about the state or voluntary
services available. Some areas have law centres and housing advisory centres.
Social Security
The general aim of the social security programme is to provide an efficient and
responsive system of financial help for people who are elderly, sick, disabled,
unemployed, widowed or bringing up children. Certain benefits provide an
income for people who have little or no earnings because they are retired,
unemployed or sick. Others provide income for widows; assistance with extra
expenses arising from disablement; compensation for injury or disease caused
at work or while in the armed forces; and help with the cost of bringing up
children. Alongside these benefits are certain income-related benefits for people
who have insufficient means of support.
Social security benefits fall into two broad categories—contributory and
158
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Major New
Reforms
non-contributory. Contributory benefits are paid from the National Insurance
Fund, which consists of contributions from employed people and their
employers, self-employed people and the Government. Non-contributory benefits
are financed from general taxation revenue. Some non-contributory benefits are
income-related (for example, income support) but others are not (for example,
child benefit and mobility allowance), and entitlement depends solely on
meeting the qualifying conditions. Appeals relating to claims for the various
benefits are decided by independent tribunals.
Expenditure on social security has nearly doubled in real terms since 1970.
Trends over the last five years have included a steady growth in the number of
retirement pensioners and the numbers receiving income-related benefits, and a
steep rise in the numbers getting disability benefits; a decline in the numbers of
families receiving child benefit (due to a fall in the birth rate), the number of
widows, and the numbers receiving unemployment benefit (because a smaller
proportion of unemployed people are entitled to unemployment benefit).
The Department of Social Security1 administers most of the services in Great
Britain; in Northern Ireland they are administered by the Department of Health
and Social Services. Pensions and welfare services for war pensioners and their
dependants are the responsibility of the Department of Social Security
throughout the United Kingdom. The costs, including the costs of administra¬
tion, fall on central government. The Department of Employment acts as an
agent for the Department of Social Security in paying benefit to unemployed
people and the Inland Revenue in collecting National Insurance contributions.
The housing benefit scheme is administered mainly by local authorities who
recover most of the cost from the Department of Social Security. Advice on social
security is given to the Government by the Social Security Advisory Committee.
Over the 40 years since the basic structure of the social security system was
established there had been many piecemeal changes and developments, and the
system had become very complex. As spending on the system accounts for nearly
one-third of all public expenditure, and pressures for improvements and
increased expenditure were bound to continue, the Government considered that
a re-examination of the system was required. Following a series of reviews and
the publication in 1985 of a consultative paper and a White Paper, Reform of
Social Security: Programme for Action, government proposals for a wide-ranging
reform of the structure of the system became law under the Social Security Act
1986. Its main objectives are to make a simpler and fairer system which is
effective in meeting genuine need in a way which encourages independence. The
main reforms, introduced from April 1988, include the modification of the State
Earnings-related Pension Scheme, which is additional to the basic state
pension, and new arrangements to encourage personal and occupational
pension schemes; and the introduction of a new range of income-related
benefits, entitlement to which is assessed using the same basic rules. These are:
family credit, which has replaced family income supplement; income support,
which replaces supplementary benefit; and a restructured housing benefit
scheme. A new social fund in the form of loans or grants has been introduced to
help people on low incomes who have exceptional or emergency needs. Maternity
and funeral expenses from the social fund were introduced in April 1987.
The demand for advice and information about the benefits available is met in
part by the Freeline Social Security Service, which handled nearly 7,700 calls
between April 1987 and April 1988. A complementary Advice Line service
providing expert advice on social security for employers was introduced in 1988.
As part of its plans to improve the management of the social security system
See footnote on p 138.
SOCIAL WELFARE
159
CONTRI¬
BUTIONS
BENEFITS
Retirement
Pension
and the quality of its service to the public, the Department of Social Security is
embarking on the largest computerisation programme in Europe, which aims to
link all of its local and central offices and the local offices of the unemployment
benefit service into a single network.
Entitlement to National Insurance benefits such as retirement pension,
sickness and invalidity benefit, unemployment benefit, maternity allowance and
widows benefit is dependent upon the payment of contributions. Industrial
injuries benefits are non-contributoiy, but are also payable from the National
Insurance Fund. There are four classes of contributions. Class 1 contributions,
w ich are related to earnings, are paid by employees and employers. The
contribution is lower if the employer operates a ‘contracted-out’ occupational
pension scheme (see p 161). Self-employed people pay a flat rate Class 2
contribution and may have to pay a Class 4 contribution which is assessed as a
percentage of profits or gains within certain limits; they are not eligible for
unemployment and industrial injuries benefits. Voluntary Class 3 contributions
are made by people wanting to safeguard rights to some benefits.
Employees who continue working after pensionable age (60 for women and 65
for men) do not pay contributions but the employer continues to be liable. People
earning less than the lower earnings limit are not liable for contributions-
neither are their employers. Self-employed people with earnings below a set
annual amount may apply for exemption and those over pensionable age are
excused payment of contributions.
For most benefits there are two contribution conditions. First, before benefit
can be paid at all, a certain number of contributions has to be paid; secondly,
the full rate of benefit cannot be paid unless contributions have been made or
credited up to a specific level over a specified period. Benefits are increased
annually, the uprating being linked to increases in retail prices. The main
benefits (payable weekly) are summarised below. The rates shown in Tables 5 to
8 are those effective from April 1988 until April 1989.
A state retirement pension is payable on retirement to women at the age of 60
and men at the age of 65. The Sex Discrimination Act 1986 protects employees
of different sexes in a particular occupation from being required to retire
compulsorily at different ages. (This, however, has not affected the payment of
state retirement pensions at different ages for men and women.) The state
pension scheme consists of a basic pension together with an additional
earnings-related pension. Pensioners are permitted to earn up to £75 a week
before the amount of their pension is reduced; those still at work who have put
off or cancelled their retirement during the five years after minimum pension
age may earn extra pension. A non-contributory retirement pension is payable to
people over the age of 80 who meet certain residence conditions, and who have
not qualified for a contributory pension. People whose pensions do not give
them sufficient resources to live on may be entitled to supplementary pension.
Rights to basic pension are safeguarded for mothers who are away from work
looking after children or for people giving up work to care for severely disabled
relatives. Women contributors receive the same pension as men with the same
earnings. Since April 1988 the earnings-related pension scheme has been based
on a lifetime’s earnings instead of on the best 20 years and is to be calculated as
20 per cent rather than 25 per cent of earnings. The pensions of people retiring
this century will be unaffected.
Employers are free to ‘contract-out’ their employees from the state scheme for
the additional earnings-related pension and to provide their own occupational
pension in its place, provided that the latter is at least as good as the state
160
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Table 5: Benefit Rates
Category
Weekly rate
from April 1988
Retirement and widow’s pensions and widowed mother’s allowance
Single person
Spouse or person caring for claimant’s child
Child
Non-contributory retirement pension for people over 80
Statutory maternity pay
Earnings threshold
Lower rate
Maternity allowance
Spouse or person caring for claimant’s child
Child benefit
One-parent benefit (for the first or only child)
Guardian’s allowance
Widow’s allowance (first 26 weeks of widowhood)
Unemployment benefit
For beneficiary under pension age
Single person
Wife or other adult dependant
For beneficiary over pension age
Single person
Spouse or person caring for claimant’s child
Child
Statutory sick pay (depending on level of earnings)
Sickness benefit
For beneficiary under pension age
Single person
Wife or other adult dependant
For beneficiary over pension age
Single person
Spouse or person caring for claimant's child
Child
Invalidity pension
Single person
Spouse or other adult dependant
Child
Invalidity allowance payable with retirement or invalidity
pension
Disablement benefit (100 per cent assessment)
Unemployability supplement
Single person
Spouse or person caring for claimant’s child
Special hardship allowance (maximum)
Constant attendance allowance (normal maximum)
41-15
24-75
8-40
24-75
41-00
34-25
31-30
24-75
7- 25
4-90
8- 40
57-65
32-75
20-20
41-15
24-75
8-40
34-25 to 49-20
31-30
19-40
41-15
24-75
8-40
41-15
24-75
8-40
2-75 to 8-65
67-20
41-15
24-75
26-88
26-90
SOCIAL WELFARE
161
Mothers and
Children
Table 5: Benefit Rates (continued)
Category
Weekly rate
from April 1988
Exceptionally severe disablement allowance
Industrial death benefit
Widow’s pension (first 26 weeks of widowhood)
Widow’s pension (higher permanent rate)
Widow’s pension (lower permanent rate)
Increase for each child
Attendance allowance
Higher rate
Lower rate
Severe disablement allowance
Spouse or person caring for claimant’s child
Child
Invalid care allowance
Spouse or person caring for claimant’s child
Child
Mobility allowance
26-90
57-65
41-15
12-35
8-40
32-95
22-00
24-75
14-80
8-40
24-75
14-80
8-40
23-05
additional pension. The State remains responsible for the basic pension. There
are at present around 90,000 occupational schemes, with some 11 million
members—about half the working population. As part of a programme to reform
the occupational pensions system, the Government has introduced measures to
protect against inflation the pension rights of people who change jobs before
pension age; to give workers leaving a scheme the right to a fair transfer value;
and to require pension funds and other pension schemes to provide access to
more information about their schemes. The Social Security Act 1986 gives all
employees the right to choose a personal pension rather than staying fully in the
State Earnings-related Pension Scheme or in an employer’s scheme. Such
pensions will qualify for contracting out of the State Earnings-related Pension
Scheme and will enable people to choose from a wide range of schemes available
from banks, building societies and trusts. The new regulations were introduced
in January 1988.
Under the new statutory maternity pay scheme, which took effect in April 1987,
women who leave work to have a baby receive their maternity pay directly from
their employer and have more choice than previously about the time they have
off work. To qualify, a woman must have worked for the same employer for at
least six months up to and including the twenty-sixth week of pregnancy and
have had average weekly earnings in the last eight weeks of that period which
are not less than the lower earnings limit for National Insurance contributions.
Maternity pay is normally paid for 18 weeks. There are two rates: where a woman
has been working for the same employer for at least two years, she is entitled to
90 per cent of her average weekly earnings for the first six weeks and to the lower
rate of £34-25 for the remaining 12 weeks; where a woman has been employed
for between six months and two years, she is entitled to payments for the full 18
weeks at the lower rate.
Women unable to qualify, because, for example, they are self-employed, have
162
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Widows
Sick and
Disabled
People
recently changed jobs or given up their job, may qualify for the new maternity
allowance which is payable at a flat rate for 18 weeks. To qualify for this, a
woman must have paid standard rate National Insurance contributions for at
least 26 weeks of the pregnancy.
A payment of £85 from the social fund is available for each living child born or
for a stillborn child if the pregnancy lasts for at least 28 weeks or for an adopted
baby if the mother or her partner are receiving income support or family credit.
Non-contributory child benefit is the main social security benefit for children.
Tax free and normally paid to the mother, it is payable for children up to the age
of 16 and for those up to the age of 19 if they continue in full-time non-advanced
education. A sum in addition to child benefit, called one-parent benefit, is
payable to certain people, whether parents or not, bringing up one or more
children on their own. A non-contributory guardian’s allowance for an orphaned
child is payable to a person who is entitled to child benefit for that child. In
certain circumstances it can be paid on the death of only one parent.
Under new arrangements which took effect in April 1988, all eligible widows
receive a tax-free lump sum payment of £1,000 on bereavement. A widowed
mother with a young family receives a widowed mother’s allowance with an
addition for each child. Widow’s pension is payable to a widow who is 45 years or
over when her husband dies or when her entitlement to widowed mother’s
allowance ends. Payment continues until the widow remarries or begins
drawing retirement pension. Widows also benefit under the industrial injuries
scheme.
A man whose wife dies when both are over pension age inherits his wife’s
pension rights just as a widow inherits her husband’s rights.
There is a large variety of benefits for people unable to work because of sickness
or disablement. Statutory sick pay with additions for a wife or other adult
dependants is payable by an employer for the first 28 weeks of an employee’s
illness. Employees not covered for statutory sick pay can claim sickness benefit
instead, as can self-employed people.
An invalidity pension with additions for a wife and children is payable when
statutory sick pay or sickness benefit ends if the beneficiary is still incapable of
work. An invalidity allowance may be paid with the pension to those people who
become sick more than five years before minimum retirement age. An additional
earnings-related pension may also be payable. A severe disablement allowance
may be payable to people of working age who are unable to work and do not
qualify for the National Insurance invalidity pension because they have not paid
sufficient contributions.
Various benefits are payable for disablement caused by an accident at work or
a prescribed disease. Disablement benefit is usually paid after a qualifying
period of 15 weeks if, as a result of an industrial accident or a prescribed
disease, there is a loss of physical or mental faculty. (During the qualifying
period statutory sick pay or sickness benefit may be payable.) The degree of
disablement is assessed by an adjudicating medical authority and the amount
paid depends on the extent of the disablement and how long it is expected to
last. Disablement of 14 per cent or more attracts a weekly pension; except for
certain progressive respiratory diseases, disablement of less than 14 per cent
does not attract basic benefit. In certain circumstances disablement benefits
may be supplemented by constant attendance allowance. An additional allow¬
ance may be payable in certain cases of exceptionally severe disablement. A
reduced earnings allowance is payable in certain circumstances to people who,
as a result of disablement assessed at 1 per cent or more, are unable to carry out
their regular job or one with equivalent earnings.
SOCIAL WELFARE
163
Unemployment
Benefit
INCOME
SUPPORT
HOUSING
BENEFIT
FAMILY
CREDIT
SOCIAL
FUND
A non-contributoiy, tax-free attendance allowance may be payable to severely
disabled people at either a higher or a lower rate depending upon the amount of
care and attention they require. It is payable from the age of two and there is no
upper age limit. A non-contributory invalid care allowance may be payable to
men and women aged between 16 and pension age who cannot go to work
because they are caring for a severely disabled person receiving an attendance
allowance.
Physically disabled people unable or virtually unable to walk may be entitled to
a tax-free mobility allowance to help to pay their transport costs. People aged
between 5 and 66 may claim and payment can continue up to the age of 75.
An independent organisation called Motability assists disabled drivers and
passengers wanting to use their mobility allowance to obtain a vehicle.
Unemployment benefit is payable for up to a year in any one spell of unem¬
ployment. Periods covered by unemployment or sickness benefit, maternity
allowance or some training allowances, which are eight weeks or less apart, are
linked to form one period of interruption of employment. Everyone claiming
unemployment benefit has to be available for employment, but unemployed
people wishing to do voluntary work in the community may do so in certain
circumstances without loss of entitlement to benefit.
Under new arrangements which took effect in April 1988 income support (see
Table 6) is payable to people who are not in work, or who work for less than 24
hours a week, and whose financial resources are below certain levels. Income
support, like supplementary benefit which it replaced, is the difference between
a person’s existing resources and specified weekly levels. Under the new scheme,
these levels consist of a personal allowance with additional premiums for
families, lone parents, pensioners, and long-term sick and disabled people.
From April 1988 the housing benefit scheme (see Table 6), which offers help
with the cost of rents and rates (local property taxes) to people with low incomes,
uses general assessment rules and benefit levels similar to the income support
scheme. People whose net income is no higher than certain specified levels
receive housing benefit equivalent to 100 per cent of their rent and 80 per cent of
their rates.
Both income support and housing benefit schemes introduce a limit to the
amount of capital a person may have and still be entitled, and income is taken
into account net of income tax and National Insurance contributions.
Since April 1988 a new benefit—family credit (see Table 7)—has been payable to
working families on modest incomes with children. Family credit, which is
additional to child benefit, is related to net income, and to the number and ages
of children in the family. A maximum credit, consisting of an adult credit and
credit for each child, is payable when the net income does not exceed £51-45.
The credit is then reduced by 70 pence for each pound by which net income
exceeds £51-45. (It replaces the previous system of family income supplement
which was payable when the gross weekly income of a family fell below a
prescribed amount, varying according to the number and ages of children in the
family.) Overall, family credit is expected to reach around twice the number of
families who received family income supplement.
In April 1988 a system of discretionary payments, in the form of loans or grants,
came into force. These are available to people on low incomes who have special or
emergency needs. There are three types: budgeting loans to help meet important
intermittent expenses, crisis loans for help in an emergency or a disaster, and
164
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
WAR
PENSIONS
AND
RELATED
SERVICES
Table 6: Income Support and Housing Benefit £
Weekly rate
from April 1988
Personal allowances
Single person
Underage 18 19-40
Aged 18-24 26 05
Aged 25 or over 33-40
Lone parent
Underage 18 19-40
Aged 18 or over 33 -40
Couple
Both under age 18 38-80
At least one aged 18 or over 51-45
Dependent children
Under age 11 10-75
Aged 11-15 16-10
Aged 16-17 19-40
Aged 18 26-05
Premiums
Family 6-15
Lone parent (income support) 3-70
Lone parent (housing benefit) 8 • 60
Pensioner
Single person 10-65
Couple 16-25
Pensioner (higher)
Single person 13-05
Couple 18-60
Disability
Single person 13-05
Couple 18-60
Severe disability
Single person 24-75
Couple (one disabled) 24-75
Couple (both disabled) 49-50
Disabled child 6-15
community care grants to help people re-establish themselves or remain in the
community and to ease exceptional pressure on families. In addition, payments
are made from the fund to help with the costs of maternity or funerals or with
heating during exceptionally cold weather.
Pensions are payable to people disabled as a result of service in the armed forces
or by certain injuries received in the merchant navy or civil defence during
war-time, or to civilians injured by enemy action. The amount varies according
to the degree of disablement and rank; an allowance is paid for dependants (see
Table 8).
There is a range of supplementary allowances, the main ones being for
SOCIAL WELFARE
165
Table 7: Family Credit
Weekly rate
from April 1988
Adult Credit
Child credit
Under age 11
Aged 11-15
Aged 16-17
Aged 18
3210
605
11-40
14-70
21-35
unemployability, restricted mobility, the need for constant attendance, the
provision of extra comforts, and as maintenance for a lowered standard of
occupation. An age allowance is payable to disabled pensioners aged 65 or over
whose disablement is assessed at 40 per cent or more. Pensions are also paid to
war widows and other dependants.
The Department of Social Security maintains a welfare service for war
pensioners, war widows and other dependants. It works closely with the many
voluntary and ex-Service organisations which give financial aid and personal
help to disabled ex-Service men and women and their families.
Table 8: War Pensions
Category
Weekly rate
from April 1988
Disablement benefits
Pension for a private at 100 per cent rate
Unemployability allowances
Personal allowance
Wife or other adult dependant
Addition for each child
Comforts allowance
Allowance for lowered standard of occupation (maximum)
Constant attendance allowance
(depending on attention needed)
Age allowance (depending on degree of disability)
Exceptionally severe disablement allowance
Severe disablement occupational allowance
Clothing allowance (per year)
Death benefits
Widow’s pension (private’s widow)
Childless widow under 40
Rent allowance (maximum)
Age allowance for elderly widows
Aged 65—69
Aged 70-79
Aged 80 and over
67-20
43-70
24-75
8-40
5-80 to 11-60
26-88
13-45 to 53-80
4-70 to 14-60
26-90
13- 45
58-00 to 92-00
53-50
12-35
20-35
5-75
11-50
14- 45
166
TAXATION
OTHER
BENEFITS
ARRANGE¬
MENTS
WITH OTHER
COUNTRIES
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Social security benefits, other than child, maternity, sickness, invalidity and
disablement benefit, are regarded as taxable income. Various income tax reliefs
and exemptions are allowed on account of age or liability for the support of
dependants. The following benefits are not taxable: income support, family
credit, attendance allowance, mobility allowance, severe disablement allowance,
and war pensions. Income support is taxable only when paid to the unemployed
and to people involved in trade disputes.
Other benefits for which unemployed people and those on low incomes may be
eligible include exemption from health service charges (see p 139), grants
towards the cost of spectacles, free school meals and free legal aid. Reduced
charges are often made to the unemployed, for example, for adult education and
exhibitions, and pensioners usually enjoy concessionary transport fares.
As part of the European Community’s efforts to promote the free movement of
labour, there are regulations providing for equality of treatment and the
protection of benefit rights for employed and self-employed people who move
between member states. The regulations also cover retirement pensioners and
other beneficiaries who have been employed, or self-employed, as well as
dependants. Benefits covered include child benefit and those for sickness and
maternity, unemployment, retirement, invalidity, accidents at work and occupa¬
tional diseases.
Britain also has reciprocal social security agreements with a number of other
countries. Their scope and the benefits they cover vary, but the majority cover
most National Insurance benefits and family benefits.
Education
British education aims to develop fully the abilities of individuals, both young
and old, for their own benefit and that of society as a whole. Compulsory
schooling takes place between the ages of 5 and 16, although some provision is
made for children under 5, and many pupils remain at school beyond the
minimum leaving age. Post-school education (mainly at universities,
polytechnics and colleges of further and higher education) is organised flexibly
to provide a wide range of opportunities for academic and vocational education
and continuing study throughout life.
For many years the education service has been characterised by change, and
much of the post-1945 period has also been marked by growth: large increases
in the number of pupils, the expansion of further and higher education,1 and
increased expenditure. Although the process of change continues, recent years
have seen increasing reassessment and consolidation with a view to making the
best use of resources in the light of a substantial drop in the birth rate and
government policies to control public expenditure.
The overriding objectives of the Government’s education policies are to raise
standards at all levels of ability, increase parental choice, make further and
higher education more widely accessible and more responsive to the needs of the
economy, and achieve the best possible return from the resources invested in
the education service. In schools, standards of achievement are being raised by
improving school management, securing a broader and more balanced curricu¬
lum for all pupils so that they can develop the qualities and skills required for
adult life and work in a technological age, encouraging schools to be more
responsive to the needs of a multi-ethnic society, reforming the public
examination system, and improving the quality of teaching through better
teacher selection, training and deployment. Parental preference as to school and
the need for increased parental involvement in school organisation receive close
consideration while gifted children from less well-off homes may qualify for
financial assistance to enable them to attend certain independent schools.
Special attention is paid both to the provision of better pre-vocational education
and training in schools and colleges for the 14- to 18-year-old age-group, and to
the 40 per cent of lower-attaining pupils in the final years of compulsory
education. In response to the report of an inquiry into the education of ethnic
minority groups the Government has described its policies for encouraging
children from the ethnic minorities to achieve their full potential. An important
objective has been to extend the knowledge and use of information technology in
schools.
It is recognised that co-operation between the education system and industry
is essential to help young people acquire the skills necessary to maintain
Britain's position as a leading industrial and trading nation. Many organisa-
The terms higher education and'further education'are variously understood; however under
the Education Reform Act 1988, higher education is defined as advanced courses in any
institution broadly, those of a standard higher than General Certificate of Education (GCE)
Advanced (A) level or its equivalent—and further education as all other post-school courses.
168
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
tions already work to improve such links, and further contacts are being
encouraged. In addition, the Government is working towards achieving the
following objectives: that every year 10 per cent of teachers should be given the
opportunity to gain some business experience; that all pupils should have at
least two weeks of suitable work experience before leaving school: and that every
trainee teacher should have an appreciation of the needs of employers.
Facilities at more than 350 inner city schools and colleges are to be improved
with the aid of additional government funding under the Government’s strategy
to rejuvenate inner city areas. The London Compact, an agreement linking a
number of schools and firms in London with the object of improving educational
standards and contributing to inner city regeneration, was launched in 1987;
under the agreement, pupils are given priority in recruitment by participating
companies if they meet agreed standards of performance at school. The
Government is encouraging the development of new compacts in several inner
city areas.
Measures to improve the quality and breadth of education and to extend
parental choice and delegated decision-making in state-maintained schools in
England and Wales are embodied in two recent Acts of Parliament. The
Education (No 2) Act 1986 makes provision for reform of the composition of
school governing bodies and reallocation of functions between school governors,
local education authorities and head teachers; appraisal of the performance of
teachers; and more effective in-service training of teachers. The Education
Reform Act, passed in July 1988, contains wide-ranging measures covering both
school and post-school education. It provides for the establishment of a national
curriculum in schools and for regular assessments of performance. Secondary
schools will be required to admit pupils up to the limit of their available physical
capacity if there is sufficient demand on behalf of children eligible for
admission; this policy, known as ‘more open enrolment’, will further increase
parental choice of schools. The 1988 Act gives all secondary as well as larger
primary schools responsibility for managing the major part of their budgets,
including staffing costs, in addition to the option to withdraw from local
authority control. It also makes provision for the development of a network of
city technology colleges in disadvantaged urban areas; these will be sponsored
by industry and commerce and will offer broadly based secondary education
with a strong technological and business element. The colleges are to be
state-aided but independent of local education authorities. The first one opened
in Solihull (West Midlands) in September 1988.
Legislative proposals are before Parliament to establish school boards for local
authority schools in Scotland so as to increase parental involvement in school
management (see p 171). Proposals broadly similar to those in England and
Wales are being planned in Northern Ireland.
Under the Education Reform Act, changes are also to be introduced in the
structure and funding of higher education to help institutions improve their
management and planning, and become more flexible and responsive to the
economic and social needs of the country. The system of university funding is to
be reformed in England, Wales and Scotland: the University Grants Committee
will be replaced by the new Universities Funding Council with executive powers
to allocate finances to individual universities. Polytechnics and other major
higher education colleges in England will be removed from local authority
control, and incorporated as independent charitable institutions with boards of
governors, half of whose members are to be drawn from industry, commerce and
the professions. Their work will be planned and financed by the Polytechnics
and Colleges Funding Council with parallel responsibilities to those of the
Universities Funding Council. The Government believes that by granting
polytechnics and other institutions of higher education independent status, it
EDUCATION
169
Administration
will enable them to become more efficient and better able to meet the needs of
students and employers. Those further and higher education colleges remaining
under local authority control will take on greater responsibility for their annual
budgets and will include greater employer representation on their governing
bodies. & 6
In line with the concern to maintain British expertise in science, engineering
and technology, a shift in provision is occurring in post-school education from
the arts and social sciences towards these subjects and towards directly
vocational courses, while higher education institutions and industry are being
encouraged to collaborate more closely for their mutual benefit. A number of
science parks have been set up by higher education institutions in conjunction
with industrial scientists and technologists to encourage the use of advanced
technology. Also, a network of regional technology centres has been established,
bringing together colleges, polytechnics and universities within particular areas
and linking them with local firms; the centres’ incomes will be derived from
charges to companies which send their employees for training. The Govern¬
ment’s LINK initiative, announced in 1986, aims to accelerate the commercial
exploitation of government-funded research and development by bringing
together industry and higher education. As part of the Government’s efforts to
persuade the higher education sector to forge closer ties with industry, higher
education establishments are being invited to provide enterprise training to
undergraduates and postgraduates.
The responsiveness of many courses in further education to the needs of the
economy is also being increased to ensure that students are effectively prepared
for adult working life. The role played by further education institutions in
providing training and continuing education is of great importance, especially
at a time of increasing technological change and high unemployment.
One of the distinctive features of the education service is the large degree to
which responsibility for provision is decentralised. Overall responsibility for all
aspects of education in England, and for the Government’s relations with and
support for universities throughout Britain, rests with the Secretary of State for
Education and Science. The Secretaries of State for Wales, Scotland and
Northern Ireland have responsibility in their respective countries for non¬
university education, and are consulted about education in universities.
The main concerns of the education departments (the Department of
Education and Science in England, the Welsh Office, the Scottish Education
Department, and the Department of Education for Northern Ireland) are
formulating national education policies, allocating resources and influencing
the other partners in the education service (the local education authorities,
governing bodies of educational institutions, the teaching profession, the
churches and voluntary organisations). The departments are also responsible
for the supply and training of all teachers.
The provision of maintained, that is, publicly financed, school education and
most post-school education outside universities has been the responsibility of
local education authorities which are funded by central government and (except
in Northern Ireland) through rates (local property taxes). Their role in England
and Wales, however, is being modified as a result of the Education Reform Act
1988, and in the case of the Inner London Education Authority (a central body
providing education services for inner London boroughs) provision has been
made to abolish it in 1990 and to hand responsibility for education to the
individual inner London councils. The local education authorities employ
teachers and other staff, provide and maintain buildings, supply equipment and
materials and, in England and Wales, award grants to students proceeding to
further and higher education. Universities are self-governing institutions
170
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Finance
receiving most of their income from central government grants. In Scotland the
central institutions, which are roughly equivalent to the English polytechnics,
and colleges of education, providing teacher training, are administered by
independent governing bodies. In Northern Ireland colleges of education are
controlled by the Department of Education and by a voluntary agency.
Planned spending on education and science in 1988—89 is some £21,000
million, more than 13 per cent of the public expenditure planning total. About
four-fifths of this expenditure will be incurred by local authorities who make
their own expenditure decisions according to local needs and circumstances.
Factors affecting the deployment of resources include changes in the number of
school-age children, the removal of surplus school places, and savings made in
such areas as the provision of school meals and milk.
Local education authorities are also directly responsible for the funding of
most further education courses. The Government’s expenditure plans allow
authorities and colleges to respond to the needs of employers and students with
a wide range of full-time and part-time courses.
An education support grant scheme in England and Wales enables the
Government to support local authority expenditure on educational activities of
national priority. In 1988—89 it is intended to provide £81 million out of total
expenditure of £115-5 million on 22 schemes including the purchase of
microcomputer systems and the employment of advisory teachers to promote
information technology as an aid to learning in schools; the purchase of books
and equipment for school courses leading to the General Certificate of
Secondary Education; the provision of information technology in further
education; and the supervision of pupils at midday. The balance of the
programme is aimed at improving the efficiency and effectiveness of the
education service through work on the curriculum, teacher assessment, records
of achievement and other aspects of the service.
Support for the universities and several other higher education institutions,
and grants to students, account for most of the direct expenditure by central
government. About 70 per cent of universities’ income comes from public funds,
the major part being recurrent grant paid by the Government to the University
Grants Committee, which allocates the funds to individual universities and
certain other institutions. The Committee also advises the Government on the
future development of the universities. It is to be replaced, under the Education
Reform Act, by the Universities Funding Council. The independent University of
Buckingham receives no assistance from public funds although its students can
apply for mandatory grants.
Funds for advanced courses in polytechnics and other colleges of further and
higher education maintained by local authorities are allocated centrally. The
National Advisory Body for Public Sector Higher Education advises the
Government at present on how these resources should be allocated in England;
the Wales Advisory Body has a similar function. There is no equivalent
organisation in Scotland. The Polytechnics and Colleges Funding Council is to
be established under the terms of the Education Reform Act to finance advanced
courses in polytechnics and colleges of higher education in England that are to
become independent of local education authorities, as well as some higher
education courses in establishments remaining under local authority control.
Many universities, polytechnics and other higher education institutions
undertake training, research or consultancy for commercial firms, and the
Government is encouraging them to secure a larger flow of funds from these
sources. Universities are now authorised to market inventions arising from
their research work. A number of establishments have endowments or receive
grants or gifts from foundations and benefactors. Local education authorities.
EDUCATION
171
SCHOOLS
Management
through their further and higher education institutions, are empowered to sell
goods and services arising as by-products of educational activities.
Parents are required by law to see that their children receive efficient full-time
education, at school or elsewhere, between the ages of 5 and 16 Some 9-5
million children attend Britain’s 35,500 schools (of which 26,000 are primary or
nursery and 5,000 secondary schools in the state sector). Most pupils receive
free education financed from public funds, but a small proportion (roughly 7 per
cent) attend schools wholly independent of direct public financial support.
Boys and girls are taught together in most primary schools, and 88 per cent of
pupils in maintained secondary schools in England and Wales and 66 per cent in
Northern Ireland attend mixed schools. In Scotland nearly all secondary schools
are mixed. Most independent schools for younger children are co-educational-
the majority providing secondary education are single-sex, although the number
of mixed schools is growing.
No fees are charged to parents of children at maintained schools, and books
and equipment are free, although in Northern Ireland a small proportion of
grammar school pupils is admitted on a fee-paying basis.
Schools supported from public funds are of two main kinds in England and
Wales: county schools and voluntary schools. County schools are provided and
maintained by local education authorities wholly out of public funds. Voluntary
schools, mostly established by religious denominations, are also wholly
maintained from public funds but the governors of some types of voluntary
school contribute to capital costs. Just under one-third of the 23,650 primary
and secondary schools in England are voluntary schools, most of them Anglican
or Roman Catholic. Each publicly maintained school has a governing body,
which includes governors appointed by the local education authority and
teacher and parent representatives. The Education (No 2) Act 1986 provides for
equal numbers of parent and local authority governors in most maintained
schools, so that no single interest predominates. Governing bodies now have
responsibility for the main policies of their schools, and for the preparation of a
statement of their schools’ curricular aims and objectives. They also have
ultimate responsibility for school discipline and a large say in the appointment
and dismissal of staff. The role of governing bodies in England and Wales is to be
further enhanced by the Education Reform Act 1988 with local education
authorities delegating responsibility for the management of school budgets to all
secondary schools and primary schools with more than 200 pupils. The Act also
enables English and Welsh secondaiy schools and primaiy schools with over 300
pupils to withdraw from local authority control and to be directly financed by
central government as grant-maintained non-fee-paying schools.
In Scotland most of the schools supported from public funds are provided by
education authorities and are known as public schools (in England this term is
used for a type of independent school, see p 172). Under the School Boards
(Scotland) Bill, there would for the first time be a requirement for education
authorities to establish school boards to play a part in the administration and
management of schools; the boards would consist of elected parent and staff
members as well as co-opted members. Their aim would be to provide an
opportunity for greater parental involvement and to promote closer links
between home, school and local community.
In Northern Ireland there are three main categories of grant-aided school:
controlled schools, owned and managed by the area education and libraiy
boards and having all their expenditure met from public funds; voluntary
schools, mainly under Roman Catholic management and also maintained
largely by public funds; and voluntaiy grammar schools, which may be under
172
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Nursery and
Primary
Schools
Secondary
Schools
Independent
Schools
Roman Catholic or non-denominational management and receive grants from
the Department of Education. Since the end of 1985 all grant-aided schools have
included elected parents and teachers on their boards of governors. It is
government policy to encourage integrated education, providing for both
Protestant and Roman Catholic pupils, where there is a local desire for it; a small
number of integrated schools have been opened with assistance from charitable
trusts.
In England, Wales and Scotland parents have a statutory right to express a
preference for a particular school for their children, and have an effective
channel of appeal at local level. Schools also have to publish basic information
about themselves and their public examination results.
Although there is no statutory requirement to provide education for the
under-fives, successive governments have expanded nursery education. Current
expenditure plans allow for the maintenance of existing levels of provision or a
small increase, mainly by converting surplus primary school accommodation to
nursery use. About 47 per cent of three- and four-year-olds receive education in
nursery schools or classes or in infants’ classes in primary schools. In addition,
many children attend informal pre-school playgroups organised by parents and
voluntary bodies such as the Pre-School Playgroups Association.
Compulsory education begins at five when children go to infant schools or
departments; at seven many go on to junior schools or departments. The usual
age for transfer from primary to secondary schools is 11 in England, Wales and
Northern Ireland, but a number of local authorities in England have established
‘first’ schools for pupils aged 5 to 8, 9 or 10 and ‘middle’ schools covering various
age-ranges between 8 and 14. In Scotland primary schools take children from 5
to 12.
The publicly maintained system of education aims to give all children an
education suited to their particular abilities. Over 90 per cent of the maintained
secondary school population in England and Wales attend comprehensive
schools, which take pupils without reference to ability or aptitude and provide a
wide range of secondary education for all or most of the children of a district.
The schools can be organised in a number of ways, including those that take the
full secondary school age-range from 11 to 18; middle schools, whose pupils
move on to senior comprehensive schools at 12, 13 or 14, leaving at 16 or 18;
and schools with an age-range of 11 or 12 to 16 combined with a sixth-form or a
tertiary college for pupils over 16. Tertiary colleges provide a full range of
vocational courses for students over 16, as well as academic courses. Most other
children receive secondary education in ‘grammar’ or ‘secondary modern’
schools to which they are allocated after selection procedures at the age of 11.
Scottish secondary education is almost completely non-selective; the majority
of schools are six-year comprehensives. Because of local circumstances there are
some comprehensive schools at which courses last only four years or less; pupils
may transfer at the end of their second or fourth years to a six-year
comprehensive.
In Northern Ireland secondary education is organised largely along selective
lines, based on a system of testing. There are, however, certain areas where
secondary schools operate on a non-selective basis.
Independent schools are outside the publicly maintained sector, but they must
register with the appropriate education department and are open to inspection.
They can be required to remedy serious shortcomings in their premises,
accommodation or instruction, and to exclude anyone regarded as unsuitable to
teach in or to be the proprietor of a school.
EDUCATION
173
Special
Educational
Needs
Teachers
The
Curriculum
There are about 2,500 independent schools educating 560,000 pupils of all
ages. They charge fees, varying from about £150 a term for day pupils at nursery
age to £2,250 a term for senior boarding pupils. Many offer bursaries to help
pupils from less well-off families. Such pupils may also be helped by local
education authorities particularly if the authorities own schools cannot meet
the needs of individual children—or by the Government’s assisted places
scheme, under which assistance is given in relation to parental income (over
220 schools participate in the scheme). The Government also gives income-
related help with fees to pupils at certain specialist music and ballet schools.
There is great variety of provision within the independent sector, ranging
from small kindergarten to large day and boarding schools and from new and in
some cases experimental schools to ancient foundations. A number of indepen¬
dent schools have also been established by religious and ethnic minorities. The
600 boys’, girls’ and mixed preparatory schools are so called because they
prepare children for the Common Entrance Examination to senior schools. The
normal age range is from seven-plus to 11, 12 or 13, but many of the schools now
have pre-preparatory departments for younger children.
Independent schools for older pupils—from 11, 12 or 13 to 18 or 19—include
about 550 which are sometimes referred to as ‘public schools’. Today the term is
becoming less frequently used but refers to the mainly boys’ schools (which are
increasingly admitting girls) belonging to the Headmasters’ Conference and/or
the Governing Bodies Association and to schools in membership of the
Governing Bodies of Girls’ Schools Association. They should not be confused
with the state-supported public schools in Scotland.
Special educational needs embrace learning difficulties arising from emotional
or behavioural disorders as well as physical or mental handicap. Local education
authorities in England, Wales and Northern Ireland must ensure that children
with special needs are educated in ordinary schools provided that the parents’
wishes have been taken into account and that this is compatible with meeting
the needs of the child, with the provision of efficient education for the other
children in the school, and with the best use of resources. In Scotland school
placing is a matter for agreement between education authorities and individual
parents.
There are almost 2,000 special schools (both day and boarding), including
those run by voluntary organisations, which cater for a wide variety of handicap.
Teachers in publicly maintained schools are appointed by local education
authorities or school governing bodies. There are about 540,000 teachers in
maintained and independent schools, and the average pupil-teacher ratio for all
schools is 17 to 1. Teachers in maintained schools must hold qualifications
approved by the appropriate education department (see p 182).
Under provisions contained in the Education (No 2) Act 1986, head teachers in
England and Wales are responsible for determining and organising the
curriculum within their schools, taking into consideration the policy of their
local education authority and that of their governing body. The Government is
in favour of widening educational opportunities as much as possible through a
broad and balanced curriculum which is differentiated to meet the individual
needs of pupils and is relevant to the requirements of the modern world. Under
the Education Reform Act 1988, it is introducing a national curriculum in
England and Wales which, during the compulsory period, will include the core
subjects of mathematics, English and science, as well as the foundation subjects
of history, geography, technology, music art, physical education and (for
secondary level pupils) a modern foreign language. For each core and foundation
174
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Technical
and Vocational
Education
Initiative
subject there will be attainment targets and assessment arrangements, allowing
for variations in ability for the key ages of 7, 11, 14 and 16, together with
nationally specified programmes of study leading to those targets. Religious
education (already compulsory under the Education Act 1944) will be required
for all pupils as part of the basic curriculum, although parents will have a right
to withdraw their children from religious education classes. The content of
religious education courses will be determined locally.
In Wales the Welsh language is taught and is used as either the main or
secondary medium of teaching in some schools (it will constitute a core subject
in Welsh-speaking schools and a foundation subject elsewhere when the
national curriculum is brought in), and in Scotland provision is made for
teaching in Gaelic in Gaelic-speaking areas. The content and management of the
curriculum in Scotland is the responsibility of education authorities and
individual head teachers though guidance is issued by the Scottish Education
Department and the Scottish Consultative Council on the Curriculum. The
Council has issued guidelines to head teachers recommending compulsory
study of English, mathematics and science for 12- to 16-year-olds. A major
programme of curricular review and development has been proposed for the
5-to-14 age-range. As part of a development programme for 16- to 18-year-olds, a
flexible system of vocational courses based on modules or short units of study
has been introduced in schools and colleges in disciplines ranging from
business and administration to engineering and industrial production. Though
designed primarily to improve the preparation of young people for working life,
the courses are also intended to meet the needs of many adults entering training
or returning to education. The courses lead to the award of a National
Certificate.
In Northern Ireland major programmes of curriculum review and development
are in progress in both primary and secondary schools. The objective in the
secondary sector is to improve the quality and relevance of education for all
pupils in the 1 l-to-16 age-range by promoting, in particular, courses in science
and technology, and the development of economic awareness and information
technology across the curriculum. At the same time teaching methods are being
reconsidered.
Over the last 20 years or so much has been done by the education authorities
to meet the special needs of ethnic minority children. English language teaching
has received priority, but attention has been increasingly directed at the use of
mother tongues, especially in the early years. Emphasis has been placed on the
need for schools to take account of the ethnic and cultural backgrounds of
pupils. Measures are being taken not only to improve the achievement of ethnic
minority pupils but also to prepare all children, not just those of ethnic minority
origin, for living in a multi-ethnic society.
In England curriculum development is promoted by the National Curriculum
Council and in Wales by the Curriculum Council for Wales. At some 500
teachers’ centres in England and Wales, teachers meet for curriculum develop¬
ment work, discussion and in-service training. In Scotland such development
work is undertaken by the Scottish Consultative Council on the Curriculum
and in Northern Ireland by the Northern Ireland Council for Educational
Development.
Recognising the need to equip pupils of all abilities with the skills needed by
modern commerce and industry, the Government launched the Technical and
Vocational Education Initiative in England and Wales in 1983 and in Scotland
in 1984. Originally a series of pilot projects, it was extended into a national
scheme in 1987. The scheme is funded and administered by the Department of
Employment, working in close co-operation with government education depart-
EDUCATION
175
ments and Her Majesty s Inspectorate of Schools. Projects provide general,
technical and vocational education for 14- to 18-year-old pupils leading to
nationally recognised qualifications; the extension of the scheme will make it
available to all young people in this age-group in maintained schools and
colleges.
Information
Technology
British
School
Technology
Religious
Education in
Schools
Examinations
The Government aims to integrate information technology (IT) across the school
curriculum; Britain has already developed a world lead in several aspects of
computer education. In 1987 the Government announced a major new initiative
for developing IT in schools and extending its benefits as widely as possible. The
objects are to increase the number of microcomputers and accompanying
teaching materials in schools; recruit advisory teachers who will be trained in
the applications of IT; and provide training for teachers in the use of IT.
Government funding of the initial five-year programme is expected to amount to
some £100 million.
As part of this strategy, the Government has set up the National Council for
Educational Technology (NCET) to evaluate the newest technologies as they can
be applied to education. Formed from a merger of the Council for Educational
Technology and the Microelectronics Education Support Unit, the NCET will
carry foward the Support Unit s functions of devising curriculum materials,
offering advice to teachers and providing an information service. In this way, the
NCET will make available an integrated professional service covering the whole
spectrum of educational and information technology.
British School Technology, an independent education centre to promote the
teaching of technology in secondary schools and colleges, has been developed
with funding from the Department of Trade and Industry and the Department of
Employment. The centre provides help to local education authorities wanting to
introduce courses into their schools, assists in training teachers, co-operates
with examination boards to assess new courses, and assists new firms planning
to produce equipment for British schools and for export.
In England and Wales county and voluntary schools are required to give religious
instruction and pupils to take part in a daily corporate act of worship unless
their parents choose otherwise; under the Education Reform Act 1988 due
recognition must be given to the place of Christianity within religious education
and collective worship. The Act amends requirements for daily collective worship
so that it can be organised at times other than the beginning of the day, and
allows for separate acts of worship for different groups of pupils. In county
schools, and sometimes in voluntary schools, non-denominational religious
instruction is given in accordance with a locally agreed syllabus which may
include the study of comparative religions. Syllabuses have been revised in many
areas to take account of the faiths of the local population. In all kinds of
voluntary schools there is the opportunity for denominational instruction. In
Scotland religious instruction must be given, the content being determined by
education authorities and schools in accordance with the wishes of the local
community. Certain schools provide for Roman Catholic children but in all
schools there are safeguards for the individual conscience. In Northern Ireland,
too, there must be provision for religious instruction; in controlled schools
clergy have a right of access which may be used for denominational instruction
and in voluntary schools collective worship and religious instruction are
controlled by the management authorities.
The principal examinations taken by secondary school pupils in England, Wales
and Northern Ireland around the age of 16 are those leading to the General
Certificate of Secondary Education (GCSE), which replaced the General
176
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Records of
Achievement
Certificate of Education (GCE) Ordinary (O) level and the Certificate of
Secondary Education (CSE) in 1988. The GCSE is normally taken after five years
of secondary education and has a seven-point scale of grades denoted by the
letters A to G. Grades A to C have standards at least as high as GCE O level
grades A to C and CSE grade 1, which were the normal qualifying grades for
entry to further education or training.
GCSE courses were introduced in 1986 with a view to improving the
examination syllabus and raising standards of performance. Syllabuses and
assessment procedures comply with nationally agreed guidelines, known as
national criteria. The main objective of this and other policies is to bring 80 to
90 per cent of all pupils at least to the level achieved by pupils of average ability in
individual subjects (CSE grade 4), and to do this over a broad range of skills and
competence in a number of subjects.
The GCE Advanced (A) level is normally taken after a further two years of
study. New examinations. Advanced Supplementary (AS) levels, have been
introduced alongside them and will be examined for the first time in the summer
of 1989. The AS level, the first courses for which began in 1987, provides an
opportunity for sixth-form pupils to study a wider range of subjects than
hitherto; students specialising in the arts and humanities, for example, will be
able to continue the study of mathematics and technological subjects at the new
level. Requiring the same standard of work as A levels, AS levels are designed to
occupy half the teaching and study time of an A level. A mixture of A and AS
levels is the standard for entrance to university and other higher education and
to many forms of professional training.
The Certificate of Pre-Vocational Education, awarded for the first time in
1986, is intended for those at school or college who wish to continue in full-time
education for a year after the age of 16 to prepare either for work or for vocational
courses. It is being devised by the Business & Technician Education Council
and the City and Guilds of London Institute (see p 182).
The Secondary Examinations Council has been established to co-ordinate and
supervise systems of examination and assessment in England and Wales
designed principally for pupils in secondary education.
The public examination system in Scotland is different from that in other
parts of Britain. Scottish pupils take the Scottish Certificate of Education (SCE)
at Ordinary grade at the end of their fourth year of secondary education
(equivalent to the fifth year in England and Wales). Pupils in the fifth and sixth
years sit the SCE Higher grade, and passes at this grade are the basis for entry to
university, colleges of education or professional training. For those who have
completed their main studies at the Higher grade but wish to continue their
studies in particular subjects there is the Certificate of Sixth Year Studies
(CSYS).
New Standard grade courses and examinations are being introduced to
replace the Ordinary grade. These cater for the whole ability range and all pupils
will be assessed in examinations against nationally determined standards of
performance. The Higher and CSYS examinations are also being revised to
ensure compatibility with the Standard grade.
Under the Government’s plan for the reform of non-advanced further
education in Scotland, the National Certificate was introduced in 1984—85 for
students over 16 who had successfully completed a programme of vocational
courses based on study units known as modules (see p 182). These modules are
now being utilised in schools for pupils in the 14-to-18 age-range, and other
short courses specifically for use in schools are being devised.
The Government has decided that by the end of the decade arrangements should
be made for all pupils in England and Wales to be issued with a written record of
EDUCATION
177
Educational
Standards
Educational
Aids
Careers
Education and
Guidance
Health and
Welfare of
Schoolchildren
their school achievements and performance when they leave school; this would
reflect achievements across the whole educational programme of the school
going beyond examination results. There is a similar commitment in Northern
Ireland.
Her Majesty s Inspectors report to ministers on the quality of education provided
in all schools (and in most further and higher education establishments outside
the universities) and advise local education authorities, schools and the
Government; their reports on individual establishments are published (except
in Northern Ireland). Local education authorities also employ inspectors or
advisers to guide them on maintained schools.
The Assessment of Performance Unit of the Department of Education and
Science promotes the development of methods of assessment and monitors the
achievement of schoolchildren. Programmes of monitoring have been under¬
taken in England, Wales and Northern Ireland in English language and
mathematics at the ages of 11 and 15, in science at the ages of 11, 13 and 15,
and in the first foreign language at the age of 13. A survey of performance at the
age of 15 in design and technology is being undertaken in 1988. In Scotland the
Assessment of Achievement research programme has surveyed attainments of
pupils in English and mathematics at ages 8, 12 and 14.
Teachers and pupils use a range of aids to assist the processes of teaching and
learning. The government-funded National Educational Resources Information
Service enables schools to find out about a wide range of teaching aids. Most
schools have audio-visual equipment such as slide projectors and overhead
projectors, and educational broadcasting is of major importance. Each year
more than 450 hours of school radio and 800 hours of television are transmitted
nationally by the BBC and the independent broadcasting companies. Teachers’
notes, pupils’ pamphlets and computer software accompany many broadcast
series. Virtually all primary and secondary schools now have microcomputers
which are used for computer-assisted learning (see p 175).
Increasing importance is being attached by schools (and by further and higher
education establishments) to careers education to increase young people’s
awareness of further and higher education and careers opportunities and
generally help them to prepare for post-school life. The work of careers officers at
local level is supported by careers information material produced by the
Government’s Careers and Occupational Information Centre. The Government
is sponsoring the development of a computer-assisted careers guidance system
for students in universities, polytechnics and colleges.
Physical education, including organised games, is part of the core curriculum of
all maintained schools, and playing fields must be available for pupils over the
age of eight. Most secondary schools have a gymnasium.
The government health departments are responsible for the medical inspec¬
tion of schoolchildren and for advice on, and treatment of, specific medical and
dental problems associated with children of school age. The Government
believes that the education service has a role to play in preventing and dealing
with juvenile drug misuse and in helping to prevent the spread of AIDS
(Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome).
Local education authorities are free to decide what milk, meals or other
refreshment to provide at their schools, and what charges to make. (In Northern
Ireland school meals must be provided for primary school pupils.) Provision has
to be made free of charge, however, for pupils from families receiving certain
social security benefits. Under certain conditions the authorities must provide
178
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
POST-SCHOOL
EDUCATION
free school transport, and they have discretionary powers to assist with the cost
of travel to school.
Corporal punishment is prohibited by law in state-supported schools through¬
out Britain.
More than a third of young people receive some form of post-school education,
compared with a fifth in 1965; 14 per cent of young people in the 18- to
19-year-old age-group entered full-time higher education courses in 1987. The
number of degrees awarded by age-group is comparable with that of other
developed countries and the proportion of people in all further and higher
education also compares well, taking into account the large proportion of
part-time students and the large group of students receiving professional
training in firms rather than in educational institutions.
Post-school education is provided at universities, polytechnics, the Scottish
central institutions, further and higher education colleges, adult education
centres, colleges of technology, tertiary colleges, colleges of art and design, and
agricultural and horticultural colleges. There are also many independent
specialist establishments, such as secretarial and correspondence colleges and
colleges for teaching English as a foreign language. Several voluntary and public
bodies provide cultural and general education, sometimes with assistance from
local education authorities and central government, and many education and
training schemes are run by public or private organisations, or firms.
The Government is seeking to improve awareness of the opportunities for
further and higher education and training through the development of national
information services, such as the Educational Counselling and Credit Transfer
Information Service funded by the Department of Education and Science.
Higher education is provided by universities, polytechnics, the Scottish
central institutions and institutions of further and higher education, some
concerned wholly with teacher training. The Government considers that access
to higher education courses should be available to all those who can benefit from
them and who have the necessary intellectual competence, motivation and
maturity. By 1990 it expects over 1 million students to be in higher education,
25 per cent above the 1980 level. One of the Government’s main objectives in
higher education is to bring about a change in the balance of provision in favour
of scientific, technological and directly vocational courses.
In order to maintain British expertise in information technology and related
fields, a three-year initiative was launched in 1982 to expand higher education
and research in electronics, engineering and computer science by providing
5,000 extra student places, and additional staff and research fellowships in
universities, polytechnics and Scottish central institutions. Under a separate
scheme, some 950 researchers and lecturers were appointed, mostly in the
natural sciences and technology. The Engineering and Technology Programme
announced in 1985 will, by 1989—90, provide a further 5,000 student places in
engineering, information technology and related scientific disciplines.
The Department of Employment is bringing in a new Graduate Enterprise
Programme in 1988 offering 450 places on management training courses for
recently qualified graduates intending to start their own businesses.
Further education in England and Wales comprises all provision outside
schools to people aged over 16 of a standard up to and including GCE A level (or
equivalent). Courses are run by 490 or so colleges of further education, many of
which also offer higher education courses. The great majority of such colleges
are controlled by local education authorities. In Scotland the new modular
courses at the non-advanced level (see p 174) can be taken in schools, further
education colleges or as part of government training schemes.
Much of the provision outside the universities is broadly vocational in
EDUCATION
179
Students
purpose, it extends from lower-level technical and commercial courses to
advanced courses for those aiming at higher-level posts in commerce, industry
and administration, or taking up a variety of professions (for example,
town planning or estate management). However, most colleges provide non-
vocational courses, including GCSE and GCE A level courses. The system is
flexible and permits the student to acquire whatever qualifications his or her
capabilities and time allow.
A large proportion of students on further education courses attend part time,
either by day release or block release from employment or during the evenings. A
particular feature of the further education system is its strong ties with
commerce and industry: a major part of the further education sector is devoted
to work-related studies. Co-operation with the business world is encouraged by
the Government and its agencies, and employers are often involved in designing
courses. Further education colleges provide much of the education element in
industrial training programmes like the Youth Training Scheme and Employ¬
ment Training, both sponsored by the Department of Employment. The former
scheme offers the opportunity of two years’ planned work experience and
training to 16-year-old school-leavers and one year’s to 17-year-old school-
leavers, the latter provides a broad range of directed and practical training to
anyone unemployed for over six months. The Further Education Unit is an
advisory and development body for further education.
The Education Reform Act 1988 requires every local education authority in
England and Wales to prepare a scheme outlining procedures for planning
further education provision, setting college budgets, and delegating control over
budgets to college governing bodies.
Some 1,031,000 students were taking full-time courses in 1986-87, including
sandwich courses (where substantial periods of full-time study alternate with
periods of supervised experience on a relevant job), at universities and major
establishments of further and higher education in Britain. Of these about
316,000 were at universities while another 297,000 were following advanced
courses outside universities, at colleges of further and higher education,
polytechnics and Scottish central institutions. More than 364,000 were taking
non-advanced courses leading to recognised vocational or educational qualifica¬
tions.
There were also about 3-6 million part-time students, some of whom are
released by their employers for further education during working hours. Many of
the remainder take part in adult education classes.
Over 90 per cent of full-time students on advanced courses are helped by
grants from public funds, which are mandatory for those students taking first
degree and other comparable courses who qualify under national rules. (Grants
for other courses may be given at the discretion of a local education authority.)
Grants cover tuition fees and maintenance, but parents contribute to main¬
tenance costs according to their income. They are awarded by local education
authorities in England and Wales up to first degree level; equivalent schemes are
administered in Scotland by the Scottish Education Department, and in
Northern Ireland mainly by the education and library boards. For postgraduate
study and research, grants are offered by the education departments and the
research councils. Some scholarships are available from endowments and from
particular industries or companies.
There are 47 universities in Britain, including the Open University, compared
with 17 in 1945. They are governed by royal charters or in some cases by Act of
Parliament, and enjoy complete academic freedom, appointing their own staff
and deciding which students to admit, what and how to teach, and which
Universities
180
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Open
University
degrees to award. The English universities are: Aston (Birmingham), Bath,
Birmingham, Bradford, Bristol, Brunei (London), Cambridge, City (London),
Durham, East Anglia, Essex, Exeter, Hull, Keele, Kent at Canterbury, Lancaster,
Leeds, Leicester, Liverpool, London, Loughborough, Manchester, University of
Manchester Institute of Science and Technology, Newcastle upon Tyne, Notting¬
ham, Oxford, Reading, Salford, Sheffield, Southampton, Surrey, Sussex,
Warwick, York and the independent University of Buckingham. The Royal
College of Art, the Cranfield Institute of Technology, the London Graduate
School of Business Studies and the Manchester Business School also have
university status. The federated University of Wales comprises six constituent
institutions. The Scottish universities are: Aberdeen, Dundee, Edinburgh,
Glasgow, Heriot-Watt (Edinburgh), St Andrews, Stirling and Strathclyde
(Glasgow). In Northern Ireland there are the Queen’s University of Belfast and
the University of Ulster.
The universities of Oxford and Cambridge date from the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries, and the Scottish universities of St Andrews, Glasgow,
Aberdeen and Edinburgh from the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. All the
other universities were founded in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
Admission to universities is by examination or selection. Of the 316,000
full-time university students in 1986-87 (excluding those at the Open
University and the University of Buckingham), 56,000 were postgraduate. About
half lived in colleges, halls of residence and other accommodation owned by
universities. There are 31,400 full-time university teachers paid wholly from
university funds. The ratio of full-time staff to full-time students is about 1 to
10, one of the most favourable in the world.
Except at the Open University, first degree courses are mainly full time and
usually last three or four years, though medical and veterinary courses usually
require five or six years. Degree titles vary according to the practice of each
university; in England, Wales and Northern Ireland the most common titles for a
first degree are Bachelor of Arts (BA) or Bachelor of Science (BSc) and for a
second degree Master of Arts (MA), Master of Science (MSc), and Doctor of
Philosophy (PhD); in the older Scottish universities Master is used for a first
degree in arts subjects. Uniformity of standards between universities is
promoted by employing external examiners for all university examinations, and
the general pattern of teaching is fairly similar throughout Britain.
Research is an important feature of university work; many staff combine
research with their teaching duties and about half of postgraduate students are
engaged on research projects. The Government is encouraging universities to
co-operate closely with industry on research projects. In 1987 a new information
technology institute, sponsored jointly by industry and the Cranfield Institute of
Technology, was opened to link academic and commercial interests.
The Open University is a non-residential university which provides degree and
other courses, using mainly a combination of correspondence courses, tele¬
vision and radio broadcasts, audio and video cassettes, and summer schools,
together with a network of study centres for contact with part-time tutors and
counsellors and with fellow students. No formal academic qualifications are
required to register for these courses, but the standards of the University’s
degrees are the same as those of other universities. Its first degree, for which
courses began in 1971, is the BA (Open), a general degree awarded on a system
of credits for each course completed. In 1987 there were nearly 70,000 registered
undergraduates, and in all almost 83,000 first degrees have been awarded since
the University’s inception. The University also has a programme of higher
degrees, BPhil, MPhil and PhD, available through research, and MA and MSc
EDUCATION
181
Polytechnics
and Other
Institutions
Council for
National
Academic
Awards
National Council
for Vocational
Qualifications
through taught courses. It is planning to introduce a Master of Business
Administration (MBA) degree course in 1989.
A Continuing Education Programme, including short courses of community
education, in-service training for teachers, health and social welfare workers
and other professional staff, and up-dating courses for managers, scientists and
technologists, is the fastest-growing aspect of the University’s work. In 1988
some 150,000 students were following Open University courses, more than half
at degree level. Whereas students must normally be resident in the United
Kingdom, undergraduate courses are also available to English-speakers in
Belgium and Luxembourg. The University has advised many other countries on
the setting-up of similar institutions.
A major contribution to post-school education in England and Wales is made by
the 30 polytechnics which have been established since 1967. They offer higher
education courses in the main in a wide range of subjects, including those
leading to first and higher degrees and certain graduate-equivalent qualifica¬
tions in addition to courses leading to the examinations of the main professional
bodies, and to qualifications such as those of the Business & Technician
Education Council (see p 182). One-year ‘access’ courses provide a foundation
and an appropriate test before enrolment on a course of higher education for
prospective students who lack the standard entry qualifications. Polytechnics
have close links with commerce and industry, and many polytechnic students
have jobs and attend on a part-time basis. Similar provision is made in Scotland
in the 15 central institutions and a number of further education colleges, and in
Northern Ireland by the University of Ulster.
Institutes and colleges of higher education, formed by the integration of
teacher training with the rest of higher education, also account for a significant
proportion of higher education students, and other further education colleges
run some, usually specialised, higher education courses.
In 1988-89 polytechnics and other colleges in England and Wales are expected
to enrol 300,000 full-time students.
An increasing proportion of students on advanced courses in Great Britain
outside the universities are taking courses leading to the qualifications of the
Council for National Academic Awards (CNAA). The Council awards degrees
and other academic qualifications comparable in standard with those granted
by the universities. The courses range from science and technology to the
arts, social studies, business studies and law, but the proportion of technologi¬
cal, business or other broadly vocational courses is much higher than in
universities. In 1987 the CNAA instructed institutions running CNAA-approved
courses that they could apply to have delegated to them responsibility for
approving and reviewing their own courses; a total of 29 institutions will be
accredited by the CNAA for taught degree courses by September 1988.
A National Council for Vocational Qualifications (NCVQ) was established in 1986
to reform the existing vocational qualifications system in England, Wales and
Northern Ireland. The Council is instituting a system of accreditation for
qualifications awarded for various levels of occupational competence by
approved bodies. It is designing a new framework—called the National
Vocational Qualification (NVQ)—which will incorporate qualifications that meet
agreed criteria within a simple structure of levels. The first accreditations within
the NVQ framework were made in 1987 and the first four levels should be
operating by 1991. In Scotland the new system of non-advanced further
education has already brought into operation a new vocational qualification
structure.
182
Other
Examining
Bodies
Teacher
Training
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Business & Technician Education Council (BTEC) plans and administers a
unified national system of courses at technician or equivalent level for students
in industry, commerce and public administration in England, Wales and
Northern Ireland. Courses leading to BTEC awards are available at polytechnics,
colleges of further and higher education, and in some schools. The Scottish
Vocational Education Council (SCOTVEC) is the principal examining and
awarding body in the field of further education in Scotland. SCOTVEC is
responsible for the administration and development of the non-advanced
SCOTVEC National Certificate.
Qualifications in a wide range of craft skills are offered by the City and Guilds
of London Institute, and a variety of qualifications in commercial and office
practice are awarded by the Royal Society of Arts.
Almost all entrants to teaching in maintained and special schools in England
and Wales complete a recognised course of initial teacher training. Such courses
are offered by university departments of education as well as many polytechnics
and colleges. Non-graduates usually qualify by taking a four-year Bachelor of
Education (BEd) honours degree; there are also specially designed two-year BEd
courses—mostly in subjects where there is a shortage of teachers at the
secondary level—for suitably qualified people. Graduates normally take a
one-year Postgraduate Certificate of Education (PGCE), and two-year PGCE
courses are available in the secondary shortage subjects for those with a first
degree whose principal component is not the subject that they intend to teach.
The Government plans to further alleviate teacher shortages by easing entry
into the profession for people who do not have formal teacher-training
qualifications but do have relevant training and experience.
In Scotland all teachers in education authority schools must be registered
with the General Teaching Council for Scotland. It is government policy that all
entrants to the teaching profession in Scotland should be graduates. New
primary teachers qualify either through a four-year BEd course or a one-year
postgraduate course of teacher training at a college of education. Teachers of
academic subjects at secondary schools must hold a degree containing two
passes in the subject which they wish to teach. In certain non-academic
subjects, a relevant specialist diploma has been acceptable in place of a degree,
but this provision is being phased out.
In Northern Ireland teacher training is provided by the two universities and
the two colleges of education. The principal courses are BEd (four years), BA and
BSc with education (three, four or five years) and the one-year Certificate of
Education for graduates.
The Government is taking steps to improve the quality of teaching by revising
selection, training and placement procedures for new teachers, and by making
available more in-service training opportunities. Management training courses
for head teachers are also being provided. The Government believes that more
systematic planning is required by schools and local education authorities to
match in-service training to both the career needs of teachers and to the
curricular needs of schools. A major new in-service training programme to
improve the quality of teaching in schools and institutions of further education
was introduced under the Education (No 2) Act 1986. The programme will cost
up to £207 million in 1988—89, of which £70 million is being allocated to
projects of national priority, including training in assessment and testing and
in curriculum areas where expertise is in short supply, such as mathematics,
science, and craft, design and technology.
Measures taken to strengthen initial teacher training in England, Wales and
Northern Ireland have included the issuing of criteria which courses must meet
and the establishment of the Council for the Accreditation of Teacher Education
EDUCATION
183
to review courses against the criteria. The Education (No 2) Act 1986 gives the
Government powers to require local education authorities in England and Wales
to appraise the performance of teachers. In Scotland, following recommenda¬
tions of working parties on teacher training, postgraduate courses are being
revised. All new pre-service and major in-service courses provided by colleges of
education must be approved both by the Scottish Education Department and by
a validating body.
Adult and
Continuing
Education
It is becoming increasingly recognised that education is a process which
continues throughout adult life. The scope of adult and continuing education
has widened in recent years and now includes, in addition to the development of
the individual through cultural, physical and craft pursuits, such subjects as
basic education (for example, in literacy and numeracy); education for disadvan¬
taged groups and those with special needs such as ethnic minorities or the
disabled; consumer education; health education; and pre-retirement education.
Continuing education also includes training for those in employment to enable
them to keep pace with technological change. The Government has taken a
number of initiatives to improve opportunities for both adult and continuing
education. In 1982 it launched a Professional, Industrial and Commercial
Updating Programme (PICKUP), designed to help colleges, polytechnics and
universities to meet the need to up-date and broaden the skills of those in
mid-career in industry, commerce and the professions. By 1992 the Government
aims to have one in ten of Britain’s workforce attending job skills updating
courses every year under PICKUP. A programme to encourage the expansion of
educational opportunities for the adult unemployed, called REPLAN, was
launched in 1984. The first courses of the Open College, bringing together
broadcasters, educationists and sponsors and providing vocational education
and training courses below degree level, were transmitted in 1987. The Open
College of the Arts, also launched in 1987, offers an art foundation course to
those wishing to study at home.
Apart from provision for mature students at universities, courses are provided
by the Open University, further education colleges, adult education centres,
residential colleges, extra-mural departments of universities and various other
bodies including a number of voluntary organisations. Most of the provision is
made by the local education authorities in a wide variety of establishments,
including schools used for adult evening classes and ‘community schools’ which
provide educational, social and cultural opportunities for the wider community.
Most courses are part time. Local authorities also maintain or aid many of the
short-term residential colleges or centres which provide courses lasting between
a weekend and a fortnight. Long-term residential colleges, grant-aided by central
government departments, have courses of one or two years and aim to provide a
liberal education without academic entry tests. Most students admitted are
entitled to full maintenance grants.
University extra-mural departments and the Workers’ Educational Associa¬
tion, the largest recognised voluntary body in Britain, offer extended part-time
courses of liberal studies; they also run short courses for special (including
vocational) interests. Various kinds of education and training are provided by a
wide range of other organisations, for example, the National Federation of
Women’s Institutes, the Young Men’s Christian Association and the Pre-
Retirement Association.
The National Institute of Adult Continuing Education is a centre of
information, research, development work and publication for adult and
continuing education, as well as a channel of co-operation and consultation for
the many interested organisations in England and Wales. The Institute also
administers with government funding the Unit for the Development of Adult
184
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Teaching
Methods
EDUCATIONAL
RESEARCH
EDUCATIONAL
LINKS
OVERSEAS
Continuing Education which undertakes research and development work; the
Adult Literacy and Basic Skills Unit, covering proficiency in literacy, numeracy
and communications skills; and a large part of the REPLAN programme. The
Institute’s counterpart in Scotland is the Scottish Institute of Adult and
Continuing Education.
In Scotland the Scottish Community Education Council advises the Govern¬
ment and promotes all community education matters including adult literacy
and basic education, and the youth service.
In Northern Ireland the Council for Continuing Education advises the
Department of Education on adult and continuing education matters.
The general pattern of teaching and learning on full-time courses of higher
education remains a mixture of lectures, prescribed or suggested reading,
seminars and tutorials, exercises and tests, and, where appropriate, practical
work or work experience. Educational aids are widely used.
Radio and television programmes, both specifically educational and general,
are important media for continuing education and are often linked to
supplementary publications, courses and activities. The BBC, the independent
television companies and Channel 4 provide programmes which range from
basic education and progressive vocational training to domestic, social and craft
skills. The BBC also works with the Open University (see p 180), producing and
broadcasting radio and television programmes as part of the University’s
courses. Channel 4 has a similar relationship with the Open College.
Research into the theory and practice of education and the organisation of
educational services is supported financially by central and local government,
the Economic and Social Research Council, philanthropic organisations,
universities and other higher education institutions, teachers’ associations and
certain independent bodies.
The major research institute outside the universities is the autonomous
National Foundation for Educational Research in England and Wales, with
income mainly from funds received from research projects and from corporate
members, including local education authorities, teachers’ organisations and
universities; it also receives a small government grant. The Scottish Council for
Research in Education and the Northern Ireland Council for Educational
Research have similar functions.
Schoolchildren, students, teachers and others concerned with education come
to Britain from overseas to study, and British people work and train overseas.
Many opportunities for such movement are the result of international co¬
operation at government level within the European Community and within the
Commonwealth, and of educational schemes, courses and professional contacts
organised in Britain by officially funded and voluntary organisations. The
British aid programme encourages links between educational institutions in
Britain and developing countries.
British membership of the European Community is creating closer ties with
other member countries. Both in schools and in the colleges and universities
there has been an expansion of interest in European studies and languages, I
and exchanges of teachers, schoolchildren and students take place. The
European Community’s European Action Scheme for Mobility of University
Students (ERASMUS), for instance, promotes the exchange of students and
academic staff throughout the Community. Britain has adhered to the Statute
of the European Schools (nine of which have been established throughout the
Community including one at Culham, Oxfordshire) to provide education for
children of people employed in Community institutions.
EDUCATION
185
Overseas
Students in
Britain
English as a
Foreign
Language
Students come to Britain from countries throughout the world to study at
universities and other educational institutions or for professional training.
British universities, polytechnics and other further and higher education
establishments have built up their reputation overseas by offering tuition of the
highest standards, maintaining low student-to-staff ratios, and providing
courses and qualifications to meet present-day and possible future needs. First
degree courses tend to be shorter and more intensive than in many other
countries (three years is the normal length in England, Wales and Northern
Ireland; three or four years in Scotland).
In the academic year 1986—87 there were about 43,000 overseas students at
universities and 16,000 at polytechnics and other establishments of further and
higher education. In addition, many thousands of people from abroad were
training for such occupations as nursing, law, banking and accountancy, and
service and other industries. About half of all overseas students were from the
Commonwealth and Britain's dependencies. Many come to Britain for advanced
training: 38 per cent of students enrolled for full-time postgraduate study or
research in Britain in 1986—87 came from overseas.
Most overseas students pay their own fees and expenses or hold awards from
their own governments. Those following courses of higher or further education
are charged fees which cover the full cost of their courses. Nationals of other
member countries of the European Community are generally charged the lower
level of fees that applies to British students.
The Government continues, however, to make considerable provision for
students and trainees from overseas under its overseas aid programme and
other schemes. At present about 18,000 overseas students are supported
annually (including some studying overseas) at a cost of about £87 million.
Three-quarters of this number are from developing countries, most of them from
the Commonwealth, and financed from the aid programme at a cost of some £65
million. Under a new Overseas Development Administration Shared Scholarship
Scheme, launched in 1986-87, 750 awards over five years are available mainly
at postgraduate level for students from the developing countries of the
Commonwealth, with costs being shared between the Government and the
educational institutions.
Outside the aid programme, the Overseas Research Students Awards Scheme,
funded by the Department oi Education and Science, provides assistance for
overseas research students of high ability to attend British universities while
the Foreign and Commonwealth Office Scholarships and Awards Scheme, which
operates in some 90 countries, is designed to benefit individuals likely to hold
positions of responsibility in their future careers.
Many public and private scholarships and fellowships are available to students
from overseas (and to British students who want to study overseas). Among the
best known are the British Council Scholarships, the Commonwealth Scholar¬
ship and Fellowship Plan, the Fulbright Scholarship Scheme, the Marshall
Scholarships, the Rhodes Scholarships, and the Churchill Scholarships for men
and women in all walks' of life. Most British universities and colleges offer
scholarships for which graduates of any nationality are eligible.
A number of British colleges of further education have entered into arrange¬
ments with British universities to provide ‘bridging’ courses for overseas
students before they enter university.
The continuing increase in interest in English as a foreign language is reflected
in the growth of the number of private language schools in Britain, the majority
of which are recognised by the British Council. At the same time the British
Council has expanded the volume of its own teaching of English overseas
by opening several new centres and extending existing ones, and runs a
186
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Educational
Exchanges
programme for teaching English related to specific jobs and skills. Publications
and other material relating to English language teaching have also increased in
number and are now a large component in many publishers’ lists, constituting a
major export.
The BBC’s English by Radio and English by Television services provide a
world-wide facility for the individual learner at home.
The promotion of cultural and educational relations with other countries is a
major concern of the British Council, which plays an important part in the
management of the aid programme to education. It recruits teachers for work
overseas, organises short visits overseas by British experts, and encourages
cultural exchange visits. It also runs schemes to encourage academic inter¬
change between universities and higher education institutions in Britain and
other countries, and exchange schemes in other scientific, educational and
cultural areas. Co-operation between universities in Britain and developing
countries is promoted with funding from the Overseas Development Administra¬
tion by means of recruiting staff for overseas universities, the secondment of
staff from British universities, interdepartmental faculty link schemes, local
staff development, short-term teaching and advisory visits, and general consul¬
tancy services.
The Central Bureau, a charity financed by the Government, makes available
information and advice on all forms of educational visits and exchanges. It
develops and administers a wide range of exchange programmes such as teacher
exchanges with West European countries and the United States; short courses
in Europe for teachers; international visits for education specialists; and the
European Community Young Worker Exchange Scheme. It is responsible for the
linking of educational establishments and local education authorities with
counterparts abroad and the organisation of meetings and conferences. It
publishes a series of guides for people of all ages seeking advice on work, study
and travel abroad. The Language Assistant Scheme is administered by the
Bureau in Britain.
The Youth Exchange Centre was formed by the British Council and the
Central Bureau in 1985 to promote youth exchanges between Britain and other
countries. It has responsibility for the development, implementation and
evaluation of policy concerning youth exchanges on which it advises the
Government. British youth groups are awarded grants by the Centre to develop
exchanges. Through its close links with the youth service it helps overseas youth
groups to find British partners.
The Association of Commonwealth Universities promotes contact and co¬
operation between 330 member universities in 29 Commonwealth countries or
regions. It assists student and staff mobility by administering various award
schemes including, for Britain, the Commonwealth Scholarship and Fellowship
Plan, and by providing an academic appointments service; it publishes
information about Commonwealth universities, courses and scholarships; and
organises meetings in different parts of the world.
The Commonwealth Education Liaison Committee supplements normal
direct dealings on education between the countries of the Commonwealth. The
United Kingdom Council for Overseas Student Affairs is an independent body
serving overseas students, and organisations and individuals concerned in
student affairs.
The Youth Service
The youth service forms part of the education system and is concerned with
promoting the personal development and social education of young people by
EDUCATION
187
Youth Workers
providing opportunities for them to participate in a wide range of leisure-time
activities. Young people take part in the youth service on a voluntary basis.
Extending the breadth of experiences open to young people and giving them
opportunities to participate in the running of their organisations are seen as key
elements in the provision.
The youth service is a partnership between central government, local
authorities and voluntary youth organisations; at local level the youth service is
provided by voluntary organisations and local education authorities. Govern¬
ment education departments formulate broad policy objectives and encourage
their achievement through financial assistance and advice. The need to achieve
better planning, management and co-ordination of the youth service in
England, which was emphasised in an official review published in 1982, has
been endorsed by the Government. In 1985 the Government established the
National Advisory Council for the Youth Service for England and Wales to advise
ministers and others on the scale and direction of youth service activity and has
indicated those groups of young people to whom special attention should be
given. In Wales the Youth Work Partnership was set up in 1985 to foster the
co-ordination and development of services there.
National voluntary youth organisations promote the major share of youth
activities through local groups which raise most of their day-to-day expenses by
their own efforts. Many receive financial and other assistance from local
education authorities, which also provide facilities in many areas. The voluntary
organisations vary greatly in character and include the uniformed and church
organisations. Many local authorities and voluntary youth organisations have
responded to new needs in society by making provision, for example, for the
young unemployed, young people from the ethnic minorities, young people in
inner cities or rural areas and those in trouble or especially vulnerable. Other
areas of concern are homelessness and provision for handicapped young people.
Among the largest of the voluntary youth organisations are the Scout and Girl
Guides Associations (with about 550,000 and 700,000 members), Youth Clubs
UK (about 700,000), the National Association of Boys’Clubs (some 170,000), the
Young Men’s Christian Association (1 million) and clubs run by the churches.
The Young Farmers’ Clubs are distinguished as a movement in which decisions
are taken by the members themselves. There are also organisations like the
Outward Bound Trust providing opportunities for adventurous outdoor pur¬
suits. The three pre-service organisations (the Sea Cadet Corps, Army Cadet
Force and Air Training Corps), with a membership of some 75,000, undertake
activities related to the work of the armed forces. Many authorities have youth
committees on which official and voluntary bodies are represented, and employ
youth officers to co-ordinate youth work and to arrange in-service training.
There are also youth councils which are representative bodies of young people
from local youth organisations. At national level many voluntary organisations
belong to the National Council for Voluntary Youth Services, a representative
and consultative body which aims to develop the partnership between voluntary
and statutory bodies in England. Similar councils exist in Wales, Scotland and
Northern Ireland. The British Youth Council is a national forum for young
people, youth organisations and youth councils, including the youth wings of
the major political parties, and represents young people at an international level.
The youth service in England and Wales can draw on information, advice,
training and research services provided by the National Youth Bureau, which is
funded primarily by central government and issues a range of publications.
In England and Wales a basic two-year training course at certain universities
and higher education colleges leads to the status of qualified youth and
community worker; there are also several part-time and postgraduate courses
188
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Other
Organisations
Concerned with
Young People
Voluntary
Service by
Young People
available. From January 1989 people with teaching qualifications will no longer
be automatically entitled to undertake youth and community work. In Scotland
one-, two- and three-year courses are provided at certain colleges of education
and in Northern Ireland courses are run by the University of Ulster.
Full-time youth workers are supported by some 500,000 part-time workers,
many of them unpaid, both qualified and unqualified. Short courses and
conferences are held on youth and community work. There are also in-service
courses for serving youth workers and officers. Both initial and in-service
courses are validated by the Council for Education and Training in Youth and
Community Work.
A substantial sum of money is awarded by the many grant-giving foundations
and trusts each year for activities involving young people. The Royal Jubilee
Trusts, formed in 1978 from King George’s Jubilee Trust (started in 1935 at the
time of the Silver Jubilee of King George V) and The Queen’s Silver Jubilee Trust
(which arose from the 1977 Queen’s Silver Jubilee Appeal) support work
involving young people aged 8 to 25 (King George’s Jubilee Trust) and young
people up to the age of 25 involved in voluntary community service work (The
Queen’s Silver Jubilee Trust). King George’s Jubilee Trust has distributed
nearly £7 million since 1935 and The Queen’s Silver Jubilee Trust over £11
million since 1978. In addition. The Prince’s Trust, which was set up in 1976 to
help disadvantaged young people aged 14 to 25, has disbursed some £3 million
to individuals and small ad hoc groups.
The Duke of Edinburgh’s Award Scheme, which operates through bodies such
as local authorities, schools, youth organisations and industrial firms, enables
young people from Britain and other Commonwealth countries to take part,
with the voluntary assistance of adults, in a variety of challenging activities in
four areas: community service, expeditions, the development of personal
interests and social and practical skills, and physical recreation.
Thousands of young people voluntarily undertake community service designed
to assist those in need, including the elderly and the disabled, and many others
work on environmental projects. Organisations providing opportunities for
community service, such as Community Service Volunteers, International
Voluntary Service and the British Trust for Conservation Volunteers, receive
grants from the Government. Many schools also organise community service
activities as part of the curriculum, and voluntary work in the community is
sponsored by a number of churches.
8 The
Environment
Development
Plans
Through its comprehensive system of land-use planning and development
control, Britain has had considerable success in resolving the conflicting
demands of industry, commerce, housing, transport, agriculture and recreation
and in reducing environmental pollution. The underlying aim is to promote
efficiency, economy and amenity in the use and development of land, respecting
both the needs of development and the interests of conservation. There is a
statutory system of land-use planning applying to virtually every kind of
development, and there are laws dealing specifically with environmental health,
the control of pollution and the conservation of the natural environment. Most
development requires local planning permission’, and applications are dealt
with in the light of development plans (which set out strategies for each area on
such matters as housing, transport, industry and open land) and of any other
material considerations. However, many minor developments are subject to a
general permission under which they do not need a specific planning applica¬
tion; the opportunity is being taken to expand this general permission wherever
possible. Many voluntary organisations take an active interest in planning,
conservation and the control of pollution.
Planning
The system of land-use planning in Great Britain involves a centralised
structure under the Secretaries of State for the Environment, Wales and
Scotland and compulsory planning duties for local planning authorities. The
Department of the Environment brings together the major responsibilities in
England for land-use planning, housing and construction, countryside policy
and environmental protection. The Welsh Office and the Scottish Development
Department have broadly equivalent responsibilities. Strategic planning in
England and Wales, excluding London, is primarily the responsibility of the
county councils and the metropolitan district councils, while district councils
and, in London, the councils of the London boroughs and the City of London are
responsible for local plans and development control, the main housing functions
and many environmental health matters. In Scotland planning functions are
undertaken by regional and district councils whose responsibilities are divided
on a basis broadly similar to that in England and Wales. In the more rural
regions and the islands, all planning responsibilities are carried out by the
regional and islands councils respectively. In Northern Ireland the Department
of the Environment for Northern Ireland is responsible for planning matters
through six divisional planning offices which work closely with the district
councils. The councils have local environmental health responsibilities.
The development plan system in England and Wales involves ‘structure’ and
‘local’ plans. Structure plans are prepared by county planning authorities and
require ministerial approval. They set out broad policies for the development
and other use of land, including measures for the improvement of the physical
190
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Public
Participation
Major
Schemes
environment and traffic management. Local plans provide detailed guidance for
development expected to start within about ten years; they are normally
prepared by district planning authorities, although sometimes by county
planning authorities, and must conform generally to the approved structure
plan. In exceptional cases, with ministerial approval, the adoption of a local plan
may precede the approval of a structure plan. Local plans are adopted by the
planning authorities without being subject to ministerial approval unless called
in by the Secretary of State. All plans are kept under review and may be altered
from time to time. In Greater London and the other six metropolitan areas in
England structure and local plans are gradually being replaced by new unitary
development plans, which contain both general policies and detailed proposals
for land use and development control.
Scotland has a broadly similar system, with structure plans being prepared by
regional or islands authorities, and local plans by the districts. Regional and
islands authorities may also produce a regional report outlining their priorities
and policies. Under Northern Ireland's single-tier system, plans are prepared by
the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland.
Members of the public and interested organisations are given an opportunity to
express their views on the planning of their areas during the formative stages of
the structure and local plans. The local planning authorities must ensure
adequate publicity for matters proposed for inclusion in the plans; representa¬
tions may be made about them to the authorities. These opportunities for public
participation are additional to provisions for objecting to prepared plans. In the
case of structure plans the Secretary of State normally holds an examination in
public of matters on which he or she requires more information in order to reach
a decision. In the case of local plans objectors have a right to be heard at a public
local inquiry held by the planning authorities. There are similar provisions for
participation in the preparation of unitary development plans and for making
objections to them. Measures to improve the efficiency of planning inquiries and
simplify appeals procedures were announced by the Government in 1986.
Where specific proposals for development differ substantially from the
intentions of a development plan, they must be publicised locally. Other
schemes affecting a large number of people are usually advertised by the local
planning authority, and applications seeking permission for certain types of
development—for example, those affecting historic buildings and conservation
areas—must also be advertised. (In Scotland there is a system of neighbour
notification of planning applications, under which the applicant must notify the
proprietors of land and buildings adjoining the site of a proposed development at
the same time as the application is submitted to the local planning authority.)
The applicant has a right of appeal to the Secretary of State if planning
permission is refused or is granted subject to conditions. Most appeals are
transferred for decision to inspectors (in Scotland, reporters) appointed by the
Secretary of State.
Similar provision is made in Northern Ireland for public participation in the
planning process and for the hearing of representations at public inquiries. For
planning applications which do not give rise to public inquiries there is a right
of appeal to an independent Planning Appeals Commission.
The Secretaries of State can direct that a planning application be referred to
them for decision. This power is exercised sparingly and usually only in respect
of proposals of national or regional importance which give rise to substantial
controversy—for example, proposals for a major new airport or power station.
The applicant and the local planning authority have the right to be heard by a
person appointed by the Secretary of State and a public inquiry is normally held
THE ENVIRONMENT
191
New Towns
Enterprise
Zones
Simplified
Planning
Zones
for this purpose. In the case of development schemes of exceptional importance
the departments concerned have set up procedures to aid the progress of the
inquiry by helping the parties to resolve procedural matters beforehand. Where
highway development is proposed, the government minister concerned can hold
such inquiries as he or she considers appropriate; these generally relate to the
compulsory acquisition of land.
The 32 new towns designated since 1946 represent one of the most significant
achievements in recent British planning. Twenty-one of them are in England,
two in Wales, five in Scotland and four in Northern Ireland. Most of them had an
existing town or village as a nucleus. The new towns programme has taken
account of a number of policy objectives, notably the dispersal of industry and
population from congested cities to the surrounding regions, and the stimula¬
tion of the regional economy in areas suffering from the decline of old industries
or in need of industrial diversification. The new towns have a total population of
over 2 million; several have become regional centres for shopping and office
accommodation. The new town development corporations’ priorities now are to
maximise private investment in housing and employment and to achieve
balanced communities able to generate their own growth.
In England the new towns programme is nearing completion, with the
majority having been substantially completed and their development corpora¬
tions (which supervised the planning and development of the towns) dissolved.
It is expected that the three remaining development corporations will have been
dissolved by 1992. When a development corporation is wound up, its remaining
assets are generally transferred to the Commission for the New Towns, which
manages the assets and arranges for their disposal, mainly to the private sector.
The New Towns and Urban Development Corporations Act 1985 provides for the
eventual dissolution of the Commission. The dissolution of the five Scottish
development corporations will not begin before 1990. In Wales responsibility for
Newtown rests with the Development Board for Rural Wales (known as
Mid-Wales Development’) while the corporation responsible for Cwmbran was
dissolved in 1988. In Northern Ireland development of the new towns has been
incorporated in a new District Towns Strategy which is the responsibility of the
Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland.
Since 1981 the Government has set up 26 ‘enterprise zones’ (see map, p 194).
The aim of this experimental policy is to see how far industrial and commercial
activity can be stimulated by the removal of certain tax burdens and by relaxing
or speeding up the application of a number of administrative controls. The
zones, which contain land suitable for development, range in size from about 50
to 450 hectares (about 120 to over 1,100 acres). Benefits in the zones include
exemption from rates (the local property tax); 100 per cent allowances for
corporation and income tax purposes for capital expenditure on industrial and
commercial buildings; a much simplified planning system in which many forms
of development are automatically permitted; and a reduction in government
requests for statistical information.
The Housing and Planning Act 1986 provided for the establishment of
‘simplified planning zones’. They use a simplified planning framework, already
operational in enterprise zones, under which advance planning permission is
given for specified types of development within a zone without payment of a fee.
This removes the need for each developer to make a separate planning
application in these cases. Simplified planning zones are intended to stimulate
investment and regeneration by removing the uncertainty from the planning
system.
192
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Urban
Programme
City Action
Teams
Inner Cities
Revitalising the inner areas of many towns and cities is an important
government priority. Past policies have produced many successes, including the
replacement of most of the slums and the improvement of much old housing,
but other problems remain. They include high unemployment, decay and
dereliction, and population structures with relatively large proportions of the
disadvantaged and the elderly. It is the Government’s policy to work out, in
co-operation with the private sector, local authorities, and local voluntary
organisations, a package of measures for the worst affected areas that is most
likely to improve conditions and regenerate local economies.
In 1988 the Government announced an intensification of its inner cities
policies and programmes. With the launch of ‘Action for Cities’ in March, it
underlined its comprehensive approach to inner city renewal with a number of
new initiatives. The measures involve six government departments in a
co-ordinated effort to tackle environmental dereliction and encourage enter¬
prise, development and investment by the private sector in the inner cities; they
aim to raise skills and enhance educational and employment opportunities for
local people, to improve the quality of housing (see p 200) and transport, and to
reduce crime. The main contributing programmes are those of the Department
of the Environment, the Department of Employment and the Department of
Trade and Industry. About £3,000 million is being spent on urban regeneration
in Britain in 1988—89, and this is expected to bring in several times that total in
private investment. Inner city target areas are shown on the map (p 194).
The Urban Programme was the first major public spending programme directed
solely at the inner cities. It gives specific grant through local authorities to some
10,000 projects a year in the inner cities, and has increasingly been used to
support projects which strengthen the local economy. Its priorities are to
encourage individual enterprise, help local companies, and improve sites and
buildings. In 1987—88 the Urban Programme supported 560 new firms in
managed workshops, the improvement of nearly 2,000 hectares (5,000 acres) of
unsightly land, management improvement schemes for over 89,000 council
homes and nearly 90,000 inner city jobs or training places. Spending on the
Programme has increased from a 1978—79 level in England and Wales of under
£60 million to £314 million in 1988—89. In 1987 the Government announced
that, in order to achieve a greater impact with available funds, resources were to
be concentrated on 57 areas with special problems and needs. The Urban
Programme represents only a part of the central assistance to urban, and other,
local authorities. The main contributions are through the annual rate support
grant, housing subsidy and other programmes.
In certain places, special schemes are in operation. There is a co-ordinated
‘partnership’ approach in seven English areas (Birmingham, Liverpool,
Manchester/Salford, Newcastle upon Tyne/Gateshead and the inner London
boroughs of Hackney, Islington and Lambeth), in which central and local
government work together to tackle urban problems where they are at their most
severe. Each partnership has a three-year action programme reviewed annually,
which is based on the needs of the area and its particular priorities.
Partnerships receive allocations of Urban Programme resources ranging from
£10 million to £25 million a year. Other Urban Programme authorities also
prepare strategic action programmes for their inner areas, but receive lower
allocations of resources ranging from £1-5 million to £5-5 million a year.
In 1985 the Government announced the establishment of five ‘City Action
Teams’ (one for the inner London boroughs and one for each of the other
THE ENVIRONMENT
193
Task Forces
Urban
Development
Corporations
City Grant
Garden
Festivals
The Enterprise
Initiative
partnership areas) to secure improved co-operation between government
departments in developing and implementing their policies and programmes for
these areas. These teams have special budgets to enable them to develop
collaboration between the private and public sectors in key areas, and to
promote project development. Two further teams—based in Nottingham and
Leeds—were set up in 1988.
In 1986 task forces (see map, p 194) were created to intensify and bring
together the efforts of government departments, local government, the private
sector and the local community in eight inner city areas: Leeds, Middlesbrough,
Leicester, Manchester, Bristol, Birmingham, and two in London. A further eight
areas were added in 1987: Hartlepool, Rochdale, Preston, Nottingham, Coven¬
try, Wolverhampton, Doncaster and the London borough of Tower Hamlets.
Funds in addition to those available under existing programmes are being
provided and the initiative is being co-ordinated by the Secretary of State for
Trade and Industry.
In 1981 the Government set up two Urban Development Corporations (UDCs),
modelled on the new town development corporations, in London Docklands and
Merseyside. By the end of March 1988 the London Docklands Development
Corporation had received £390 million in government grant and secured private
investment commitments of around £3,000 million. It has reclaimed 375
hectares (930 acres) of derelict land for housing, commercial and recreational
use. Over 8,000 homes have been completed and over 10,000 jobs have been
attracted to the area. The Merseyside Development Corporation has reclaimed
154 hectares (380 acres) of derelict land and 140,000 square metres (1 -5 million
square feet) of buildings have been refurbished in its area.
Five new Corporations were set up in 1987: Trafford Park (Greater Manches¬
ter), Teesside, Tyne and Wear, Black Country (West Midlands) and Cardiff Bay.
Three more in Leeds, Central Manchester and Sheffield—were set up in 1988.
UDCs cover about 16,000 hectares (about 40,000 acres) and public expenditure
on the programme will be around £203 million in 1988-89. In December 1987
the Secretary of State for the Environment announced a proposal to set uo a
UDC in Bristol.
A new grant—City Grant—was introduced in May 1988 to simplify the grants
available to encourage private sector developments in inner cities; it replaced the
Urban Development Grant and the Urban Regeneration Grant, which had been
available since 1982 and 1986 respectively. It also covers projects that would
previously have been assisted by private sector Derelict Land Grant (see p 207)
within urban priority areas. It will be paid on projects with a total value which
exceeds £200,000. As with the Urban Regeneration Grant, City Grant will be
paid direct to the private sector for projects which contribute to the regeneration
of an urban area.
National garden festivals, based on the European idea of garden shows, have
been introduced with the aim of rejuvenating inner urban areas and reclaiming
derelict sites. The first festivals in Liverpool in 1984, Stoke-on-Trent in 1986,
and Glasgow in 1988, are being followed by similar events in Gateshead in 1990
and Ebbw Vale in 1992.
In January 1988 the Government announced measures to foster good business
practice which will involve the private sector further in inner city regeneration
and widen the choice and opportunities open to inner city residents. Under its
‘Enterprise Initiative’, the Department of Trade and Industry, among other
Urban Policy Initiatives
0 20 40 60 80100 120 km
i l l i l i i
Invergorden
Fraserburgh^
Peterhead1
Inverness
Aberdeen
Scotland
Tayside
Arbroath
Dundee
Perth®
Hawick#
Dumfries
.Stranraer
g) Londonderry
Newcastle®
Gateshead*
Teesside'
Workington
Belfast
Yorkshire and
Humberside
lidlands Dei
kin#® ★Bl
Nottingham *
^— Leicester *
® Corby Eas
©Wellingborough
- Coventry *
■ Walsall
Sand well —
Birmingham %
'd Haven
• Bristol *
South West
Plymouth
i i i i i
0 20 40 60 80 miles
Target areas
Enterprise zones
Urban Development
Corporations
Areas with task forces
Valleys Programme
towns
Boundaries of
economic planning
regions
★
Inset A
Tyneside
Tyne and Wear
— North Tyneside
— South Tyneside
 Sunderland
y— Hartlepool *
Middlesbrough *
M6*-*--- Langbaurgh
! — Stockton-on-Tees
Northern
Ireland
East Midlands
Inset A
Benarty
Stirling*
Greenock
Alexandria
Dumbarton
•
Clydebank
_ , 9®
Renfrew^
Paisley^
Denny-
Glenrothes Leven
• •
Buckhaven#
T Inverkeithing
Dunfermline^^ Kirkcaldy '■
Alloa
Falkirk1
Kirkintilloch Grangemouth
r
Polmont
Edinburgh#
Broxburn ^ Musselburgh •Tranent
Coatbridge Bathgate# ^
Glasgow # #Airdrie # Livingston Dalkeith
Whitburn
Barrhead
•Kilbirnie
Viewpark#^Bellshill
Blantyre# • •Cleland
Hamilton#/ #Wishaw
Motherwell-
• Larkhall
•Dairy
^•Kilwinning
’^^# ^Stevenson
ln 1 •In/ine •
■   
10
15 20 25 30 km
—J 1 i i
Kilmarnock
10
15 20 miles
Knowsley
Liverpool
Wirral —-
Bradford
North-east Lancashire
Preston* ^ ®*n|e
Blackburn
Rochd
Bolton • „
• ^
Sefton • Salford ★Central Ma
St Helens •©•Manchester
Salford/Trafford
Leeds *
•★
Kingston upon Hull
* Kirklees
Wigan
lester
Trafford
®^ton ParR
— Merseyside
0Wakefield
- ■"l
Glanford®
Barnsley
Scunthorpe® f
Doncaster * f
Rotherham
Sh**ld *
0 10
20
i
30 40 50 km
J i
10
—r-
20
1
30 miles
Inset C
Valleys Programme Boundary
J Pontardawe
*—
■ Ebbw Vale
%a
Aberdarei
Tonypandy
Merthyr Tydfil *
.O
ansea®-—! ^ Maesteg L _ Pontypool (
Valley ■ ■ ■ O'-
Cardiff Bay^
10
_i_
20
_J_
10
T-
15
30 40 km
_J i
i 1
20 25 miles
Inset D
Islington
Hackney
Tower Hamlets *
Brent
Hammersmith
and Fulham
A
Kensington
and
Chelsea*
London Docklands
Wandsworth
Lambeth
Greenwich
Isle of Dogs
Lewisham
Southwark *
Greater London Boundary
10
_i_
—i—
10
20
. I
30 40 km
_J i
15 20 25 miles
196
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Scotland
Wales
Northern
Ireland
measures, offers help towards consultancy costs to advise small independent
businesses on marketing, design, quality, manufacturing systems, business
planning, and financial and information systems; more than £50 million is
available in 1988—89. Higher levels of grant will be made in urban areas.
In Scotland, where the Urban Programme amounts to £44-2 million in 1988-89,
a major urban renewal exercise in Glasgow to regenerate the city’s east end (the
Glasgow Eastern Area Renewal Project) has been organised on somewhat similar
lines to the partnership areas in England, and a further eight Scottish districts
have been designated under the Inner Urban Areas Act 1978. In addition, the
Scottish Development Agency operates the Local Enterprise Grants for Urban
Projects Scheme (equivalent to the City Grant) and is making urban renewal its
major priority over the next few years.
In Wales one of the most ambitious land reclamation drives in Europe has
resulted in the clearance of 2,690 hectares (6,650 acres) since 1979. Between
1988 and 1991 the Welsh Development Agency will spend over £70 million on its
land clearance and urban renewal programme. In 1988 the Government
launched a three-year programme designed to improve economic, environmen¬
tal and social conditions in the south Wales valleys (see map, p 195). It includes
a three-fold expansion of the Welsh Development Agency’s factory building
programme, increased regional assistance to industry, new training and loan
schemes for small businesses, and the establishment of a Centre for Quality,
Enterprise and Design at Treforest (Mid Glamorgan), which will serve the whole
of Wales.
In Northern Ireland inner city problems on a substantial scale are largely
confined to Belfast, where a major housing programme is supplemented by
Urban Development Grants, an environmental improvement scheme and a
comprehensive development programme to regenerate the commercial parts of
the inner city. In 1988—89 these programmes have a combined allocation of
£100 million. Four Action Teams have also been established to tackle the
problems of particularly deprived areas of the city. In July 1988 the Government
announced a new programme to stimulate greater economic activity and
improve the quality of the environment in the most disadvantaged areas in
Belfast. A further £10 million has been allocated to projects in 1988—89 and four
more Action Teams will be set up.
Housing
The pattern of housing tenure has changed considerably in recent years, with a
substantial increase in owner-occupation and a decline in privately rented
accommodation. Between the end of 1971 and 1987 the proportion of dwellings
that were owner-occupied in Great Britain rose from 51 to 64 per cent, while the
proportion rented from a local authority or new town authority fell from 31 to 26
per cent, and the proportion of other types of tenure fell from 19 to 10 per cent.
The fall in the last category reflected the decline in privately rented dwellings,
while the number of housing association dwellings increased substantially
during this period. There are variations, however, in the distribution of tenure
between different parts of the country; owner-occupation ranges from 42 per
cent in Scotland to 70 per cent in south-west England. The encouragement of
further home ownership and the regeneration of the independent rented sector
are major aims of the Government’s housing policy, while the emphasis of public
sector housing policy has shifted from new building to modernisation,
improvement and making better use of existing dwellings.
THE ENVIRONMENT
197
Administration
Home
Ownership
Mortgage Loans
There are over 22-6 million dwellings in Britain, houses being much more
common than flats (the ratio is roughly four to one), and around 50 per cent of
families live in a post-1945 home. Throughout this century pressure on housing
accommodation has been increased more by the rapid rise in the number of
separate households than by the increase in population. While the number of
people has increased by about two-fifths, the number of households has more
than doubled.
New house construction is undertaken by both public and private sectors but
over the past few years the private sector has built many more dwellings than the
public sector. In 1987, 5 per cent of new building was carried out by voluntary
housing associations. Private interests build mainly for sale to owner-occupiers
while public sector dwellings are provided mainly for renting, although tenants
do have the right to buy the property in which they live after a qualifying period.
As with environmental planning, responsibility for formulating housing policy
and supervising the housing programme is borne by the Secretary of State for
the Environment in England and by the Secretaries of State for Wales, Scotland
and Northern Ireland. Although the policies are broadly similar throughout
Britain, provisions may differ slightly in Northern Ireland and Scotland from
those in England and Wales.
The construction or structural alteration of housing is subject to building
regulations laid down by the Government. Building in the private sector is
regulated by an independent organisation, the National House-Building Coun¬
cil, which sets standards and enforces them by inspection and certification.
Almost all new private houses are covered by the Council’s insurance scheme
which provides ten-year guarantees against major structural defects. A two-year
guarantee is also given against faulty workmanship. Most lenders will only make
a loan for purchase of a new house if it is covered by the Council’s certificate.
Local authorities are responsible for the payment of house renovation grants
and the implementation of housing renewal programmes. (In Northern Ireland
the Northern Ireland Housing Executive has these responsibilities.) Many have
housing advisory centres to provide information on aspects of housing.
The number of people owning their own homes has more than trebled in the last
35 years, and the number of owner-occupied dwellings in Great Britain
amounted to over 14 million at the end of 1986, compared with 4 million in
1951. Most public sector tenants have the right to buy the homes they occupy at
discounts which vary according to the length of their occupancy. Local
authorities have been asked to encourage low-cost home ownership by selling
land to builders to construct homes for ‘first-time’ buyers, or to individuals or
groups to build their own ‘first-time’ homes in partnership with private
builders; by improving homes for sale; by selling dilapidated homes for
improvement by the purchaser (‘homesteading’); by offering shared ownership
(part owning, part renting); and by using local authority guarantee powers to
facilitate lending by building societies and other financial institutions.
In Northern Ireland shared ownership has been developed in the public sector
by the Northern Ireland Housing Executive and in the private sector by the
Northern Ireland Co-ownership Housing Association. The Executive has offered
most of its homes for sale to tenants; almost 35,000 have been sold.
Most people buy their homes with a mortgage loan (for which the properties are
regarded as securities) from such sources as building societies, banks,
insurance companies, industrial and provident societies, and local authorities.
Some companies also make loans for house purchase to their own employees.
Building societies are the largest source of such loans, although banks and
198
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Public Sector
Housing
other financial institutions are taking an increasing share of the mortgage
market. For first-time buyers a lender will usually advance about 90 per cent of
the valuation of a property with the help of an appropriate insurance guarantee,
but it is possible to borrow up to 100 per cent. Loans are normally repayable over
periods of 20 or 25 years (up to 30 or 35 years in certain circumstances) by equal
monthly instalments to cover capital and interest. Ordinary mortgage loans
from building societies are usually available to purchasers on average income or
above. People with insufficient income to obtain a mortgage for outright
purchase may be able to participate in a scheme in which a housing association
buys the home and sells a share in it to them, allowing them to rent the
remainder and to purchase it later if they wish.
Owner-occupiers are entitled to tax relief on interest payments arising from
their mortgage loans on up to £30,000 a property (on their main home only).
Under the Homeloan Scheme first-time home buyers who have saved for two
years and are buying a home in the lower price range may qualify for an extra
loan of £600 interest-free for up to five years, and a tax-free bonus of up to £110.
Most of the public housing in Great Britain is provided by 460 local housing
authorities. The authorities are: in England (outside London) and Wales, the
district councils; in London, the London borough councils and the Common
Council of the City of London; and in Scotland, the district and islands councils.
Other public housing authorities are the new town authorities, the Scottish
Special Housing Association, which supplements building by local authorities
in Scotland, and the Development Board for Rural Wales. The Northern Ireland
Housing Executive is responsible for the provision and management of public
housing in Northern Ireland. Public housing authorities own about 6 million
houses and flats. The number of homes owned by each authority varies widely,
from 141 homes in the Isles of Scilly to 165,000 in Glasgow. Most authorities
own between 2,500 and 15,000 dwellings. The Northern Ireland Housing
Executive owns almost 175,000 homes.
Local authorities meet the capital costs of new house construction and of
modernisation of their existing stock by raising loans on the open market, by
borrowing from the Public Works Loan Board (an independent statutory body
set up to make loans to local authorities) or from the capital receipts generated
by the sale of local authority houses and housing land. The Northern Ireland
Housing Executive is similarly financed.
Sheltered housing (usually accommodation with an alarm system and
resident warden) is provided for those elderly people who need this degree of
support, but increasing emphasis is being placed on schemes to help elderly
people to continue to live in their own homes and on schemes to adapt existing
housing to meet the needs of physically handicapped people. Local authorities
have a statutory duty to ensure that accommodation (not necessarily owned by
the authority) is available for homeless people who have dependent children or
are vulnerable on grounds such as age or disability.
The Housing Act 1980 (consolidated in the Housing Act 1985) established a
charter for public sector tenants in England and Wales, giving them statutory
rights which include security of tenure; provision for a resident member of the
tenant’s family to succeed to the tenancy on the death of the tenant; the right to
exchange homes and to take in lodgers; and, at the landlord’s discretion,
subletting and reimbursement for improvements made by the tenant. With a few
exceptions, public sector tenants of at least two years' standing can buy their
house or flat at a discount which depends on the length of occupation. Similar
provisions are made for Scotland and Northern Ireland under separate
legislation. By the end of 1987, 1 • 1 million council, housing association and new
town homes had been sold.
THE ENVIRONMENT
199
Privately
Rented
Housing
The Housing Bill (see below) would make provision for public sector tenants to
change their landlord where they are not satisfied with the service provided by
their local authority. Where there are serious social problems and housing
disrepair. Housing Action Trusts would be set up to take over responsibility for
local authority housing in designated areas (see p 201).
A National Mobility Scheme, sponsored by the Department of the Environ¬
ment, the Scottish Development Department, the Welsh Office and the
Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland, assists tenants who need
to move to another area for employment or social reasons. Tenants who wish to
move by exchanging homes are able to make use of the Tenants Exchange
Scheme, a free computer-based national information scheme.
There has been a steady decline in the number of rented dwellings available from
private landlords (including tied accommodation), from over 50 per cent of the
housing stock in 1951 to less than 8 per cent in 1987 (under 2 million
dwellings). Major factors have been the increased demand for owner-occupation,
the greater availability of public rented housing and the operation of rent
restriction. Privately rented dwellings are predominantly found in older hous¬
ing. Many landlords are individuals owning a small amount of property, but
some rented housing is provided by larger property owners, including property
companies. The Government’s policy is to increase the availability of privately
rented accommodation and it is encouraging a greater variety of agencies to let
such accommodation.
This is being implemented through the Housing Bill for England and Wales
^nd the Housing (Scotland) Bill, which would provide for the deregulation of new
private sector lettings, the reform of housing association finance, the creation of
Housing Action Trusts in England, and, for council tenants, the right to choose
a new landlord.
Most private lettings are subject to the system of protection provided by the
Rent Act 1977 (and similar legislation in Scotland) and associated legislation.
Where the letting is a fully protected ‘regulated tenancy’, the tenant or the
landlord may apply for a ‘fair rent’ to be fixed by independent rent officers and
there is a wide degree of security of tenure. Under the Housing Bills, two forms of
tenancy would be created: the assured tenancy, which would give the tenant
long-term security in return for a market rent, to be freely negotiated between
landlord and tenant; and the assured shorthold tenancy (short assured tenancy
in Scotland), which would be for a fixed term, at a rent to be negotiated between
landlord and tenant. The holder of a shorthold tenancy, however, would be able
to apply to a rent assessment committee for the rent to be determined at any
time once the tenancy had started, and the committee would be empowered to
reduce the rent if it proved to be excessive in comparison with other market
rents for shorthold tenancies of similar property in the area. The previous
system of registered fair rents would continue for existing lettings. The Bills
would strengthen the law concerning harassment of tenants, which is a
criminal offence, and provide for improved compensation for tenants driven out
by harassment or illegally evicted. Tenants and most other residential occupiers
may not be evicted without a court order.
It is expected that rents would move towards market levels, and more premises
be made available to rent. Government support would be focused on tenants,
rather than on property, through the housing benefit system. Depending on
their personal circumstances, occupiers may be eligible for housing benefit to
assist them in paying their rent and rates.
In Northern Ireland only certain pre-1956 properties subject to rent restriction
come under statutory control. Rent levels are linked to those of the Northern
Ireland Housing Executive, and both landlords and tenants may apply to a rent
200
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Housing
Associations
Improving
Older Houses
assessment committee for rent determination in cases where the current rent is
considered to be inappropriate. Rent increases are permitted only for properties
which meet a prescribed standard. There are no assured tenancies in Northern
Ireland but lettings under the shorthold concept are available.
Housing associations extend the choice of housing by providing accommodation
available for rent or sale through new building or the rehabilitation of older
property. The associations normally cater for people who would otherwise look to
a local authority for a home, and also provide particularly for the special needs of
elderly, disabled and single people.
The associations, which are non-profit-making, have grown under govern¬
ment encouragement and now own over 500,000 homes and 2,600 hostels.
Individual associations range in size from a group of‘almshouses’ for fewer than
ten old people to associations with more than 10,000 homes. In Great Britain
housing schemes carried out by associations qualify for government grant if the
association is one of over 2,600 registered with the Housing Corporation, a
statutory body.
Under existing legislation most rented homes owned by housing associations
are let on secure tenancies subject to the fair rent arrangements. Secure
housing association tenants have rights under the tenants’ charter in the
Housing Act 1985—in Scotland the Housing (Scotland) Act 1987—including, in
some cases, the right to buy or the possibility of a discount on the purchase of an
alternative home. Housing associations also provide accommodation on a
shared ownership basis, allowing the occupier to part-rent and part-own a
home, and they can purchase improved older properties for outright sale. Both
activities are eligible for government grants.
Under the Housing Bills all new housing association lettings would be on an
assured tenancy basis or a shorthold basis in the same way as in the private
sector. This would give the associations the flexibility in setting rents to enable
them to meet the requirements of private sector finance instead of relying on
public finance.
In Scotland a new housing development agency, Scottish Homes, would be set
up under the Housing (Scotland) Bill, with a wide range of general functions and
powers, both providing financial assistance to housing associations and others,
and directly owning, managing and disposing of housing. It would incorporate
both the Housing Corporation in Scotland and the Scottish Special Housing
Association.
Under the Housing Bill a new body, Housing for Wales, would be set up to cany
out the functions undertaken in Wales by the Housing Corporation, which
would operate in England only.
In Northern Ireland broadly similar assistance is available to associations
registered with the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland. Rent
levels are linked to those of the Northern Ireland Housing Executive. Tenants
have rights under a tenants’ charter, but not the right to buy, although housing
associations may sell their dwellings voluntarily, with discount as appropriate,
in line with the right to buy arrangements.
In urban areas of Britain slum clearance and redevelopment used to be major
features of housing policy, but large-scale clearance is now virtually at an end,
and there has been a trend in recent years towards the retention of existing
communities accompanied by the modernisation and conversion of sub¬
standard homes. Housing conditions have improved considerably, but problems
remain in some areas where there are high concentrations of dwellings lacking
basic amenities or requiring substantial repairs; and there are still some
pockets of unfit housing for which demolition is considered the best solution.
THE ENVIRONMENT
201
The emphasis now is on area renewal, with an integrated approach to renewal
and renovation.
More recently there has been concern about the problems associated with
high-density local authority estates in inner city areas or on the outskirts of
cities, some of which have not been popular with tenants, and about serious
structural defects found in some local authority dwellings. Authorities are
tackling these problems in a variety of ways including refurbishment and sale to
the private sector. In Scotland community-based housing associations and
tenant ownership co-operatives are being formed by some groups of tenants.
Scottish Homes would be given a major role in tackling housing-related urban
dereliction, in co-operation with local communities, the private sector and other
statutory agencies.
The Government’s Estate Action Initiative, which started in 1985, is working
with local authorities to deal with the problems of their run-down council
estates. Measures which are being developed include local housing management
along the lines of the Department of the Environment’s Priority Estates Project
(see below); the injection of private sector skills and resources; capital
investment in the refurbishment of the housing stock; community refurbish¬
ment schemes to enable previously unemployed people to work on environmen¬
tal improvements; the development of tenant management and ownership
co-operatives; measures to increase the diversification of tenures on estates; and
the stimulation of local employment and business enterprise opportunities.
Approval has been given to 250 schemes involving additional resources of
£50 million in 1986-87 and £75 million in 1987-88. Resources for 1988-89
have been almost doubled to £140 million.
The Priority Estates Project (PEP) was set up in England in 1979 (in Wales in
1983) to promote locally based housing management, under which control of
landlords services is devolved to a local team with maximum involvement and
consultation of residents. There are 36 projects on estates in England and
Wales, and many local authorities are now applying local management to their
own estates. Several schemes in England propose the formation of a local
management board to act as the management agent on behalf of the local
authority. Broadly similar arrangements apply in Northern Ireland.
Where social problems and housing disrepair are so serious that additional
action is required, the Housing Bill provides for the establishment of Housing
Action Trusts in England. These would take over responsibility for local
authority housing in designated areas, renovate it and then pass it to other
owners and managers, including housing associations, tenants’ co-operatives
and approved private landlords. The trusts would also act to facilitate the
provision of other community needs, such as shops, workshops and advice
centres, and to encourage local enterprise.
Over 1 -4 million home improvement grants were paid in respect of privately
owned dwellings in Great Britain between 1980 and 1987. There are five types of
grant: improvement grants, for carrying out improvements to bring a property
up to a good overall standard; intermediate grants, for the provision of standard
amenities (such as a bath and an inside lavatory) and associated repairs; repair
grants for substantial and structural repairs to pre-1919 houses (pre-1957 in
Northern Ireland and pre-1964 in Scotland, where a grant can cover all forms of
repair work); common parts grants (in England and Wales) for repairs and
improvements to the common parts of buildings containing flats; and special
grants for providing standard amenities and repairs (not available in Scotland)
and means of escape from fire in houses which are in multiple occupation. In
addition, since 1978 grants for loft insulation have been paid in respect of some
3-5 million homes. Since February 1988 this scheme has been concentrated on
low-income households.
202
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Declaring ‘general improvement areas’ and ‘housing action areas’ enables local
authorities in England and Wales to tackle the improvement of whole areas
systematically. General improvement areas, of which there are more than 1,800,
contain fundamentally sound houses and a stable population, while housing
action areas (of which there are about 200 in England and Wales) are
characterised by relatively poor housing and bad environmental conditions
combined with social problems. Local authorities have special powers to bring
about an improvement in living conditions for the benefit of residents. In both
types of area government financial aid for environmental improvement (such as
landscaping and work to improve the external appearance of buildings) is
available to local authorities. In these areas home improvement grants may
range up to 75 per cent of the eligible expense limit, and in certain cases of
hardship up to 90 per cent. ‘Enveloping’, introduced in 1982, involves the
renovation of the external fabric of whole terraces or streets of mainly privately
owned property in housing action areas which has deteriorated beyond routine
maintenance. It is carried out by local authorities at public expense, and the
encouragement it gives to residents is reflected in the increased take-up of
grants for improvements to the interiors after enveloping.
An ‘improvement-for-sale’ scheme has also been introduced; the Government
helps to meet any loss a local authority may make in buying, improving and
selling run-down or neglected housing.
In Scotland housing action area powers are available for the improvement of
areas in which at least half the houses fail to meet a statutory tolerable standard.
Since 1975 some 1,580 housing action areas, covering houses requiring
improvement or demolition, have been declared by local authorities. Outside
such areas in Scotland local authorities have powers to require the improvement
of houses below the statutory tolerable standard, or lacking certain basic
amenities, by improvement orders. In housing action areas or where an
improvement order has been made, grants of 75 per cent (up to 90 per cent in
cases of hardship) of the eligible expense limit may be made. Government
financial aid is also given towards the costs incurred by local authorities in
improving the environment of predominantly residential areas.
Northern Ireland has a large number of houses which are either unfit or in
serious disrepair. Since 1977, 50 housing action areas have been declared,
involving a continuous programme of rehabilitation, enveloping and associated
environmental improvement schemes. In addition, the Northern Ireland Hous¬
ing Executive undertakes a programme of improvement of its own stock.
Conservation
Britain is one of the leading countries in the conservation movement, with a
wide range of groups, including many voluntary organisations, actively involved
in environmental conservation and protection.
Historic
Buildings,
Ancient
Monuments
and
Conservation
Areas
Lists of buildings of special architectural or historical interest are compiled, as
required by the planning Acts, by the Secretary of State for the Environment and
the Secretaries of State for Scotland and Wales; some 416,000 buildings are
listed in England, over 35,000 in Scotland and 11,000 in Wales. It is against the
law to demolish, extend or alter the character of any listed building without
special consent from the local planning authority or the appropriate Secretary of
State; where consent is given to demolish a building, the Royal Commission on
Historical Monuments (for England) and similar bodies for Scotland and Wales
have an opportunity to make a photographic and written record of the building.
Emergency ‘building preservation notices’ can be served by the local planning
authority to protect buildings not yet listed. Ancient monuments are similarly
THE ENVIRONMENT
203
Architectural
Standards
protected through a system of scheduling. There are 13,000 scheduled ancient
monuments in England, about 4,500 in Scotland and over 2,600 in Wales.
Maintaining royal parks (which are open to the public) and palaces is the
responsibility of the Secretaries of State for the Environment and Scotland.
English Heritage (the Historic Buildings and Monuments Commission for
England) is charged with protecting and conserving England’s architectural and
archaeological heritage; it manages some 400 ancient monuments on behalf of
the Secretary of State for the Environment and gives grants for the repair of
ancient monuments, historic buildings and buildings in conservation areas in
England. In Scotland and Wales similar functions are performed by the Historic
Buildings and Monuments Directorate of the Scottish Development Depart¬
ment, which manages over 330 ancient monuments, and by Cadw (Welsh
Historic Monuments), which manages 125, with advice from an ancient
monuments board and a historic buildings council for each country. Local
authorities can make grants and loans for any building of architectural or
historic interest. The National Heritage Memorial Fund provides assistance
towards the cost of acquiring, maintaining or preserving land, buildings, works
of art and other items of outstanding interest which are also of importance to
the national heritage. In 1987—88 the Fund assisted in the preservation of about
90 heritage items.
Local planning authorities have designated for special protection about 6,000
‘conservation areas' of particular architectural or historic interest in England.
Grants and loans are available from the appropriate historic buildings and
monuments body for works which make a significant contribution towards the
preservation or enhancement of such an area.
In Northern Ireland the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland
has 160 historic monuments in its care, and some 850 monuments are
scheduled for protection. It is also responsible for listing buildings of special
architectural or historic interest and for designating conservation areas; there
are some 7,200 listed buildings and 26 conservation areas. It may also provide
grants and loans to help with the repair and maintenance of listed buildings and
to preserve or enhance conservation areas. It is advised by a Historic Buildings
Council and a Historic Monuments Council.
Among the voluntary organisations which campaign for the preservation of
buildings are the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings and the Ancient
Monuments Society; the Georgian Group; the Architectural Heritage Society of
Scotland; the Ulster Architectural Heritage Society; the Victorian Society;
and the Council for British Archaeology. The National Trust (for Places of
Historic Interest or Natural Beauty), an independent charity with more than
1 -5 million members, owns and protects over 200 historic buildings in addition
to 252,600 hectares (624,200 acres) of land and 794 km (494 miles) of coastline
in England, Northern Ireland and Wales. Scotland has its own National Trust.
Besides helping to conserve the finest buildings inherited from the past, the
Government encourages high standards in new building. The Department of the
Environment, in collaboration with the independent Royal Institute of British
Architects (RIBA) and the National House-Building Council, sponsors the
biennial Housing Design Awards Scheme for England and Northern Ireland,
with categories for renovation as well as new building. Scotland and Wales have
similar but separate award schemes. The Government has also encouraged the
use of architectural competitions, and has set an example in the award of some
of its own contracts. Royal Fine Art Commissions for England and Wales and for
Scotland advise government departments, planning authorities and other
public bodies on questions of public amenity or artistic importance.
The RIBA, the principal professional body for architects, exercises control over
204
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Tree
Preservation
Green Belts
The Coast
standards in architectural education and encourages the maintenance of high
architectural standards in the profession. The Royal Incorporation of Architects
in Scotland is allied to it, as is the Royal Society of Ulster Architects. The Civic
Trust, with associate trusts in Scotland, Wales and north-east and north-west
England, encourages high standards in urban design and the improvement and
regeneration of the environment.
Local planning authorities have power to protect trees and woodlands in the
interest of amenity by means of tree preservation orders. When granting
planning permission for development, a local planning authority must, where
appropriate, ensure adequate provision for the preservation or planting of trees.
In general, landowners must replace trees which die or are removed, uprooted or
destroyed in contravention of a preservation order. In October 1987 an
estimated 15 million trees in the south and east of England were felled by gales
of hurricane force. Many of the trees destroyed were in areas of outstanding
natural beauty and in urban areas. The Government has made available £6
million for planting replacement trees and a special unit of the Countryside
Commission (see p 205), ‘Task Force Trees’, is administering the planting
scheme. In addition, £250,000 was made available to the royal parks, which also
suffered badly.
‘Green belts’ (areas where it is intended that the land should be left open and free
from inappropriate building development and where people can seek recreation)
have been established on the fringes of certain urban areas, including London,
Merseyside, Greater Manchester and the West Midlands. They are intended to
restrict the further sprawl of large built-up areas, to prevent neighbouring towns
merging into one another, to assist in urban regeneration and to preserve the
special character of a town and the amenities of the countryside. Some 1-8
million hectares (4-5 million acres) of land have been designated as green belt in
Great Britain.
In 1987 advice was given to local planning authorities to encourage alternative
uses of farmland, and to assist rural enterprise and the diversification of the
rural economy. Further policy guidance issued at the beginning of 1988 also
reaffirmed the Government’s commitment to the protection and maintenance of
green belts.
The maritime local planning authorities are responsible for planning land use at
the coast, providing, for example, recreational facilities and amenities for
holidaymakers and local residents; at the same time they attempt to safeguard
and enhance the coast’s natural attractions and preserve areas of scientific
interest. The protection of the coastline against erosion is administered
centrally by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, the Welsh Office and
the Scottish Office.
A comprehensive study of the coastline of England and Wales, undertaken by
the Countryside Commission (see p 205) during the period 1966—70, recom¬
mended that certain stretches of undeveloped coast of particular scenic beauty
should be treated as heritage coast. Jointly with local authorities, the
Commission has defined 39 of these coasts so far, protecting 1,370 km (850
miles).
In 1965 the National Trust launched its Enterprise Neptune campaign to raise
funds for the nation to acquire stretches of coastline of great natural beauty and
recreational value. More than £11 million has been raised so far and as a result
the Trust has under its protection 794 km (494 miles) of coastline in England,
Wales and Northern Ireland. As part of the campaign, relaunched in 1985, the
Trust is raising funds to acquire a further 653 km (406 miles) considered at
THE ENVIRONMENT
205
Countryside
Commissions
National Parks,
Areas of
Outstanding
Natural Beauty
and National
Scenic Areas
risk. Some 128 km (80 miles) of coast in Scotland are protected by conservation
agreements with the National Trust for Scotland.
In exceptional cases economic arguments override conservation; development
associated with North Sea oil and gas is occurring on remote and unspoiled
coastal areas in Scotland, for instance, but planning guidelines drawn up by the
Scottish Development Department aim to ensure that oil-related activities are
sited so as to make the best use of existing labour and infrastructure and to
minimise the effect on the coastline. Provision has also been made for funds to
be set aside for the restoration of sites once there is no further need for them.
Two Countryside Commissions (one for England and Wales, the other for
Scotland) are responsible for conserving and enhancing the natural beauty and
amenity of the countryside, and for encouraging the provision and improvement
of facilities for open-air recreation. These include the provision by local
authorities (sometimes in association with other bodies) and private individuals
of country parks and picnic sites often within easy reach of towns, the provision
or improvement of recreational paths and the encouragement of amenity
tree-planting schemes. The Countryside Commission recognises 222 country
parks and 265 picnic sites in England and Wales. In Scotland 35 country parks
are recognised and a large number of local authority and private sector schemes
for the provision of a variety of countryside facilities have been approved for
grant aid. The Commissions undertake research projects and experimental
schemes, working in consultation with local authorities and such bodies as the
Nature Conservancy Council (see p 206) and the Sports Councils. The Commis¬
sions give financial assistance to public, private and voluntary bodies and
individuals carrying out countryside recreation and amenity projects, and
landscape conservation projects.
The Countryside Commission (for England and Wales) is empowered to
designate, for confirmation by the appropriate minister, national parks and
areas of outstanding natural beauty’; to define heritage coasts in conjunction
with local authorities (see p 204); and to make proposals for the creation of
long-distance footpaths and bridleways. Ten national parks have been estab¬
lished, covering 13,600 sq km (5,250 sq miles), 9 per cent of the area of England
and Wales, and 38 areas of outstanding natural beauty have been designated
and confirmed, covering 19,300 sq km (7,450 sq miles).
The land in these designated areas generally remains privately owned, but
agreements or orders to secure additional public access may be made by local
authorities. Steps are taken to preserve and enhance the landscape’s natural
beauty by high standards of development control, and by positive measures, for
which grants are available, such as tree planting and the removal of eyesores. In
the national parks other measures for the benefit of the public include the
provision of car parks, camping and caravan areas, and information centres. All
national parks and some other designated areas have warden services. Most
local authority expenditure on national parks is met by government grants. A
special statutory authority to manage the Norfolk and Suffolk Broads, long
considered to be of equivalent status to a national park, was established in
1988.
In Northern Ireland the Ulster Countryside Committee advises the Depart¬
ment of the Environment for Northern Ireland on the preservation of amenities
and the designation of areas of outstanding natural beauty. Eight such areas
have been designated, covering 259,500 hectares (641,000 acres), and seven
areas are being managed as country parks and one as a regional park.
In Scotland there are no national parks as such, but there are three regional
parks and 40 ‘national scenic areas’, covering more than 1 million hectares (2-5
206
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Public Rights
of Way
and Open
Country
Nature
Conservation
million acres), or 13 per cent of the country, where certain kinds of development
are subject to consultation with the Countryside Commission for Scotland, and
in the event of a disagreement, with the Secretary of State for Scotland. More
than 98 per cent of the land in Scotland is designated countryside within which
the Commission may provide grants for a wide range of countryside projects.
There are 11 forest parks in Great Britain, covering some 244,000 hectares
(603,000 acres) and administered by the Forestry Commission, and nine in
Northern Ireland administered by the Forest Service of the Department of
Agriculture. Camping and other recreational facilities are provided.
Many voluntary organisations are concerned to preserve the amenities of the
countryside; they include the Councils for the Protection of Rural England and
of Rural Wales, the Association for the Protection of Rural Scotland and the
Ulster Society for the Preservation of the Countryside.
County councils in England and Wales are required to prepare and keep under
review definitive maps showing public rights of way; they are also responsible for
keeping rights of way free from obstruction, and signposted. If a path is not
shown on the map, a private citizen may claim that it is a public right of way if it
has been regarded as such and used without hindrance for at least 20 years.
Public footpaths are maintained by local authorities, which also supervise
landowners’ duties to repair stiles and gates. Local authorities in Great Britain
can create paths, close paths no longer needed for public use and divert paths to
meet the needs of either the public or landowners. Local planning authorities
can also convert minor roads into footpaths or bridleways to improve the
amenities of their area. In England and Wales there are some 217,000 km
(135,000 miles) of rights of way. There are 13 approved long-distance footpaths
and bridleways in England and Wales covering some 2,711 km (1,684 miles) and
three approved long-distance routes in Scotland covering some 580 km
(360 miles). Voluntary organisations concerned with footpaths include the
Open Spaces Society, the Scottish Rights of Way Society and the Ramblers
Association.
There is no automatic right of public access to open country, although many
landowners allow it more or less freely. Local planning authorities can secure
access by means of agreements with landowners; if agreements cannot be
reached, authorities may acquire land or make orders for public access. Similar
powers cover Scotland and Northern Ireland.
Common land, a large proportion of which is open to the public, totals an
estimated 600,000 hectares (1-5 million acres) in England and Wales. (There is
no common land in Scotland or Northern Ireland.) This land is usually privately
owned, but people other than the owner may have various rights on or over it, for
example, of pasture for farm animals. Commons are protected by law and cannot
be built on or enclosed without the consent of the Secretaries of State for the
Environment or Wales.
The official body responsible for nature conservation in Great Britain is the
Nature Conservancy Council, which has the functions of establishing, main¬
taining and managing nature reserves, advising the Government, providing
general information and advice, and commissioning or supporting research. \
There are 234 national nature reserves covering some 161,000 hectares
(398,000 acres). Some 5,000 sites of special scientific interest have been listed
for their flora, fauna or geological or physiographical features.
The Forestry Commission has 344 ‘sites of special scientific interest’ on its
land—covering 70,000 hectares (173,000 acres)—on which nature conservation
is a primary objective. Local authorities have declared about 150 local nature
reserves. Voluntary nature conservation trusts and the Royal Society for the
THE ENVIRONMENT
207
Protection of Birds play an important part in protecting wildlife, having
established between them some 1,800 reserves. The trusts are affiliated to a
parent organisation, the Royal Society for Nature Conservation. The Royal
Society for the Protection of Birds, with over 440,000 members and 90,000
young ornithologists, is the largest voluntary wildlife conservation body in
Europe.
In Northern Ireland the Committee for Nature Conservation advises the
Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland on nature conservation
matters including the establishment and management of terrestrial and marine
nature reserves and the declaration of areas of special scientific interest; 46
national nature reserves have been established and 18 areas of special scientific
interest declared.
The Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 extended the list of protected species
(further extended by Order in 1988), restricted the introduction into the
countryside of animals or plants not normally found in the wild, and afforded
greater protection for areas of special scientific interest and other important
habitats. In Northern Ireland two Orders, which became operative in 1985, have
brought legislation into line with the rest of Britain on species and habitat
protection.
Other conservation measures promoted by the Government have included a
ban (in conjunction with other European Community countries) on the import
of whale products and certain seal pup products, a system of licensing zoos to
ensure that captive animals are kept in suitable conditions, and stricter controls
for the protection of wild birds. Certain areas, of importance for their landscape,
historic and habitat value, are being designated ‘environmentally sensitive
areas' as a result of a change in European Community regulations allowing
governments to make special payments to farmers to continue their traditional
farming methods for the sake of preserving the countiyside and its wildlife. By
mid-1988, 19 areas had been designated.
Britain participated fully in the European Year of the Environment (from
March 1987 to March 1988), which aimed to raise public awareness of
environmental issues and of the individual’s responsibility for the present and
future quality of the environment. Over 3,000 events held in Britain highlighted
nature conservation, the control of pollution and wastes, and the improvement
of the urban environment.
Land
Reclamation
and Use
Derelict land is often concentrated in places associated with nineteenth-century
industrial development, but the restructuring of particular industries over the
past decade or so is continuing to add significantly to this problem in certain
areas. Dereliction can take various forms and includes mineral waste tips, old
mineral workings, and former industrial sites (such as steelworks, disused
railways and docks), many of which are contaminated sites.
In England government grants are available under the Derelict Land Act 1982
to local authorities and to other public bodies, to the private sector and to
nationalised industries for the reclamation of such land in order to bring it into
beneficial use or to improve its appearance. The expenditure provision for the
derelict land reclamation programme in 1988-89 is £76 million. The main
priority is given to reclamation schemes in urban, particularly inner city, areas
that lead to development by the private sector for industry, commerce and
especially housing. Between 1 April 1979 and 31 March 1988 some 11,500
hectares (over 28,000 acres) of derelict land were reclaimed in England with the
aid of some £460 million of grant.
In Scotland and Wales responsibility for derelict land reclamation rests with
the respective development agencies, which may acquire and reclaim land,
employ local authorities as their agents (in Scotland) or make grants to local
208
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Registers of
Unused and
Under-used
Land
Environmental
Improvement
Scheme
Administration
authorities for the purpose (in Wales). In Northern Ireland grants may be paid to
landowners who restore or improve derelict sites.
To prevent new dereliction, planning controls require that when permission is
given for mineral working, various measures must be taken to minimise the
disturbance caused by the work and, where practicable, to secure effective
restoration to the former land use or to a new use.
In Wales land use is additionally encouraged by the Land Authority for Wales, a
statutory body with powers to make land available for development in
circumstances where the private sector would find this difficult or impossible.
In England the Government has instituted, and made available for inspection,
registers of unused and under-used land held by local authorities, nationalised
industries and other public bodies; some 64,000 hectares (159,000 acres) have
been registered. Of this, some 28,000 hectares (70,000 acres) have been
deregistered mainly because the land has been sold to the private sector or
brought into use. There is power to direct a public body to dispose of registered
land; directions in respect of 73 sites had been issued by the end of March 1988.
Registers are also published for certain areas of Wales.
In 1986 the Government launched a new initiative to encourage a wide range of
local environmental improvement work. The initiative, called UK 2000, brings
together representatives of voluntary organisations and independent members
from business. It aims to improve the natural and built environment and
people's enjoyment of it, create jobs, and provide work and training for the
participants. Voluntary organisations promote programmes of work and assist
in the setting up of local projects such as creating parks, footpaths and other
areas of greenery in cities, conserving the industrial heritage and the natural
environment, recycling waste, and providing tourist information and facilities.
Control of Pollution
The Control of Pollution Act 1974, which applies to England, Scotland and
Wales, sets out a wide range of powers and duties for local and water authorities,
including control over wastes, air and water pollution and noise, and contains
important provisions on the release of information to the public on environmen¬
tal conditions. In particular, it introduced a new system for the comprehensive
planning of waste disposal operations so as to ensure that disposal is carried out
to satisfactory standards and that, where practicable, waste materials are
recovered and recycled. The Act also increased the penalties for a large number
of pollution offences. Similar legislation applies in Northern Ireland.
Executive responsibility for pollution control rests in general with local and
water authorities, although certain industrial processes are controlled by
central government agencies. Local authorities are responsible for matters such
as collection and disposal of domestic wastes; control of air pollution from
domestic and many industrial premises; and noise abatement measures. The
regional water authorities in England, the Welsh Water Authority, the river
purification boards and island councils in Scotland and the Department of the
Environment for Northern Ireland are responsible for control of water pollution.
Sewerage and sewage treatment and disposal are the responsibilities of regional
water authorities in England and Wales, of local authorities in Scotland and of
the Department of the Environment in Northern Ireland.
An independent standing Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution
advises the Government on national and international matters concerning the
pollution of the environment, on the adequacy of research and on the future
THE ENVIRONMENT
209
The Land
Recycling and
Materials
Reclamation
possibilities of danger to the environment. It has so far produced 12 reports
covering a wide range of topics.
Central government is principally concerned with formulating policy, exercis¬
es general budgetary control, promoting legislation, and advising pollution
control authorities on its implementation. The Secretary of State for the
Environment has general responsibility for co-ordinating the work of the
Government on environmental protection and in this is assisted by a Central
Directorate of Environmental Protection within the Department. In Scotland,
Wales and Northern Ireland the respective Secretaries of State are responsible
for pollution control co-ordination in their countries. They are assisted by the
Scottish Development Department, the Water and Environmental Protection
Division of the Welsh Office, and the Department of the Environment for
Northern Ireland respectively. In 1987 the former Industrial Air Pollution
Inspectorate (of the Health and Safety Executive), the Radiochemical Inspec¬
torate and the Hazardous Waste Inspectorate were amalgamated in a single
unified inspectorate for England and Wales known as the Inspectorate of
Pollution.
The Environmental Protection Technology Scheme, launched by the Depart¬
ment of the Environment in 1988, aims to encourage the development of cleaner
industrial technologies.
The main risks of land pollution lie in the indiscriminate dumping of waste
materials on land, careless disposal of pesticides and chemicals, and the
deposition of materials from the atmosphere and from flood-water. The Control
of Pollution Act places a duty on waste disposal authorities to arrange for the
disposal of controlled wastes. It requires them to draw up and revise periodically
a waste disposal plan and establishes a licensing system for waste disposal sites,
treatment plants and storage facilities receiving controlled wastes. In addition,
it provides for a more intensive control system for certain especially hazardous
or difficult wastes. The Inspectorate of Pollution and the Hazardous Waste
Inspectorate for Scotland advise local authorities on how to improve their
control of waste management and to work towards environmentally acceptable
standards for dealing with hazardous wastes. In June 1988 the Government
announced plans to strengthen legal controls on waste management; proposed
amendments to the Control of Pollution Act will include provision for a statutory
duty of care, to be imposed on both producers and holders of waste.
It is a criminal offence to leave litter in any public place in the open air or to
dump rubbish except in designated places. To help counteract the problem of
litter, financial support is given to the Tidy Britain Group, which provides a
comprehensive litter abatement programme in collaboration with local authori¬
ties and secures sponsorship from industry to undertake litter abatement
promotions. In March 1988 the Government increased its annual grant to the
Tidy Britain Group from £0-6 million to £1-25 million; the Group is to lead a
new anti-litter initiative, involving a number of pilot projects. The Group is also
included in UK 2000 (see p 208).
The Government encourages the reclamation and recycling of waste materials
wherever this is practicable and economic in order to reduce waste disposal
costs and to help to conserve natural resources. Industry already makes
considerable use of reclaimed waste material such as metals, paper and textiles.
Local authorities reclaim about 20,000 tonnes of waste paper and about 30,000
tonnes of metals annually. In an increasing number of areas there are ‘bottle
banks' and ‘can banks’ where the public can deposit used glass and metal
containers respectively. Voluntary organisations also arrange collections of
waste material. Waste disposal authorities have powers under the Control of
210
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Water Pollution
Marine
Pollution
Pollution Act to take full account of opportunities for waste reclamation and
have a duty when drawing up their waste disposal plans to include information
on disposal methods which should be used, including reclamation.
There has been a significant improvement in water quality since the 1950s: the
level of pollution in the tidal Thames, for example, has been reduced to a quarter
of the 1950s' level and over 100 different kinds of fish have been identified there
since 1964. A major scheme has been launched to clean up the Mersey, the
largest British estuary still suffering from pollution, and other major schemes
are in progress, including programmes aimed at improving water quality in the
Tyne and Tees.
There are comprehensive controls over discharges to rivers, estuaries, coastal
waters and underground waters. Information about consented discharges and
about water quality is publicly available on registers maintained by the
individual water authorities and by the river purification authorities in
Scotland. More than 95 per cent of the population is provided with main
drainage, and public authority sewage treatment works serve over four-fifths of
the population—a very high proportion by international standards.
Control of marine pollution from ships is based largely on international
conventions drawn up under the auspices of the International Maritime
Organisation, a United Nations agency with headquarters in London, and
implemented for British ships by domestic legislation. The Merchant Shipping
(Prevention of Oil Pollution) Regulations 1983 and the Prevention of Oil
Pollution Act 1986 make it an offence for ships of any nationality to discharge oil
or oily mixtures into British territorial waters and for British registered ships to
make similar discharges anywhere into the sea, except in accordance with the
regulations.
The Department of Transport’s Marine Pollution Control Unit undertakes
operations at sea to counter pollution when oil (or other dangerous substances)
threatens major coastal pollution or is likely to harm important fisheries or
concentrations of sea birds. It maintains a national contingency plan and
dispersant spraying, cargo transfer and mechanical recovery resources, includ¬
ing a remote sensing aircraft capable of detecting possible illegal discharges and
of quantifying oil pollution.
Offshore operators must ensure that oil does not escape into the sea and are
required to have contingency plans for dealing with oil spilled accidentally.
Discharges containing oil are controlled under the Prevention of Oil Pollution
Act 1971. Discharges of chemicals are controlled and monitored by a non-
statutory Chemical Notification Scheme, administered by the Department of
Energy in consultation with fisheries departments.
The Food and Environment Protection Act 1985 (which superseded the
Dumping at Sea Act 1974) tightened the controls over dumping at sea, the most
significant change being the introduction of specific controls on marine
incineration. Under the Act a licence has to be obtained for the permanent
deposit of any substance or article into tidal waters and the sea. Dumping at sea
is permitted on the basis of the scientific criteria set out in the annexes to the
Oslo Convention (International Convention for the Prevention of Marine
Pollution by Dumping from Ships and Aircraft 1972) and the London
Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping Wastes and
Other Matter 1972.
At the Second International Conference on the Protection of the North Sea,
held in London in November 1987, it was agreed to take action to protect and
enhance the quality of the North Sea and benefit the environment as a whole. In
February 1988 the Government issued guidance to the water industry and other
THE ENVIRONMENT
211
Clean Air
public utility and industrial interests on reducing inputs of pollutants to the
seas around Britain. Authorities are being required to prepare plans to reduce
inputs of dangerous substances into rivers and estuaries, one of the major
sources of such inputs to the North Sea, in order to meet the agreed objectives by
1990. At the conference ministers agreed to cease the dumping of harmful
industrial waste by the end of 1989. The conference also established a scientific
task force to ensure better co-ordination of North Sea research and monitoring
and ministers also agreed to hold a third conference, in the Netherlands, in early
1990 to review progress.
Responsibility for clean air rests primarily with local authorities. Under the
Clean Air Acts 1956 and 1968 they may declare ‘smoke control areas’ within
which the emission of smoke from chimneys constitutes an offence. About
two-thirds of the premises in conurbations are now covered by smoke control
orders. Emissions from most industrial premises are also subject to the control
of local authorities under the Clean Air Acts and the Public Health Acts. The
emission of dark smoke from any trade or industrial premises or from the
chimney of any building is in general prohibited, and new furnaces must be
capable as far as practicable of smokeless operation. Regulations prescribe
specific limits to the quantities of grit and dust which may be emitted from
certain furnaces. Industrial premises that have the greatest potential for giving
rise to noxious or offensive emissions are, in England and Wales, under the
control of the Inspectorate of Pollution. In Scotland this function is discharged
by the Industrial Pollution Inspectorate. The Inspectorates require the best
practicable means to be used to prevent emissions or render them harmless.
Similar legislation and controls apply in Northern Ireland.
Strict controls are in force on emissions from motor vehicles, and Britain has
played a constructive role in European Community discussions on tighter
limits. The maximum permitted lead content of petrol in Britain was reduced to
015 grammes per litre on 31 December 1985 and as a result the amount of lead
measured in the air in 1986 fell to less than half the 1985 figure. The European
Community has adopted a directive which requires unleaded petrol to be
available throughout the Community by October 1989. The first unleaded petrol
in Britain went on sale at selected service stations in 1986, and from 1 October
1990 most new cars in Britain will have to be able to run on unleaded petrol.
Britain is implementing new and tighter limits on exhaust emissions from cars
following agreement on a European Community directive (the ‘Luxembourg’
agreement) in December 1987. In June 1988 agreement was reached in
principle within the Community on new and tighter exhaust emission
standards for small cars. The overall effect will be to reduce by more than half the
emissions permitted from new cars.
Considerable progress has been made towards the achievement of cleaner air
and a better environment, especially in the last 30 years or so. Total emissions of
smoke in the air have fallen by over 85 per cent since 1960. The domestic smoke
control programme has been particularly important in achieving this result.
London no longer has the dense smoke-laden ‘smogs' of the 1950s and in central
London winter sunshine has increased by about 50 per cent since 1958. Similar
improvement has been achieved in other cities including Glasgow and Sheffield.
National sulphur dioxide emissions have fallen by about 40 per cent since
1970. The Government fully accepts the need for further reductions of both
sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxide emissions. Under a £1,000 million
programme, all new coal-fired power stations are to have equipment to remove
acid emissions; the equivalent of three Central Electricity Generating Board
power stations will be retrofitted with flue gas desulphurisation equipment, and
all 12 major coal-fired power stations with low nitrogen oxide burners. In June
212
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Noise
1988 agreement was reached on the European Community directive on the
control of emissions from large combustion plants, under which Britain
accepted a phased programme of reductions in sulphur dioxide emissions from
existing large combustion plants by 20 per cent of 1980 levels by 1993, 40 per
cent by 1998 and 60 per cent by 2003, and agreed to reduce nitrogen oxide
emissions by 15 per cent by 1993 and 30 per cent by 1998. The Government is
considering with the electricity supply industry how best to implement these
further reductions. Britain is supporting an extensive research programme into
the causes and effects of acid rain, and the likely results of possible abatement
technologies. It is also participating in international research programmes and
monitoring schemes.
Britain is closely involved in international measures to prevent further
damage to the ozone layer of the atmosphere by chlorofluorocarbons, the
man-made gases in aerosols. In 1987 Britain signed the Montreal Protocol to the
Vienna Convention on the Protection of the Ozone Layer, which is expected to
come into force on 1 January 1989. Signatories to the Protocol have agreed to
reduce their consumption and production of the substances with the greatest
potential to deplete the ozone layer—chlorofluorocarbons and halons.
The Control of Pollution Act 1974 (and similar legislation in Northern Ireland)
requires local authorities to inspect their areas for noise nuisance and gives
them the power to take action by serving a noise abatement notice on a person
responsible for it. It also enables them to designate noise abatement zones’
within which registered levels of noise from certain premises may not be
increased without their permission. The Act contains specific provisions to
control noise from construction and demolition sites. It also contains provisions
enabling individuals to take action through the courts against noise amounting
to a nuisance.
Transport is one of the main offenders in noise pollution, and control
measures are aimed at reducing noise at source, through requirements limiting
the noise that aircraft and motor vehicles may make, and at protecting people
from its effects. The Road Vehicles (Construction and Use) Regulations 1986 set
out the permissible noise levels for various classes of new vehicles. More
stringent limits will be introduced for new vehicles between October 1988 and
October 1990.
Under the Land Compensation Act 1973 and similar legislation in Scotland,
compensation is payable for loss in property values caused by physical factors
including noise arising from the use of new or improved public works such as
roads and airports. Regulations made under the Acts also enable highway
authorities to carry out or make grants for insulation of homes subject to
specified levels of increased noise caused by new or improved roads. Noise
insulation may also be provided where construction work for new roads is likely
to affect nearby homes seriously.
Noise emission levels of almost all aircraft on the United Kingdom Register are
regulated in accordance with standards agreed by the International Civil
Aviation Organisation. Since 1986 all subsonic jets on the United Kingdom
Register have had to comply with these standards, and this requirement was
extended to overseas-registered aircraft from 1 January 1988. Various oper¬
ational restrictions have been introduced to reduce noise disturbance further at
Heathrow, Gatwick and Stansted, where the Secretary of State for Transport has
assumed responsibility for noise abatement. These measures include restriction
on the type and number of aircraft which may operate at night, the routing of
departing aircraft on noise preferential routes, and quiet take-off and landing
procedures.
THE ENVIRONMENT
213
Radioactivity
Radioactive
Waste
Disposal
Radiation resulting from industrial and other processes represents only a small
fraction of that to which the population is exposed from the natural environ¬
ment. Nevertheless, that fraction is subject to stringent control because of
possible effects on health or longer-term genetic effects. Under the Radioactive
Substances Act 1960 most users of radioactive materials other than those
subject to licence under the Nuclear Installations Act 1965 must be registered by
the appropriate department, and authorisation is also required for the disposal
of radioactive waste. The Health and Safety Executive, through its Nuclear
Installations Inspectorate, is the authority concerned with the granting of
nuclear site licences for commercial nuclear installations. No installation maybe
constructed or operated without a licence granted by the Executive. The
National Radiological Protection Board (NRPB), established under the Radio¬
logical Protection Act 1970, provides an authoritative point of reference on
radiological protection. Following the accident at the Chernobyl nuclear power
station in the Soviet Union in 1986, the Government is setting up a Radioactive
Incident Monitoring Network. More than 80 stations throughout Britain will
continuously monitor radiation in order to improve emergency arrangements in
the event of a nuclear accident overseas. In 1987 the Government announced a
series of measures to deal with the problem of naturally occurring radon gas in
houses, including a survey by the NRPB to identify houses with the highest
levels where remedial action would be necessary.
Radioactive wastes vary widely in nature and level of activity, and the practices
followed reflect this variation. Some wastes are dispersed safely in the
environment. The Nuclear Industry Radioactive Waste Executive (UK Nirex Ltd)
is responsible for developing and operating disposal facilities for solid wastes
with a low or intermediate level of activity and is seeking to identify a suitable
location for a deep multi-purpose facility. UK Nirex Ltd is evaluating the relative
merits of techniques of deep burial in a repository on land, tunnelling under the
sea-bed from the shore, and disposal into the sea-bed from a sea-based rig. The
Department of the Environment is also sponsoring research, in collaboration
with other countries, into disposal of high-level wastes, but these will first be
stored in vitrified form for at least 50 years.
9 Religion
The Church of
England
Everyone in Britain has the right of religious freedom (in teaching, worship and
observance) without interference from the community or the State. Churches
and religious societies may own property, run schools, and propagate their
beliefs in speech and writing. There is no religious or denominational bar to the
holding of public office.
There are two established churches, that is, churches legally recognised as
official churches of the State: in England the (Anglican) Church of England, and
in Scotland the (Presbyterian) Church of Scotland. Clergy of the established
churches work in services administered by the State, such as the armed forces,
national hospitals and prisons, and are paid a salary by the State. Clergy of other
denominations are also appointed. Voluntaiy schools provided by religious
denominations may be wholly or partly maintained from public funds. The
churches’ involvement in broader social issues and the practical help they give to
groups of many kinds—from young people to the bereaved and homeless—was
highlighted in the Church of England report Faith in the City: A Call for Action
by Church and Nation, published in 1985. This made recommendations for
alleviating the problems of the inner cities and other areas of social deprivation
and led to a decision by the Church of England in 1986 to set up an urban aid
fund with the aim of raising £10 million in capital for its work in inner city and
other priority areas.
There is no precise or uniform information about the number of church
adherents since no inquiries are normally made about religious beliefs in
censuses or other official returns, and each church adopts its own criteria in
counting its members. Membership figures in this chapter are therefore
approximate.
About one-sixth of the adult population in Britain are members of a Christian
church and there are considerable regional variations in church membership:
England has the lowest membership with 13 per cent, Wales has 23 per cent,
Scotland 37 per cent, and Northern Ireland the highest with 80 per cent.
There has been a decline in recent years in both the number of full¬
time ministers and the recorded adult membership of the larger Christian de¬
nominations. This has been accompanied by a significant growth among
small break-away, independent, or Pentecostal churches and new religious
movements. However, the churches today share a strong desire to work together
and the ecumenical movement is well supported. Religious education in schools
is required by statute in England, Wales and Scotland, but the subject has
increasingly become concerned with religious and moral attitudes and values,
often taking into account many different faiths, rather than simply being a
vehicle for instruction in the Christian faith.
The Church of England’s relationship with the State is one of mutual
obligation—privileges accorded to the Church balanced by certain duties it must
fulfil. The Sovereign must always be a member of the Church, and promises to
uphold it; Church of England archbishops, bishops and deans are appointed by
the Sovereign on the advice of the Prime Minister; all clergy take an oath of
216
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Anglican
Communion
allegiance to the Crown. The Church can regulate its own worship. The two
archbishops (of Canterbury and York), the bishops of London, Durham and
Winchester, and 21 other bishops (according to their seniority as diocesan
bishops) sit in the House of Lords. Clergy of the Church (together with those of
the Church of Scotland, the Church of Ireland and the Roman Catholic Church)
are not allowed to sit in the House of Commons.
The Church has two provinces: Canterbury, comprising 30 dioceses (includ¬
ing the Diocese of Europe), and York, with 14 dioceses. The Archbishop of
Canterbury is ‘Primate of All England’, and the Archbishop of York ‘Primate of
England’. The dioceses are divided into 13,250 parishes. In 1986 it was
estimated that, in the two provinces (excluding the Diocese of Europe), some
233,000 people were baptised into the Church; of these 188,000 were under one
year old (30 per cent of live births). In the same year there were 72,650
confirmations. Attendances at services on a normal Sunday are around 1 • 1
million. Many people who rarely, if ever, attend services, nevertheless regard
themselves as belonging to the Church of England (amounting perhaps to some
60 per cent of the population).
The central governing body, the General Synod, has both spiritual authority
and legislative and administrative powers; and bishops, clergy and lay members
are involved in decisions. Certain important issues must be referred for the
approval of the dioceses before being decided by the Synod. Lay members are
associated with church government in the parishes through the ancient office of
churchwarden and the modern parochial church councils.
The General Synod is the centre of an administrative system dealing with such
matters as education, mission, inter-church relations, social questions, recruit¬
ment and training for the ministry, church work in Britain and overseas and the
care of church buildings, particularly those of historical and architectural
interest. It is also concerned with church schools (which are maintained from
public funds) and colleges of education, theological colleges, and centres for
training women in pastoral work. At present, men only are admitted to the
priesthood, but in 1987 the General Synod voted to proceed with legislation to
enable women to be ordained priests; final decisions on the matter, however, are
not expected to be taken for some years.
The Church has its own courts whose jurisdiction today extends only to
church property and matters of ecclesiastical discipline.
Church finance is administered locally by the parishes and the dioceses, with
contributions to a central fund for the maintenance of central services,
including capital expenditure on training and theological colleges and grants for
training candidates for ordination. The State makes no direct financial
contribution to church expenses. The Church’s endowment income is mainly
administered by the Church Commissioners, the body largely responsible for the
payment of clergy stipends and pensions.
The Anglican Communion comprises 28 autonomous provinces in Britain and
overseas and three regional councils overseas with a total membership of about
70 million. In the British Isles there are four provinces: the Church of England
(established), the Church in Wales, the Scottish Episcopal Church in Scotland,
and the Church of Ireland.
Every ten years the Lambeth Conference meets for unofficial consultation
among all Anglican bishops (the last Conference was held in Canterbury in
1988). Presided over by the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Conference has no
executive authority, but enjoys great prestige, and its findings on doctrine,
discipline, relations with other communions, and attitudes to political and
social questions are widely studied. The Anglican Consultative Council (an
assembly of laymen and clergy as well as bishops) meets every two or three years
RELIGION
217
and is designed to provide consultations within the Anglican Communion and
to serve as an instrument of common action. The Council will meet in Wales in
1990.
The Church of The Church of Scotland has a presbyterian form of government, that is,
Scotland government by elders, all (including ministers) of equal rank. Its status as the
national church derives from the Treaty of Union 1707, and the Church of
Scotland Act 1921 which confirmed its complete freedom in all spiritual
matters. It appoints its own officers, and its decisions on questions of doctrine
and discipline are not subject to parliamentary discussion or modification.
Both men and women are admitted to the ministry and each of 1,727
churches is governed locally by the Kirk Session, consisting of the minister and
the elected elders of the Church; above the Kirk Session is the Court of the
Presbytery, then the Court of the Synod, and finally the General Assembly,
consisting of elected ministers and elders, which meets annually under the
presidency of an elected moderator who serves for one year. The Sovereign is
represented at the General Assembly by the Lord High Commissioner. The adult
communicant membership of the Church of Scotland is over 838,660.
The Free
Churches
The expression Free Churches is commonly used to describe those Protestant
churches in Britain which, unlike the Church of England and the Church of
Scotland, are not established. In the course of history they have developed their
own convictions in church order and worship. All the major Free Churches 
Methodist, Baptist, United Reformed and Salvation Army—admit both men and
women to the ministry.
The Methodist Church, the largest of the Free Churches with just over
450,000 adult full members, originated in the eighteenth century following the
evangelical revival under John Wesley, and is based on a 1932 union of most of
the separate Methodist Churches. The Methodist Churches which did not join
the union include the Independent Methodists (nearly 4,000 members) and the
Wesleyan Reform Union (with some 3,200 members). The Methodist Church in
Ireland has over 20,000 members in Northern Ireland.
The Baptists are nearly all grouped in associations of churches, most of which
belong to the Baptist Union of Great Britain (formed in 1812), with a total
membership of about 170,600. In addition, there are separate Baptist Unions
for Scotland, Wales and Ireland, and other Baptist Churches.
The United Reformed Church, with some 129,000 members, was formed in
1972 when the Congregational Church in England and Wales (the oldest
community of dissenters in Britain) and the Presbyterian Church of England
merged—the first transdenominational union of churches in Britain since the
Reformation in the sixteenth century. In 1981 there was a further union with
the Re-formed Association of the Churches of Christ.
Among the other Free Churches are the Presbyterian Church in Ireland; the
Presbyterian (or Calvinistic Methodist) Church of Wales, which arose from the
revivalist movement led in 1735 by Howell Harris; the Union of Welsh
Independents; the Free Church of Scotland; the United Free Church of Scotland;
the Free Presbyterian Church of Scotland; the Reformed Presbyterian Church of
Scotland; the Reformed Presbyterian Church of Ireland; and the Non-
Subscribing Presbyterian Church of Ireland.
Other Protestant denominations include: the Unitarian and Free Christian
Churches; the Fellowship of the Churches of Christ (known also in the United
States as Disciples of Christ), which has been an organised community in
Britain since the early nineteenth century; the British Province of the Moravian
Church, which is an international missionary church; the Free Church of
England (or Reformed Episcopal Church), which was formed in 1844 as a direct
218
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Roman
Catholic
Church
Jewry
result of the Oxford Movement; and the Congregational Federation, formed from
Congregational Churches which did not enter the United Reformed Church.
There are also the Pentecostalists, who are increasing in numbers. Their two
main bodies operating in Britain are the Assemblies of God and the Elim
Pentecostal Church, many of whose members are of West Indian origin. There is
also a growing number of black-led churches.
The Religious Society of Friends (Quakers), with about 18,000 adult members
in Britain and 450 places of worship, came into being in the middle of the
seventeenth century under the leadership of George Fox. Silent worship is
central to its life as a religious organisation and Friends work for peace and the
relief of suffering in many parts of the world.
The Salvation Army, founded in Britain in 1865, has since spread to 88 other
countries. Within Britain there are 60,000 active members operating from
nearly 1,000 centres of worship. The Salvation Army’s distinctive ministry of
Christian evangelism and practical care is also expressed through the work of
some 120 social service centres, ranging from hostels for the homeless to homes
for the elderly, for abused children and for teenagers on probation, and
recreational centres for Service personnel. The Salvation Army also provides a
chaplaincy service to more than 100 prisons in Great Britain.
A recent development in Christian worship has been the house church
movement, which began in the early 1970s and now has an estimated
membership of over 89,000 (attendance being considerably greater than
membership). Each house church has an average of 100 members, the majority
of whom are former members of various Protestant denominations; groups of
between 15 and 20 members hold services and prayer meetings in private
houses, with the position of chairman being taken in rotation. House churches
receive money from their members to enable them to support their leaders and
carry out missionary and social work.
There are also a number of other religious organisations in Britain, all of
which were founded in the United States in the last century. These include the
Jehovah’s Witnesses, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints (the
Mormon Church), the Christian Scientists and the Spiritualists.
The Roman Catholic hierarchy in England and Wales, which became tempo¬
rarily extinct during the sixteenth century, was restored in 1850; the Scottish
hierarchy became extinct in the early seventeenth century and was restored in
1878. There are now seven Roman Catholic provinces in Great Britain, each
under an archbishop, 30 episcopal dioceses (22 in England and Wales, eight in
Scotland), and over 3,000 parishes. In Northern Ireland there are six dioceses,
some with territory partly in the Irish Republic. Approximately one citizen in ten
ordinarily claims to be an adherent of the Roman Catholic faith in Britain. Men
only are admitted to the priesthood. In 1982 Pope John Paul II paid a pastoral 1
visit to Britain, the first by a reigning pontiff.
The Roman Catholic Church attaches great importance to the education of
its children and requires its members to try to bring up their children in
the Catholic faith. A number of schools for Catholic children are staffed by
members of the religious orders (to the extent of one teacher in 35). These
orders also undertake other social work such as nursing, child care, and
running homes for old people. The great majority of Catholic schools are main¬
tained out of public funds and new schools may be established with
government grants.
Jews first settled in England at the time of the Norman Conquest, but the
present community in Britain dates from 1656, having been founded by those of
Spanish and Portuguese origin (known as Sephardim). Later and more
RELIGION
219
numerous settlers were of German and eastern European origin, known as
Ashkenazim. The present community, numbering about 400,000, is the second
largest in Europe.
The community is, broadly speaking, divided into two groups. About 80 per
cent of the majority Ashkenazi Jews are Orthodox and most acknowledge the
jurisdiction of the Chief Rabbi, with the Sephardi Orthodox element following
their own spiritual head (the Haham). The Reform movement which was
founded in 1840 and the Liberal and Progressive movement which followed in
1901 account for the remaining 20 per cent.
Jewish congregations in Britain number about 300. Jewish denominational
schools (some of them supported by public funds) are attended by about one in
three Jewish children. There are a number of charitable and welfare agencies
caring for the aged and handicapped.
The officially recognised representative body is the Board of Deputies of
British Jews.
Other
Religious
Communities
Christian communities of foreign origin, including the Orthodox, Lutheran and
Reformed Churches of various European countries, together with the Armenian
Church, have established their own centres of worship, particularly in London.
Britain has a long tradition of religious tolerance, a feature which has been
much in evidence during the past 30 years with the acceptance of a wide variety
of religious beliefs and traditions brought in by substantial numbers of
immigrants ol different nationalities. There are now large and growing
communities of Muslims, Hindus and Sikhs, and arrangements have been made
in places of work to allow the members of non-Christian religions to follow their
religious observances.
Britain’s Muslim population is estimated at around 1-5 million, the largest
number of whom originate from Pakistan and Bangladesh, with sizeable groups
from India, Cyprus, the Arab world, Malaysia and parts of Africa. There is also a
growing community of British-born Muslims, mainly the children of immigrant
parents, but including an increasing number of converts to Islam. The Islamic
Cultural Centre (and London Central Mosque) on the edge of Regent's Park is the
most important Muslim institution in the Western world, and there are over
1,000 mosques and prayer centres throughout Britain.
There are large Sikh and Hindu communities in Britain, both of which mainly
originate from India, each with 150 or more temples throughout the country.
Sikhs form the largest religious group of the Indian community and their
temples cater for the religious, cultural and social needs of their community.
There are over 200 Buddhist groups and centres and at least seven
monasteries and a number of temples. All schools of Buddhism are represented.
The Buddhist Society, with its headquarters in London, publicises the
principles of Buddhism and encourages their study and practice; it does not
adhere to any particular school of Buddhism.
CO-OPERATION
AMONG THE
CHURCHES
The British Council of Churches, with representatives or observers from all the
main Christian churches in the British Isles, facilitates common action and
seeks to further Christian unity. It works through five divisions: Christian Aid
(which has a separate constitution); Conference for World Mission; Ecumenical
Affairs; Community Affairs; and International Affairs.
The Free Church Federal Council (which has a concordat with the British
Council of Churches) comprises most of the Free Churches of England and
Wales. It promotes unity and joint action among the Free Churches and is a
channel for communication with central and local government.
Inter-church conversations about the doctrinal and practical issues involved
in the search for unity now take place through international as well as national
220
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
bodies. The Roman Catholic and Orthodox Churches are represented on some of
these as well as the Anglican and some of the Free Churches.
The Anglican and the main Free Churches also participate in the World
Council of Churches (of which the British Council of Churches is an associated
national council). This links together some 300 churches in over 100 countries
for co-operation and the study of common problems. The Council of Christians
and Jews works for better understanding among members of the two religions
and deals with problems in the social field. The British Council of Churches has
also established a Committee for Relations with People of Other Faiths.
The Sharing of Church Buildings Act 1969 enables agreements to be made by
two or more churches for sharing church buildings.
10 National
Economy
ECONOMIC
BACKGROUND
Since 1981 the British economy has experienced seven years of sustained
growth, representing the longest upswing since 1973. Investment, export
volume and productivity have risen substantially. Although inflation rose
during 1988 it remained less than half the 1981 rate. Unemployment fell by
900,000 between July 1986 and August 1988, although it remains high.
However, the number of people in work has been rising continuously since
1983. The current account of the balance of payments has been in deficit since
1986, following six successive years of surplus.
Britain has an open economy, in which international trade is a vital part of
economic performance. In 1987 exports of goods and services accounted for
about one-quarter of its gross domestic product (GDP)—a comparatively high
share among the major economies. The proportion has increased over the last
two decades from about 20 per cent in the early 1960s. Similar rises have
occurred in most other developed countries, reflecting the growing importance
of international trade in an increasingly interdependent world economy.
The economy is primarily based on private enterprise, and government policy
is aimed at encouraging and expanding the private sector, which accounts for
three-quarters of GDP and a similar proportion of total employment.
While manufacturing, the traditional engine of economic growth in Britain,
continues to play a vital role, recent decades have generally seen a faster growth
in the services sector, in a response to rising living standards. An adjustment to
the relative size of the manufacturing sector has also resulted from the growth of
North Sea oil output. Services now account for three-fifths of GDP and for
two-thirds of employment compared with about half of both GDP and
employment in 1950. Manufacturing accounts for about a quarter of each
compared with over a third in 1950.
Some 2-4 per cent of Britain’s workforce is engaged in agriculture—a lower
proportion than in any other major industrialised country. However, because of
a high level of productivity, Britain is able to produce nearly two-thirds of its own
food.
With the discovery and exploitation of oil and natural gas from the Continental
Shelf under the North Sea, the country has become self-sufficient in energy in
net terms. Together, the extraction of oil and gas accounted for 2 to 3 per cent of
GDP in 1987. Coal—traditionally the most important source of energy—still
meets over a third of Britain’s needs.
One of the largest exporters of visible goods, Britain accounts for about 5 per
cent of the world total. It is among the major exporters of aerospace products,
electrical equipment, most types of machinery, chemicals and oil. It is also one of
the world’s largest importers of agricultural products, raw materials and
semi-manufactures.
Since the end of the second world war, in about half the years a deficit in
222
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Economic
Growth
Inflation and
Competitiveness
Industrial
Production
Investment
Britain’s visible trade has been offset by a surplus on transactions in invisibles.
The significant contribution made by invisibles to the current account is partly
a reflection of Britain’s position as a major financial centre. The banks,
insurance underwriters and brokers, and other financial institutions of the City
of London provide world-wide financial services, and the City contains perhaps
the most comprehensive and advanced capital market in the world.
The marked rise in living standards in recent years has been accompanied by
the emergence of new industries and the renewal and improvement of much of
the country’s infrastructure. In earlier decades, in spite of short periods of rapid
economic expansion, the rate of growth had been low in comparison with the
rates in most other industrialised countries, averaging 2 to 3 per cent annually
up to 1973 but only about 1 per cent from then until the recession of the early
1980s. Since then, however, the average rate of growth has been some 3 per cent
a year. In 1987 Britain had the highest rate of growth among the major
industrialised countries.
From the late 1960s until about 1980 high rates of inflation reduced Britain’s
competitiveness. Huge rises in the price of oil in 1973—74 and 1979 and
substantial increases in the money supply and public spending were followed by
upsurges in inflation; retail prices rose by 24 per cent in 1975 and by 18 per cent
in 1980. Earnings also grew rapidly; in 1980 the underlying rate of increase was
about 21 per cent. From 1981 inflation has been on a downward trend though
rising of late; the annual rate was 5-7 per cent by August 1988—only a little
higher than the average for the European Community. In the year to July 1988
earnings rose at an underlying rate of some 9 per cent.
In the late 1970s competitiveness suffered from a much more rapid increase in
unit labour costs than in most other industrialised countries. There was also a
marked appreciation in sterling between 1978 and 1980. Since then, greater
moderation in pay settlements and a substantial rise in productivity (see p 223)
have contributed to a considerable improvement in competitiveness; between
1981 and early 1988 Britain’s unit labour costs in manufacturing fell by 19 per
cent.
In the decade to 1973 output of the manufacturing industries grew at a faster
rate than the economy as a whole. After the oil price rises of 1973—74, however,
and with increasing competition from overseas—from both developed and newly
industrialising countries—manufacturing output fell sharply so that in 1975 it
was 8 per cent lower than two years previously. It then increased from this
trough but, following another oil price rise and stagnation in the world
economy, fell back by over 14 per cent between 1979 and 1981. It has since
grown steadily to pass its 1973—74 peak.
Output of the production industries as a whole (manufacturing, energy and
water) had by 1985 risen above its earlier peak of 1979; it continued to grow in
1986 and 1987, particularly the latter year. In 1986 energy output was more
than twice the level of ten years earlier but it fell by 2 per cent in 1987.
Fixed investment grew by about 5 per cent a year during the 1960s but between
1970 and 1983 it held steady apart from cyclical variations. By 1987 it had
reached a record level, one contributory factor having been sharply rising profits
of non-oil companies in 1986. Profits of both oil and non-oil companies
continued to grow in 1987. A further influence may have been increased
capacity utilisation as Britain recovered from the recession of 1979—81. Over the
decade 1977—87 there was an increase in the private sector’s share of fixed
investment from 65 per cent to 84 per cent. Over the same period there has been
NATIONAL ECONOMY
223
Employment
and
Productivity
Overseas
Sector
a rise in the share of investment undertaken by the services sector and a fall in
that carried out by manufacturing.
Britain’s workforce in employment amounts to some 25 million. The number of
jobs in the economy is increasing: in the five years to March 1988 the number of
employees in employment rose by 1 million; self-employment has grown by 1
million since 1979. There has also been a large growth in the workforce, partly
the result of a rise in the number of women seeking work. As a result,
unemployment has not fallen as quickly as it might have done. As in other
industrialised countries, high unemployment has been a problem since the early
1970s. From a level of 300,000 to 400,000 in the mid-1960s, unemployment
rose to over 1 million in the mid-1970s (representing around 5 per cent of the
workforce) and then increased again very sharply after 1979 to reach 3 million in
the early 1980s. The rate of increase then slowed and, with the economy
growing, unemployment has been falling steadily since mid-1986. Unemploy¬
ment now amounts to 8 per cent of the workforce, having fallen faster than in
any other major industrialised country.
Other labour market indicators have improved. Overtime in manufacturing
has increased and short-time working has fallen. The shedding of surplus
labour and renewed growth have led to gains in productivity: between 1980 and
1987 output per head rose by 2-7 per cent per year on average in the economy as
a whole and by 5-2 per cent in manufacturing alone.
Britain's overseas trade performance fluctuated during the 1970s. In general,
imports of food, energy, raw materials and manufactured goods were greater
than visible exports, around 80 per cent of which were manufactured goods.
This deficit on visible trade was wholly or partly offset by a surplus on invisibles,
which cover earnings from services, together with interest, profits and
dividends, and transfers.
In the years 1980 to 1982 Britain ran surpluses on visible trade. Since then,
however, imports—especially of manufactures—have tended to rise more
sharply than exports and the deficit on visible trade has reappeared. After a long
period of deterioration in the balance of trade in manufactures there was a
deficit in 1983, which continued in the following years. Substantial and rising
net earnings on invisible transactions, however, kept the current account in
surplus up to 1986.
Membership of the European Community has had a major impact on Britain’s
pattern of trade, increasing the proportion with other member countries and
reducing the share of trade with other members of the Commonwealth. Between
1972 and 1987 the proportion of Britain’s exports of goods going to other
members of the Community rose from 34 to 49 per cent while that going to other
Commonwealth countries fell from 19 to 12 per cent. Imports followed a similar
trend. Trade with Japan and with the newly industrialised countries, including
Singapore, Korea, Taiwan and Malaysia, has risen substantially.
The strength of overseas earnings from invisibles has been maintained by the
continued adaptation to new conditions, particularly following the abolition of
exchange controls in 1979, and growth in world markets of insurance, banking,
tourism, construction, consultancy and other services. In 1987 exports of
services were valued at over one-third of exports of goods; the growth of overseas
assets has resulted in rising net receipts of investment income.
The substantial cumulative surplus on current account in the first half of the
1980s implies a corresponding increase in Britain’s net external assets, which
are estimated to have risen from £12,000 million at the end of 1979 to about
£90,000 million at the end of 1987—second in size only to those of Japan.
Following the abolition of exchange controls, investment outflows increased
224
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
sharply. Portfolio investment was high during the period 1984-86, partly a
reflection of investment by banks as they moved into lending in readily
marketable forms (such as floating rate notes) and away from traditional loans.
In 1987, however, there was net portfolio disinvestment by British residents but
a large increase in net direct investment.
Oil The development of North Sea oil and gas production has had a significant effect
on the economy; at the end of 1987 Britain was the world’s sixth largest oil
producer. The benefits to the balance of payments began to appear in the second
half of the 1970s; in 1980 Britain had its first surplus on oil trade. In 1974 oil
accounted for some 4 per cent of Britain's visible exports and 19 per cent of
visible imports; in 1987 the proportions were 11 per cent and 5 per cent
respectively. The oil surplus reached its peak in 1985, at £8,100 million. With
the fall in oil prices (see below) the surplus fell and was £4,200 million in 1987.
Exports, mainly to other European Community countries, are equivalent to
more than half of domestic production. They are partly offset in balance of
payments terms by imports of other grades of crude oil from the Middle East and
elsewhere.
North Sea oil helped to alleviate the fall in real national income which Britain,
along with other industrialised countries, suffered following the oil price rises of
the 1970s. It has helped to ease the task of controlling public sector borrowing,
contributing to the Government's counter-inflation strategy. Even after produc¬
tion runs down, the stock of external assets (see p 223) that has been built up
largely during the period of oil surpluses will provide a steady flow of income.
The price of oil fell gradually between 1981 and 1983 and then, after almost
three years of virtual stability, declined sharply again in late 1985 and the first
half of 1986. The dollar price has since partly recovered but, by August 1988,
was still about half its level of late 1985. Although a fall in the oil price leads to
some loss of revenues from oil exports and oil taxation, consumers and non-oil
industry benefit from lower costs and prices.
ECONOMIC British governments traditionally sought to influence the rate of growth and the
STRATEGY level of employment by macroeconomic policy measures (for example, by
variations in government expenditure, taxes or controls on consumer credit).
From the late 1960s until about 1980, increases in wage and price levels had an
adverse effect on competitiveness, profitability and business confidence. This
was associated with an increase in unemployment over the period. At various
times governments attempted to control pay rises and (less frequently) price
rises by means of voluntary or statutory controls, but such policies were largely
unsuccessful.
The present Government's economic objectives may be summarised as the
establishment of conditions that stimulate enterprise and encourage the
creation of wealth. In pursuit of these aims it has adopted economic policies
which in many ways represent a break with those of its predecessors.
Macroeconomic (monetary and fiscal) policies are now directed mainly at
bringing down the rate of inflation and ultimately achieving price stability. They
are set in the context of a medium-term financial strategy, which is reviewed
each year in the Budget. Microeconomic policies are aimed at improving the
working of markets by encouraging enterprise, efficiency and flexibility, and so
improving the supply side performance of the economy (see p 225). Together,
these policies are aimed at improving the division of the increase in money GDP
between output growth and inflation, and helping to create jobs.
Monetary The central aim of monetary policy is the creation of conditions that will exert
Policy steady downward pressure on the rate of growth of money GDP, so bringing
NATIONAL ECONOMY
225
The Exchange
Rate
Fiscal Policy
Supply Side
Policies
down the rate of inflation. Interest rates are the essential instrument of
monetary policy and they are set so as to bring such conditions about. Narrow
money as measured by MO1 has had a stable relationship with money GDP over a
number of years and has proved a reliable indicator of monetary conditions. A
target range of 1 to 5 per cent has been set for MO growth in 1988-89. Changes
in broad money, or liquidity, have become increasingly difficult to interpret;
far-reaching changes in financial practices have meant that there is no simple
relationship between the growth in broad money and in money GDP. Conse¬
quently, no explicit target range is set for broad money though the assessment of
monetary conditions continues to take broad money into account.
Exchange rates play a central role in both domestic monetary decisions and
international policy co-operation. The Government does not allow increases in
domestic costs to be accommodated either by monetary expansion or by
exchange rate depreciation. The major industrialised countries share a common
interest in more stable exchange rates. Britain is a member of the European
Monetary System but not of its exchange rate mechanism. This matter is kept
under review.
Monetary policy has been complemented by a firm fiscal policy whose aim has
been a progressive reduction in public borrowing as a proportion of GDP by
seeking to limit public expenditure as a proportion of GDP. The proportion has
been falling since 1982—83 and, by the early 1990s, is expected to be back to the
levels of the early 1970s. In the early years of the financial strategy the public
sector borrowing requirement amounted to around 5 per cent of GDP but by
1987-88 this had been turned into a surplus of a little under 1 per cent of
GDP—only the second surplus since the start of the 1950s. The Government’s
aim is now to maintain a balanced budget in the medium term.
While designing macroeconomic policy with the intent of reducing inflation, the
Government has sought to improve the supply response, and hence the
efficiency, of the economy through microeconomic policies. Action has been
taken to expose more of the economy to market forces. Direct controls (for
example, on pay, prices, foreign exchange, dividend payments and commercial
credit) have been abolished, competition in domestic markets strengthened,
labour market reforms introduced, measures taken to encourage share owner¬
ship and a substantial amount of activity transferred from the public to the
private sector by privatisation and by contracting work out. In addition,
regulatory burdens on business have been reduced.
In the labour market the Government has sought to improve work incentives
by reducing personal income tax rates and raising tax thresholds. It has also,
through the tax system, encouraged the extension of share ownership among
employees. A scheme of income tax relief has been introduced to encourage the
spread of profit-related pay. To improve employment prospects, the Government
has also abolished the National Insurance surcharge (a tax on employed labour)
and established a graduated structure of National Insurance contribution rates
which has reduced the cost to employers of hiring lower-paid workers. The
Government has also taken steps to achieve a better-balanced legal framework
for industrial relations and has expanded training opportunities. Obstacles to
the mobility of labour have been reduced. For example, the rights of those
leaving occupational pension schemes early have been improved and new
1 MO is notes and coin in circulation with the public and banks' holdings of cash and their
operational balances at the Bank of England.
226
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Economic
Management
NATIONAL
INCOME AND
EXPENDITURE
Expenditure
arrangements for personal pensions introduced, both of which will reduce the
pension disadvantage of changing jobs. Also, the Housing Bill aims at improving
the availability of private rented housing. The Government has enacted
legislation to limit the scope of wages councils. However, in spite of these
measures, wages have continued to rise in excess of the inflation rate. This has
taken place despite the Government’s emphasis on the link between pay and
jobs: it has repeatedly warned that, if employment is to rise faster, wages must
rise more slowly.
To improve the working of capital markets, the Government has abolished
controls on foreign exchange transactions, company dividends, hire purchase
and bank lending. Competition among financial institutions is being encour¬
aged within a new statutory framework of investor protection. The Government
has also taken steps to reduce the distorting effects of the tax system on
investment and savings decisions by, among other things, reforming corpora¬
tion tax and the system of capital allowances. Planning restrictions on industrial
investment have been eased, while government support to industry has been
made more selective and, where appropriate, more closely related to job creation.
Particular efforts have been made to improve the flow of investment funds to
small firms, to assist innovation in industry and to attract industry to the inner
cities.
The Treasury has prime responsibility for the formulation and conduct of
economic policy, which also involves the Departments of Trade and Industry,
Employment, Energy, the Environment and Transport and the Ministry of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
Other bodies are concerned with specific aspects of economic policy. These
include the Bank of England (the central bank), the National Economic
Development Council (in which the Government meets representatives of
management, trade unions and other interests), the Office of Fair Trading and
the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.
On matters of major public policy such as the broad economic strategy, and on
the economic problems it faces, the Government makes known its purposes and
keeps in touch with developments throughout the economy by means of
informal and continuous links with the chief industrial, financial, labour and
other interests. Final responsibility for the broad lines of economic policy rests
with the Cabinet.
The value of all goods and services produced in the economy is measured by
GDP. This can be expressed either in terms of market prices (the prices people
pay for the goods and services they buy) or at factor cost (the cost of the goods
and services before adding taxes and subtracting subsidies). It can also be
expressed in current prices or in constant prices (that is, removing the effects of
inflation in order to measure the underlying growth in the economy). In 1987
GDP at current factor cost totalled £352,000 million.
Gross domestic product is conventionally estimated in three different ways as
the sum total of expenditure, income or output in a given year. Each method
yields the same total in principle, but in practice there are slight differences.
Over the longer term the average of the three is the best indicator of growth in
the economy. The output measure is usually considered the most reliable
measure of short-term movements. In 1987 the index of the average estimate of
GDP at constant factor cost was 107-4 (1985 = 100), compared with 103-0 in
1977, an increase of some 4-3 per cent.
Table 9 gives figures for the expenditure-based measure of GDP, at both current
market prices and current factor cost, and shows how two other main
NATIONAL ECONOMY
227
Table 9: Gross Domestic Product, Gross National Product and National Income
£ million
1977
1987
Total final expenditure 188 521
less imports of goods and services —42,592
Gross domestic product at market prices 145,386
plus net property income from abroad 265
Gross national product at market prices 145,651
less factor cost adjustment (taxes less subsidies) —16,448
Gross domestic product at factor cost 128,938
Net property income from abroad 265
Gross national product at factor cost 129,203
/ess capital consumption -16 501
National income (net national product
at factor cost) 112 702
523,103
-112,030
414,455
5,523
419,978
-62,218
352,237
5,523
357,760
-48,238
309,522
Source: United Kingdom National Accounts 1988 Edition.
aggregates used in the national accounts, gross national product and national
income, are derived.
Table 10 shows the categories of total final expenditure in 1987. Consumers’
expenditure accounted for 62 per cent of domestic expenditure. Between 1977
and 1987 the proportion of final expenditure devoted to exports averaged 22 per
cent.
Personal
Incomes and
Expenditure
Table 10: Total Final Expenditure 1987 at Market Prices
£ million
per cent
Consumers'expenditure 258,431
General government final consumption 85,772
Gross domestic fixed capital formation 70,767
Value of physical increase in stocks and work in
progress 627
Total domestic expenditure 415,597
Exports of goods and services 107,506
Total final expenditure 523,103
49-4
16-4
13-5
01
79-4
20-6
1000
Source: United Kingdom National Accounts 1988 Edition.
Personal incomes at current prices before tax rose rapidly and fairly steadily
from £125,000 million in 1977 to £348,000 million in 1987. Personal
disposable income (that is, personal incomes after deductions—mainly taxation
and National Insurance contributions) was £273,000 million in 1987, 3 per cent
higher in real terms than in 1986. Consumers’ expenditure amounted to 74 per
cent of pre-tax personal income in 1987 compared with 70 per cent in 1977.
Table 11 shows the pattern of consumers’ expenditure in 1987. Housing, food,
alcoholic drink, clothing and footwear, and fuel and power together accounted
for 46 per cent of the total. Consumers’ expenditure increased by 5 -1 per cent in
real terms between 1986 and 1987. The changes in the pattern between 1977
and 1987 in Britain were paralleled in other industrialised countries, with
declining proportions spent on food, and on clothing and footwear. Over the
longer term, as incomes rise, people tend to spend increasing proportions on
228
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Sources of
Income
Current
Government
Expenditure
Gross Domestic
Product
by Industry
Table 11: Consumers’ Expenditure in 1977 and 1987
1977
1987
per cent
per cent
£ million
Food (household expenditure) 18-5 13 0 33,643
Alcoholic drink 7-5 6-7 17,309
Tobacco 4-2 30 7,653
Clothing and footwear 7-6 6-9 17,788
Housing 13.3 150 38,862
Fuel and power 4-9 4-3 11,082
Household goods and services 7-3 6-5 16,763
Transport and communications 14-6 16-8 43,377
Recreation, entertainment and education 9-3 9-2 23,682
Other goods and services 12-5 16-2 41,837
Other items3 0-3 2-5 6,435
Total
1000
1000
258,431
Source: United Kingdom National Accounts 1988 Edition.
a Household expenditure overseas plus final expenditure by private non-profit-making bodies minus expenditure
by foreign tourists in Britain.
Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
consumer durables and services—personal, financial and leisure services in
particular.
Saving as a percentage of personal disposable income has fluctuated over the
last decade and in 1987 stood at 5-4 per cent, down from 13-8 per cent in 1980.
The recent reduction in the saving ratio partly reflects an adjustment to
declining rates of inflation: during periods of rapidly rising prices people need to
increase their rate of saving to maintain the real value of assets fixed in money
terms. It also reflects improved investment performance by pension funds,
which raises personal income.
The proportion of total personal income accounted for by income from
employment was 65 per cent in 1987; average gross weekly earnings in April
1987 in Great Britain were £219 for full-time male workers and £145 for
full-time female workers. The three other main sources of personal income were
self-employment (9 per cent), income from rent, dividends and interest (10 per
cent) and current grants from general government (15 per cent).
Current expenditure on goods and services by central government and local
authorities amounted to £86,000 million in 1987; it rose by 14 per cent in real
terms over the period 1977 to 1987. The main cause of this was the growth over
the period in the social services, especially education and health.
In addition to their expenditure on goods and services, public authorities
transfer large sums to other sectors, mainly the personal sector, by way of
National Insurance and other social security benefits, grants, and interest and
subsidies. Central government also makes grants to local authorities to finance
about half of their current expenditure.
Table 12 shows GDP by industry in 1977 and 1987. Over a period of time
agriculture and manufacturing have come to account for smaller proportions of
national income, while energy and services have grown relatively. Services now
account for a little over 60 per cent of GDP.
NATIONAL ECONOMY
229
Table 12: Gross Domestic Product by Industry3
1977
1987
£ million per cent £ million per cent
Agriculture, forestry and fishing 3,307 2-6
Energy and water supply 8,625 6-7
Manufacturing 37,972 29-5
Construction 7,840 6 1
Distribution, hotels and
catering: repairs 17,057 13-2
Transport 6,955 5-4
Communications 3,259 2-5
Banking, finance, insurance,
business services and leasing 15,034 11-7
Ownership of dwellings 7,516 5-8
Public administration, defence
and social security 8,964 7 0
Education and health services 11,198 8-7
Other services 6,867 5-3
5,901
24,184
85,552
21,524
48,963
16,227
9,688
63,903
20,180
24,895
31,681
22,366
1- 7
6-8
24-1
61
13-8
4- 6
2- 7
180
5- 7
70
8-9
6- 3
Total 134,594 104-5
Adjustment for financial services -5,844 -4-5
375,064
-20,545
105-7
-5-8
Gross domestic product at
factor cost (income-based)
128,750
100-0 354,519
100-0
Source: United Kingdom National Accounts 1988 Edition.
a Before provision for depreciation but after deducting stock appreciation.
Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
11 Framework
of Industry
and Commerce
Among the most prominent trends in industrial activity in Britain since the
mid-1970s have been the growth of the offshore oil and gas industries together
with related products and services; the rapid development of electronic and
microelectronic technologies and their application to a wide range of other
sectors; and a continuous rise in the service industries’ share of total
employment. Industrial output has risen steadily since the recession of
1980—81, which, as in other market economies, was largely brought about by a
rise in world oil prices.
This chapter outlines some of the general features of industrial and
commercial organisation in Britain and gives indicators of recent performance.
It also describes factors significant to performance, such as management,
finance, design and quality, and innovation, together with government policies
in these areas and in others such as the functioning of markets and the
development of business in less prosperous regions.
Role of The Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) has the main responsibility for the
Government Government’s relations with industry and commerce. The results of a review of
policies and organisation of the DTI were published as a White Paper, DTI—the
department for Enterprise, in January 1988. This confirmed the Government’s
belief that economic decisions are best taken by those competing in the market
place, and that the responsibility of government is to create the right climate so
that markets work better, and to encourage enterprise.
The emphasis of the Department’s work is therefore increasingly on promot¬
ing open markets through competition policy, privatisation, deregulation and
international trade negotiations. Positive attitudes to enterprise are being
encouraged through improved links between business and education. Smaller
firms, in particular, are being helped to gain access to the specialised skills and
information essential to successful enterprise in a competitive market. There is
special emphasis on promoting enterprise in the less prosperous regions.
These changes to meet the needs of an expanding economy are being reflected
in the pattern of DTI spending and in that of its organisation. There has been a
marked reduction in expenditure on support for nationalised industries, a
number of which have been successfully transferred to the private sector. Within
a smaller total, expenditure on innovation has increased substantially. Over the
next few years there will be further changes. Spending on supporting the use of
consultancy services by smaller businesses will increase markedly and there will
be a shift from near-market support for individual companies towards collabora¬
tive research. In order to emphasise the importance of markets and to encourage
the spread of best practices, the DTI Industry Divisions have been reorganised
232
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
INDUSTRIAL
ORGANISATION
into Market Divisions, focusing on the markets for particular goods or services
rather than on supplier industries or firms.
The DTI’s specific responsibilities include industrial science, technology and
research, overseas trade and export promotion, competition policy and con¬
sumer affairs, company legislation and the Patent Office. In support of its
activities, the Department collects comprehensive statistics through the Busi¬
ness Statistics Office. Through the Invest in Britain Bureau, it provides advice
and assistance to foreign companies in locating in Britain.
Other departments whose responsibilities have a bearing on industrial and
commercial activity include the Treasury, through its responsibility for macro-
economic policies—emphasising the control of inflation and firm management
of monetary conditions—and through its policies on corporate taxation,
including allowances for investment and for scientific research; the Department
of Employment, responsible for employment and training services, small firms
counselling services and promotion of tourism; the Departments of Energy,
Transport and the Environment; and the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and
Food. The Scottish, Welsh and Northern Ireland Offices are responsible for the
range of industrial policies in their areas.
The Government remains firmly committed to the objective of completing the
single European market by the target date of 1992. This will provide major
benefits to business and consumers and improve European competitiveness in
world markets. The DTI's ‘Europe—Open for Business’ awareness campaign is
designed to bring home to business the importance of 1992 and to encourage it
to prepare for the single market.
The forms of industrial organisation and the patterns of ownership and control
are varied. The main categories of organisation are: unincorporated businesses
(sole traders and partnerships) of which there are at least 1 million; incor¬
porated companies; and public sector enterprises, which are owned by the
Government (see p 233). Incorporation means that companies are entered on an
official register of companies (see p 242); at the end of 1987 there were over
1 million companies on the registers, although about 20 per cent of these were
in liquidation or in the process of removal. About 5,000 of these companies were
public limited companies. Although not numerous, co-operative enterprises
increased in number from 300 in 1979 to about 1,500 in 1986. There has also
been a rise in the number of ‘buy-outs’ in which the staff, or management, of a
company raises the finance to purchase it. In the period from 1982 to 1987 there
were nearly 1,500, with a total value of about £6,600 million.
In some sectors a small number of large companies and their subsidiaries are
responsible for a large proportion of total production notably in the vehicle,
shipbuilding, aerospace and transport equipment industries. However, it is rare
for a few shareholders to have a controlling interest since shares in these
companies are usually distributed among many holders or held by insurance
companies or pension funds representing a cross-section of the community.
Private enterprises generate about 75 per cent of total domestic income. They
account for the greater part of activity in the agricultural, manufacturing,
construction, distributive, financial and miscellaneous service sectors. There is
substantial public ownership in the energy, transport and communications
sectors, though, with privatisation (see p 240), this has declined. Unincorpo¬
rated businesses, corporate enterprises and public sector enterprises contribute
respectively about 20, 55 and 8 per cent of total domestic income. A further 8 per
cent comes from central government and the remaining 9 per cent from local
authorities. About 200 British registered company groups and independent
companies each had capital employed of over £500 million in 1986—87. In terms
of annual sales, three British companies and two partly British ones are among
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE
233
Nationalised
Industries
Industrial
Association
the 20 largest European companies. Royal Dutch/Shell is first, BP second
Unilever sixth, BAT Group fourteenth and ICI twentieth.
The major nationalised industries are: the electricity supply industiy (including
the Central Electricity Generating Board and 12 area electricity boards in
ngland and Wales); the ten regional water authorities; British Coal; British
ail; and the Post Office. In total the industries account for just under 4 per cent
o gross domestic product (GDP) and employ about 5 -5 per cent of all employees
The managing boards and staffs of the nationalised industries are not civil
servants although they are responsible to ministers who appoint the chairman
and members of each board. Ministers are responsible for agreeing with the
industries their general strategies and have the power to give general directions
as to how the industry should be run, but do not interfere in day-to-dav
management. The Government’s policy is to encourage the nationalised
industries to behave as far as possible as commercial enterprises, and this is
carried out through the financial framework, set by the Government, within
which the industries are expected to operate. This is designed also to integrate
the industries’ medium-term commercial aims with the requirements of
government policy on the management of the economy. The main elements of
the framework are: clear government objectives for the industries; regular
corporate plans and performance reviews; systematic monitoring; agreed
principles relating to investment appraisal and pricing; external financing
limits; and financial targets and performance aims.
To ensure that nationalised industry investment earns an adequate economic
return, there is a ‘required rate of return’ which investment programmes are
expected to achieve. The current rate is 5 per cent in real terms before tax.
Financial targets are set for individual nationalised industries to give them a
framework similar to those of private sector companies which need to earn
profits. They are supported by a series of performance aims, covering costs and
standards of service, which are considered particularly important for industries
with some monopoly power where financial targets would not automatically
impose pressures for operating efficiency. External financing limits, which
control the amount of finance (grants and borrowing) that a nationalised
industiy can raise from external sources in any financial year, are an important
short-term operating control. They are set in the light of a nationalised
industiy s financial target and its expected performance and investment
requirements. Nationalised industries are planning to finance a greater
proportion of investment from internally generated funds.
External scrutiny of nationalised industry efficiency is conducted by the
Monopolies and Mergers Commission (see p 238), which carries out a number of
investigations each year at the instigation of ministers. Where appropriate,
investigations may also be undertaken by management consultants. National¬
ised industry matters are also considered by parliamentary committees such as
the Treasury and Civil Service Committee and the Public Accounts Committee.
There are several types of voluntary association representing private enterprises
and covering, with varying degrees of completeness, most of British industry.
The central body representing British business and industry is the Confedera¬
tion of British Industiy (CBI). The CBI directly represents about 250,000 parent
and subsidiary companies, as well as the members of some 200 trade
associations and employers’ organisations and the majority of public sector
enterprises. For its members, the CBI provides a lobby, a forum and a service. It
represents their views nationally to the Government and the public as well as
internationally. CBI representatives sit on such bodies as the National Economic
Development Council and the Health and Safety Commission. The CBI provides
234
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
INDUSTRIAL
PERFORMANCE
a forum where members can exchange views and experiences and discuss ways
of tackling common problems; and it offers information and advice on subjects
which members may be unable to cover themselves, in particular, on overseas
markets, health and safety, company law, environmental issues and employ¬
ment affairs.
Chambers of commerce are open to producers and traders of all kinds and are
organised on a geographical basis. They exist to provide export assistance as
well as advisory and information services and training courses. There are
around 100 local chambers of commerce, representing over 65,000 firms,
affiliated to regional associations and the Association of British Chambers of
Commerce. Additional central organisations serve Scotland, Wales and Northern
Ireland.
Trade associations consist of companies producing or retailing a particular
product or group of products. They exist to provide common services, regulate
trading practices and represent their members to government departments.
Employers’ organisations are usually concerned with the negotiation of wages
and conditions of work in a particular industrial sector, although sometimes
one institution may combine this function with that of a trade association. At
the end of 1987 there were some 330 employers’ organisations.
Other voluntary associations include industrial development associations for
particular regions or areas and the Scottish Council (Development and Industry) j
in Scotland.
In early 1988 total output was 23 per cent higher than at its trough in early
1981. It was only during 1985, however, that production regained the level of
mid-1979, which had been the high point of a period of growth since 1976. A
marked increase in productivity has been a major feature of recovery. Gains in
productivity, however, meant that this increased output was produced with
fewer workers. Manufacturing productivity has grown by 40 per cent since
1979, the highest increase among the major industrialised countries. Conse- I
quently, employment, though increasing, was still lower than in 1981. Table 13
shows GDP by sector and the percentage of total GDP and of total employment in
each sector in 1987.
Table 13: Gross Domestic Product3 by Industry in 1987
Standard Industrial Classification % of %
Revised 1985 £ million total Employment
0 Agriculture, forestry and fishing
1 Energy and water supply
2—4 Manufacturing
5 Construction
6—9 Services
Adjustment for financial services
Gross domestic product at factor cost
(income-based)
5,901 1-7 1-5
24,184 6-8 2-3
85,552 24-1 23-6
21,524 6-1 4-6
237,903 67-1 680
-20,545 -5-8
354,519 1000 1000
Sources: United Kingdom National Accounts 1988 Edition and Monthly Digest of Statistics.
a Before depreciation but after providing for stock appreciation.
British companies have had a relatively low rate of profitability historically but
there has been a marked improvement in the 1980s. For all industrial and
commercial companies the rate was 11-5 per cent in 1987 and for manufactur¬
ing companies 8 per cent.
Profitability
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE
235
Productivity
Investment
POLICIES AND
LEGISLATION
Output per head in Britain has in the past been lower than in some other major
industrialised countries but it has risen sharply since 1981 and in recent years
the growth has been among the highest in the major industrialised nations. The
rise for manufacturing has been greater than for the economy as a whole. The
index for the whole economy in 1987 was 120-3 (1980 = 100). Table 14 shows
the output and employment indices for 1986 and 1987. There was a fall in
employment in production industries between these years, but this was more
than offset by a rise in employment in service industries, which led to an overall
increase. Output and output per head in both production and service industries
rose between 1986 and 1987. The Government believes that the increased
competitiveness resulting from these productivity gains will lead to a sustained
rise in living standards and a rise in employment.
Table 14: Industrial Output and Employment (Indices: 1985 = 100)
Output Employment3
Index
1986
Index
1987
Index
1986
Index
1987
Agriculture, forestry and fishing
Production industries
of which: Energy and water supply
Manufacturing
Construction
Services
of which: Distribution, hotels,
catering and repairs
Communications
Financial and
business services
Whole economy
100-8
102- 3
105-3
100-9
100-9
103- 5
103-9
107-6
110-0
102-9
99-4
106-1
105- 0
106- 6
108-7
108-8
110-2
113-2
121-0
107-7
96- 5
97- 0
91-5
97-6
97-0
1021
101-4
100-7
105-7
100-3
94-4
94- 8
84-5
95- 9
98-7
104-6
102-8
102-8
111-8
101-4
Sources: United Kingdom National Accounts 1988 Edition and Monthly Digest of Statistics.
aExeluding self-employment.
Investment in the manufacturing, construction, distribution and financial
services industries grew by 10 per cent in real terms in 1987. A further rise is
forecast for 1988. Investment in major sectors of the economy in 1987 (at 1985
prices) is shown in Table 15. The figures for manufacturing industry do not
include expenditure on leased assets since these are attributed to the service
industries on the basis of ownership. Manufacturing industry is, however, a
major user of leased assets. The practice of leasing grew rapidly in the early
1970s. The trend was distorted in the mid-1980s following changes in the tax
treatment of capital investment announced in the 1984 Budget. Leasing rose
sharply in 1985 but then declined, showing some recovery in 1987.
With the management of business being regarded as essentially a matter for
firms themselves, the role of government is seen to be the promotion of open
markets and the encouragement of enterprise. The Government pursues these
objectives through a wide range of policies and, where necessary, legislation.
Some major elements of these are outlined in the rest of this chapter. In some
cases the execution of policy is the responsibility of an agency established for the
236
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Enterprise
Initiative
Small Firms
Table 15: Gross Fixed Capital Formation (Investment) by Sector
£ million
1987
(at 1985 prices)
Index
1987
(1985 = 100)
Agriculture, forestry and fishing
Oil and gas extraction
Other energy and water supply
Manufacturing
Construction
Distribution, hotels, catering and repairs
Transport and communications
Finance and business services
Leased assets
Other assets
Other services
Dwellings
Transfer costs of land and buildings
650
1,926
4,062
9,090
509
6,332
5,137
4,538
7,149
8,112
13,406
3,285
66-3
68-3
106-4
104-6
95-9
122-2
101-0
92-0
125-8
106-5
112-4
110-5
Whole economy
64,196
106-5
Source: United Kingdom National Accounts 1988 Edition.
purpose. The aspects of policy covered range from measures to encourage
enterprise and help business to improve its competitiveness through competi¬
tion policy to measures to secure the rights of originators of inventions and to
protect consumers.
In January 1988 the Department of Trade and Industry recast its policies for
industry in line with the strategy outlined earlier (see p 231). A major element
was the Enterprise Initiative, described as a ‘comprehensive self-help package’
bringing together a wide range of the services that the DTI provides for industry
and commerce.
It currently comprises ten initiatives including business development initia¬
tives, which encourage small and medium-sized businesses to use outside
consultancy services as a regular part of their management strategy. The
business development initiatives offer consultancy support in design, market¬
ing, manufacturing systems, quality, business planning, and financial and
information systems. In Scotland and Wales these initiatives are operated by the
respective Development Agencies. The scheme is available to businesses with
fewer than 500 employees. A total provision of £74 million has been made in
1988—89 to support 1,000 consultancies a month.
The contribution of small businesses to the British economy is now well
established. Small firms bring competition, innovation and a large share of new
jobs. They account for around 25 per cent of the total workforce, 36 per cent of
private sector employment and 20 per cent of total turnover.
The Government's success in securing low inflation, steady growth and lower
levels of public expenditure and personal taxation has helped to create the
conditions in which people are willing to invest and start businesses. New
businesses are being set up now at a rate of around 900 a week.
The Government recognises that creating a suitable economic environment is
not enough by itself. It therefore runs a number of schemes which provide either
direct assistance or advice and guidance on a wide range of business problems
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE
237
FUNCTIONING
OF MARKETS
Competition
Policy
affecting small firms. In addition to DTI schemes such as the business
development initiatives, the Department of Employment (in England) runs
schemes aimed at small firms; there are corresponding schemes in Wales,
Scotland and Northern Ireland. The schemes include the Small Firms Service,
which provides information, advice and counselling to prospective and estab¬
lished small businesses; the Loan Guarantee Scheme, under which the
Government guarantees repayment of 70 per cent of medium-term loans made
by financial institutions; the Business Expansion Scheme, which improves the
flow of equity finance to small firms by offering tax incentives to individuals who
invest in qualifying unquoted companies; and the Enterprise Allowance
Scheme, which allows unemployed people to claim an allowance while estab¬
lishing a new business. In addition, the Government has introduced a range of
tax concessions as well as training for people setting up on their own, and has
encouraged the development of new advisory services and of new sources of
venture capital within the private sector.
While preferring to let markets operate with as little regulatory machinery as
possible, the Government recognises that action is needed from time to time to
ensure that markets remain open and fair. Therefore, the stimulation of
competition and the control of practices which are restrictive or anti-competitive
are important features of government policy. Responsibilities are exercised by
the Department of Trade and Industry and by the Office of Fair Trading, a
government agency headed by a Director General.
Related policies concern consumer and investor protection, the conduct of
companies and their officers, insolvency, and the openness of markets for
foreign trade and investment. This chapter concentrates on policies covering
domestic markets.
Within the public sector the Government has taken a number of steps to
increase the exposure of trading organisations to competition, notably by
adopting a policy of privatising them where this is practicable. Within the
Department of Trade and Industry an Enterprise and Deregulation Unit is
responsible for co-ordinating across government a campaign to reduce regula¬
tory burdens on business.
Competition policy is supported by machinery for scrutinising and regulating
monopolies, mergers, anti-competitive practices and restrictive trade practices,
and by powers to regulate any structural changes, anti-competitive practice, or
other behaviour found to operate against the public interest. The Director
General of Fair Trading administers the Fair Trading Act 1973, which deals with
monopolies and mergers, the Restrictive Trade Practices Act 1976, which deals
with restrictive trading agreements, the Resale Prices Act 1976, which deals
with resale price maintenance, and the Competition Act 1980, which deals with
anti-competitive practices. The Financial Services Act 1986 makes special
provisions for the application of competition policy considerations to the
financial services sector. In 1988 the Government published the conclusions of a
review of law and policy on mergers and restrictive trade practices (see
pp 238-9).
The Government is working to increase competition in professional services,
through relaxation of unjustifiable restrictive practices including restrictions on
fee scales and on advertising. Measures are being taken to improve competition
in conveyancing. The opticians’ monopoly on the dispensing of spectacles has
been ended, and certain professional groups (for example, accountants,
solicitors and veterinary surgeons) have eased restrictions on advertising by
their members. Building societies are now allowed to offer a greater range of
services than in the past, which is bringing more competition to the fields of
financial services and estate agency.
238
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Monopolies and
Mergers
Anti¬
competitive
Practices
The Public
Sector
The Secretary of State for Trade and Industry and the Director General of Fair
Trading can refer monopolies for investigation by the Monopolies and Mergers
Commission, an independent body whose members are drawn from a variety of
backgrounds, including lawyers, economists, industrialists and trade union¬
ists. The legislation defines a monopoly as a situation where at least a quarter of
a particular kind of goods or service is supplied by a single person or a group of
connected companies or by two or more people acting in a way which prevents,
restricts, or distorts competition. Local monopolies can also be referred to the
Commission, and the Secretary of State can refer public sector industries. If the
Commission finds that a monopoly operates against the public interest, the
Secretary of State for Trade and Industry has powers to take action to remedy or
prevent the harm which the Commission considers may exist. Alternatively the
Director General may be asked to negotiate undertakings to remedy the adverse
effects identified by the Commission.
The Government believes that the market is a better judge than itself of the
advantages and disadvantages of mergers. Accordingly, policy provides for the
great majority of proposed mergers which do not pose a threat to competition to
be decided by the market. However, it recognises the need to control mergers
which could lead to a significant reduction in competition or otherwise raise
matters of public concern; this is provided for by the Fair Trading Act 1973.
Proposals for a merger (defined as occurring when two or more enterprises are
brought under common ownership or control) may be referred to the Commis¬
sion by the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, taking account of advice
from the Director General, if the merger would result in or intensify a monopoly
or if the total value of gross assets to be taken over would exceed £30 million. If
the Commission finds that a merger or proposed merger may be expected to
operate against the public interest, the Secretary of State can prevent it from
taking place or ask the Director General to obtain undertakings to remedy the
adverse effects identified; or, if it has already taken place, he can require it to be
reversed. There are special provisions for newspaper mergers.
The paper setting out the conclusions of the review of mergers policy
published in 1988 reaffirmed that merger reference decisions would continue to
be made mainly on competition grounds; and, in evaluating the competitive
situation, account is taken of the extent of competition in the domestic market
from overseas sources and of the competitive position of British firms in
overseas markets.
Three legislative changes were proposed in the policy paper, aimed at
improving merger control procedures: a voluntary procedure for pre-notification
of proposed mergers which would, in straightforward cases, permit very prompt
clearance; acceptance of statutory undertakings by the parties concerned so as
to obviate the need for a full investigation by the Monopolies and Mergers
Commission; and introduction of a charge to meet the costs of merger control.
Subject to limited exemptions, the Director General can investigate any
business practice (whether in the public or private sectors) which may restrict,
distort or prevent competition in the production, supply or acquisition of goods
or services in Britain. If the Director General concludes that a practice is
anti-competitive he may either accept an undertaking from the business
responsible for the practice or, in default of such an undertaking, refer the
matter to the Commission to establish whether it operates against the public
interest. On an adverse finding by the Commission, the Secretary of State has
powers to take remedial action.
The Competition Act 1980 empowers the Secretary of State to refer to the
Monopolies and Mergers Commission any questions concerning the efficiency
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE
239
Restrictive
Trade
Practices
Financial
Services
European
Community
and costs of, the service provided by, or the possible abuse of a monopoly
situation by, certain bodies in the public sector. A number of inquiries are
carried out each year and the results are reported to Parliament.
Under the Restrictive Trade Practices Act 1976, certain kinds of restrictive
trading agreements have to be notified to the Director General of Fair Trading
for registration. Broadly, an agreement is registrable if two or more people who
are party to it supply goods or services in Britain and accept some limitation on
their freedom to make their own decisions about matters such as prices or
conditions of sale. Failure to register an agreement within the required period
means that the restrictions are void and the parties may be liable to legal
proceedings. Once an agreement has been registered, the Director General is
under a general duty to refer it to the Restrictive Practices Court, and the Court
must declare the restrictions in it contrary to the public interest unless the
parties can satisfy the Court by reference to criteria laid down in the Act that
this is not the case. Restrictions declared contrary to the public interest are void,
and the Court can order the parties not to give effect to them or make any similar
agreement. In practice, however, the great majority of agreements never reach
the Court because, for example, the parties elect to give up the restrictions
rather than go to court, or the Secretary of State accepts the Director General’s
advice that the restrictions are not significant enough to warrant reference to
the Court.
In 1988 the Government published proposals for amending the existing
legislation. These would prohibit agreements which had the effect of preventing,
restricting or distorting competition unless an exemption had been granted on
the broad grounds that they were in the public interest. The present
requirement to register agreements would be abolished. The powers of the
competition authorities would be strengthened and financial penalties for
violation of the prohibition would be introduced. Decisions of the authority
would be subject to appeal to the Restrictive Practices Court and the scope for
private actions extended. Existing exemptions from the Restrictive Trade
Practices Act—for example, those for many professional services—would not
automatically be carried over into the new legislation.
Under the Financial Services Act 1986, the Director General of Fair Trading is
required to report to the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry on the
implications for competition of rules, regulations, guidance and other arrange¬
ments of the regulatory bodies, investment exchanges and clearing houses.
The objective of the European Community’s competition policy is to ensure that
there is free and fair competition in trade between member states and that the
government trade barriers which the Treaty of Rome seeks to dismantle are not
replaced by private barriers which fragment the common market. The competi¬
tion rules are set out in articles of the Treaty of Rome which are directly
applicable to member states and in regulations made under the articles. In most
areas of economic activity their enforcement is primarily the responsibility of the
European Commission, which has powers to investigate and terminate alleged
infringements and to impose fines.
The Treaty prohibits agreements or concerted practices which may affect
trade between member states and have as their object, or effect, the prevention,
restriction or distortion of competition within the common market. Agreements
meeting specified criteria may be exempted from this prohibition and, subject to
particular conditions and safeguards, certain categories of agreement are
exempted completely: these include agreements in respect of exclusive distribu¬
tion and purchasing, patent licensing, research and development, and motor
240
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Deregulation
Privatisation
Inward
Investment
vehicle distribution and servicing. The Treaty also prohibits any abuse of a
dominant position within the common market or a substantial part of it to the
extent that it affects trade between member states.
The Government is seeking to create a framework within which enterprise can
flourish and where barriers to entry into market areas and barriers to business
growth are kept to a minimum. All requirements placed on businesses by the
public sector have a cost and divert scarce resources away from mainstream
commercial activities. These costs are ultimately passed to the consumer,
potentially narrowing consumer choice. The Government’s initiative to reduce
regulation is led by the Enterprise and Deregulation Unit. All proposed
requirements, whether of British or European Community origin, are examined
for their impact on business, and the costs to business are considered in
deciding how and whether to impose new requirements. Existing requirements
are also being examined for their impact on business with a view to abolishing
or reducing unnecessary burdens.
The Government believes that reform of the nationalised industries is essential
to economic recovery, and that the best way to improve performance in the long
term is to expose the industries to market forces, through privatisation and the
promotion of competition. Privatisation also provides a major opportunity for
the Government to pursue its policy of widening share ownership, encouraging
both employees and the general public to take a direct stake in British industry.
Employees in privatised companies are normally given a preferential right to buy
shares in the new companies. Since 1979 the Government has mounted 17
major public offers of shares, with net proceeds of some £17,500 million, and
this has led to a substantial increase in the proportion of the population who are
shareholders (estimated at over 20 per cent in early 1988 compared with 7 per
cent in 1979). Businesses which have been privatised include British Aerospace,
British Airways, British Gas, British Telecom, Cable and Wireless, the National
Freight Consortium, Amersham International, the Rover Group, Jaguar,
Enterprise Oil, Britoil, Associated British Ports, Rolls-Royce, Royal Ordnance,
BAA (formerly the British Airports Authority), nearly all the National Bus
Company subsidiaries and British Shipbuilders' warship-building yards. Many
other state enterprises have also been sold and about 655,000 jobs have been
transferred to the private sector. Planned privatisations include the electricity
supply industry in Great Britain, the British Steel Corporation, and the regional
water authorities in England and Wales. To stimulate efficiency, the Govern¬
ment has relaxed the statutory monopolies of a number of nationalised
industries.
Britain is recognised as an attractive location for inward direct investment. This
reflects nearness to other European Community markets, improved labour
relations, and comparatively low rates of corporate and personal taxation. Direct
investment from overseas is encouraged, overseas-owned firms generally being
offered the same facilities and incentives as British-owned ones. The Depart¬
ment of Trade and Industry’s Invest in Britain Bureau provides foreign
companies with advice and assistance on all aspects of locating and relocating
businesses in Britain, and on expanding existing facilities. Similar advice and
assistance is also available in Scotland through Locate in Scotland and in Wales
through WINvest, the investment arm of the Welsh Development Agency. The
Bureau reported over 300 new inward investment projects in 1987. At the end of
1986 total United States investment in Britain was valued at $35,000 million,
representing over 35 per cent of United States investment in the European
Community. Britain has for many years been the leading country for United
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE
241
Consumer
Protection
Consumer
Advice and
Information
States manufacturing investment in Europe. Britain has attracted around 30
per cent of Japanese investment in the European Community since 1951. The
cumulative value of Japanese investment in Britain is $4,100 million.
The Government believes that consumers are best protected by open and
competitive markets offering the widest range of choice, backed up by adequate
information to inform consumer choice. In addition to laws designed to benefit
customers by providing effective competition, there is a body of legislation
whose purpose is to ensure that consumers are adequately protected.
The Fair Trading Act 1973 provides machinery (headed by the Director
General of Fair Trading) for the continuous review of consumer affairs, for
action to deal with trading practices which unfairly affect consumers' interests
and with persistent offenders under existing law, and for the negotiation of
self-regulatory codes of practice to raise trading standards. The Director General
is responsible for the operation of legislation which regulates consumer credit
and hire business and estate agency work; he also has responsibilities under
legislation controlling misleading advertisements.
The consumer’s interests with regard to the purity of foods, the description
and performance of goods and services and pricing information are safeguarded
by the Food Act 1984, the Medicines Act 1968, the Trade Descriptions Act 1968,
the Prices Act 1974, the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977, the Sale of Goods Act
1979 and the Supply of Goods and Services Act 1982. The marking and accuracy
of quantities are regulated by the Weights and Measures Act 1985. The
Consumer Credit Act 1974 provides comprehensive protection for consumers
who enter into credit or hire transactions. The Consumer Protection Act 1987
implements a harmonised European Community regime of civil law covering
product liability; establishes a general criminal offence of supplying unsafe
consumer goods; makes it an offence to give any misleading price indication;
and consolidates powers provided under safety-related Acts.
The Financial Services Act 1986 offers greater protection to investors by
establishing a new regulatory framework for the industry.
The European Community s consumer programme covers a number of impor¬
tant topics, such as health and safety, protection of the consumer’s economic
interests when purchasing goods and services, promotion of consumer educa¬
tion and strengthening the representation of consumers. The views of British
consumer organisations are represented by the Consumers in the European
Community Group (UK).
Advice and information on consumer matters is provided to the general public at
local level by Citizens Advice Bureaux and the trading standards or consumer
protection departments of local authorities and in some areas by specialist
Consumer Advice Centres.
The independent, non-statutory National Consumer Council (and associated
councils for Scotland and Wales), which receives government finance, ensures
that the consumer s view is made known to those in government, industry and
elsewhere whose decisions affect the consumer’s interest. In Northern Ireland
the General Consumer Council for Northern Ireland (which became fully
operational in 1985) has wide-ranging responsibilities in the field of consumer
protection and consumer affairs in general.
Consumer councils for the energy, rail and other nationalised industries and
the privatised gas industry investigate questions of concern to the consumer,
while some trade associations in industry and commerce have established codes
of practice. In addition, several private organisations work to further consumer
interests. The largest is the Consumers' Association, funded by the subscrip¬
tions of its membership of around 1 million. The Association conducts an
242
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Company Law
extensive programme of comparative testing of goods and investigation of
services; its views and test reports are published in its monthly magazines and
other publications. The Association provides a legal advice service on subscrip¬
tion. Local consumer groups, many belonging to a national federation, also
promote consumers’ interests and provide information and advice.
The formation and conduct of companies is regulated by the Companies Act
1985. ‘Incorporation’ involves registering with the Registrar of Companies in
Cardiff, Edinburgh or Belfast, depending on whether a company’s registered
office is in England or Wales, Scotland or Northern Ireland. The Act also deals
with capital structure, the rights and duties of directors and members, and the
preparation and filing of accounts. Most corporate businesses are ‘limited
liability’ companies. Each company is a legal entity distinct from its members,
who are not as such liable for its debts. The liability of members of a limited
company is limited to contributing an amount related to their shareholding. In
unincorporated businesses, such as sole proprietorships or partnerships, by
contrast, individuals are personally liable for any business debts (except where a
member of a partnership is a limited liability company).
Companies may be either public or private. A company must satisfy three
conditions before it can be a public limited company (pic): it must be limited by
shares and have a share capital; it must state in its memorandum of association
that it is to be a public limited company; and it must meet specified mini¬
mum capital requirements. All other registered companies are, by definition,
private companies and, as such, prohibited from offering their shares to the
public.
The consolidation of the Companies Acts 1948-83 restates existing law in a
clearer and more convenient form, and makes application and interpretation
easier for those concerned with the regulation of company affairs. The
consolidation resulted in the Companies Act 1985 and three smaller Acts: the
Business Names Act 1985, which regulates the names under which people may
carry on business in Great Britain; the Company Securities (Insider Dealing) Act
1985, which restates the law on insider dealing; and the Companies Consolida¬
tion (Consequential Provisions) Act 1985, which deals with the technical
aspects of the consolidation. (Powers to investigate suspected insider dealing
were strengthened in the Financial Services Act 1986, and the penalties for such
dealing have been increased.)
The Insolvency Act 1985 affects both corporate and individual insolvency
proceedings. It introduced for England, Wales and Scotland a licensing
procedure to ensure the professional competence, integrity and independence of
people who act as trustees of bankrupt individuals, or as liquidators, receivers
or administrators of insolvent companies. The Act also amended and sup¬
plemented the legislation relating to the winding-up of limited companies and
the appointment of receivers in England, Wales and Scotland. In so doing the
Act made substantial changes to parts of the Companies Act 1985. Subse¬
quently these parts were consolidated with the Insolvency Act 1985 into the
Insolvency Act 1986 and the Company Directors Disqualification Act 1986. A
new framework for dealing with directors of limited companies who are
demonstrably unfit to act as such came into operation in April 1986: they can be
disqualified from office and, in some cases, held personally liable for a
company’s debts. It is now also possible for individual and corporate debtors to
reach agreements with their creditors without the necessity for formal
bankruptcy or insolvency proceedings. The law relating to individual insolvency
proceedings in Scotland is now dealt with separately.
To improve the investigation and prosecution of fraud, a Serious Fraud Office
has been set up to collaborate with police work on fraud cases; restrictions on
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE
243
Industrial and
Intellectual
Property
INDUSTRIAL
FINANCING
Government
Finance
the use of documentary evidence in court cases have been relaxed; and court
procedures have been streamlined.
There is a substantial body of legislation designed to secure the rights of the
originators of inventions, new industrial designs and trade marks. These
matters are administered by the Patent Office, which includes the Design
Registry and the Trade Marks Registry. The Patent Office is a division of the
Department of Trade and Industry. Protection is also available under the
European Patent Convention and the Patent Co-operation Treaty, and benefits
may be claimed in other countries by virtue of the International Convention for
the Protection of Industrial Property.
The Government is concerned to encourage innovation by providing a more
adequate legal and administrative system for the protection of the ownership of
ideas by means of patents, registered designs, trade marks and copyright, and to
improve awareness of the value of these intellectual property rights and of their
accessibility and usage, particularly by individuals and small businesses.
Measures taken in recent years include a sharp increase in penalties for making
and trading in pirate sound and film recordings (including video); the extension
of copyright protection to owners of computer software; the widening of the law
on trade marks to embrace services: and the introduction of powers for customs
authorities to prevent the entry of counterfeit goods. Further fundamental
changes are proposed; the Copyright, Designs and Patents Bill, now before
Parliament, aims to reform and completely restate the law on copyright, provide
a new form of legal protection for designs, establish a framework of civil law for
the protection of performers, and improve the arrangements for litigation
regarding patents.
Over half of companies’ funds for further investment and other purposes are
internally generated. Banks provide the chief external source of finance, but
companies have increasingly turned to equity finance in the mid-1980s. The
main forms of short-term finance available in the private sector are bank
overdrafts, trade credit and factoring (making cash available to a company in
exchange for its debts). Types of medium- and long-term finance include bank
loans, the mortgaging of property and the issue of securities and shares to the
public through the International Stock Exchange. The leasing of equipment
may also be regarded as a form of finance. Other sources of finance for industry
include the Government, the European Community and specialist financial
institutions.
The 1980s have been particularly notable for the growth of schemes involving
venture capital (funds made available by financial institutions in support of
innovative or other new and growing high-risk business ventures). Investment
by Britain’s venture capital industry, which accounts for some 40 per cent of
total funds raised in the European Community, has grown from £7 million in
1979 to over £1,000 million in 1987. The establishment of two new securities
markets under the auspices of the International Stock Exchange and over-the-
counter markets outside the Exchange has enabled fast-developing young
companies to raise capital through share issues, even though they are not
eligible for a full Exchange listing.
The DTI spends approximately £1,000 million a year on its services to industry.
In the 1980s the most significant changes have been a decline in spending on
the nationalised industries—partly as a result of privatisation (see p 240)—and
a substantial increase in spending on innovation. Following the 1988 review of
policy (see p 231) it is expected that further marked changes will occur in the
next few years; spending on the use of consultancy services by small and
244
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Taxation
MANAGEMENT
DEVELOPMENT
AND
INDUSTRIAL
TRAINING
Engineering
Council
Role of the
Government
Technical and
Vocational
Training
medium-sized businesses will increase; and there will be a shift away from
automatic and near-market support for individual companies towards consul¬
tancy services, technology transfer and collaborative research. Combined with
the initiatives on business and education, management development and the
encouragement of enterprise in less prosperous areas of Britain, these changes
imply an increase in spending over that planned before the policy review.
The rates of corporate taxation have been progressively reduced. In the case of
industrial plant and machinery there is an annual allowance against profits for
tax purposes of 25 per cent (on a reducing balance basis) beginning in the year
in which expenditure occurs. There is an allowance for investment in industrial
property of 4 per cent a year (on a straight-line basis). Special arrangements
exist for short life (usually high-technology) assets. There is a 100 per cent
allowance for scientific research.
Management education is provided by all the polytechnics and many colleges of
further education, while Regional Management Centres have been established
in England and Wales by associations of some of these colleges, with some
similar organisations in Scotland. Universities make an important contribu¬
tion, especially through the full-time postgraduate programmes at business
schools such as those of London, Manchester, City, Durham and Strathclyde
universities. Training courses for managers are offered by several independent
colleges, including the Management College (Henley-on-Thames), Ashridge
College (Berkhamsted) and the Cranfield School of Management (Bedford). Open
and distance learning opportunities are becoming more widely available. The
British Institute of Management, which aims to encourage excellence in
management, has a particular interest in management training. There are a
number of other professional bodies concerned with standards and training in
specialised branches of management.
The Management Charter Initiative was launched by the Confederation of
British Industry and the British Institute of Management in 1987 with the aim
of establishing a code of best practice for management development.
The Engineering Council was established under Royal Charter in 1981. Its
objectives are to promote the science and practice of engineering and to advance
education in engineering. The Council maintains a register of over 270,000
chartered engineers, incorporated engineers and engineering technicians. In
co-operation with the various professional institutions and other organisations
concerned with training in engineering, it has set standards for education,
training and experience, and accredited courses by which people qualify
for registration. The council is advised by some 180 industrial affiliates,
who are employers of engineers, on industrial requirements for engineers and
technicians.
The DTI is working with other government departments and with industry to
improve management education and development and to spread awareness
about best management practices. It strongly supports the Management Charter
Initiative (see above). The consultancy support offered by the DTI under the
Enterprise Initiative to businesses with fewer than 500 employees also bears
directly on aspects of management.
A well-trained workforce is essential for economic growth, and recent technolo¬
gical advances have created a need for an even greater quantity, range
and quality of technical and vocational training, both for young people and
for adults. The main responsibility for training rests with employers and
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE
245
Business and
Education
individuals. The Business & Technician Education Council (BTEC), a privately
funded body, deals with the education and training of technicians and their
equivalents in the professions and commerce, by designing syllabuses and
validating courses offered at colleges of further education and elsewhere in
England and Wales; its Scottish counterpart is the Scottish Vocational
Education Council. The BTEC is working with the Engineering Council and the
Engineering Industry Training Board to co-ordinate their systems of assessing
and certifying the skills of those receiving technician education and training,
and with the City and Guilds of London Institute to develop the pre-vocational
courses of the two organisations into a more coherent and comprehensive
system. The National Council for Vocational Qualifications was set up by the
Government as a registered company in 1986. Its aims are to improve vocational
qualifications by basing them on the standards of competence required in
employment and to establish a National Vocational Qualification framework.
Qualifications that meet the Council’s criteria are given the title National
Vocational Qualification.
Employment Training, the new programme operating from September 1988,
combines a number of other programmes. It is presently administered by an
executive agency within the Department of Employment. Another programme is
the Youth Training Scheme, which offers a course of planned work experience
integrated with off-the-job training for 16- or 17-year-old school-leavers. It
provides two years of training for 16-year-olds and one year for 17-year-olds,
leading to a recognised qualification.
The aim of the Government’s adult training strategy is to encourage employers
and others to give adult training a high priority and to secure an adequate
supply of people with up-to-date skills. There are a number of adult training
programmes with the objective of meeting national and local demands for skills
in which almost 515,000 people took part in 1987—88. Training is being
increasingly directed towards the skills needed by employers.
The education departments run PICKUP schemes, which include updating
training for adults working with new technology, and there is a national
network of Regional Technology Centres.
The Open University, which provides degree courses using distance learning
techniques, notably television broadcasts, has set up the Open University
Business School, which offers part-time courses leading to a diploma in
management. The School, which is strongly supported by the British Institute of
Management, has been used by over 2,000 companies and organisations since it
opened in 1983. Managers continue to work while studying, which is of
particular use to those small companies which cannot afford to release staff on a
full-time basis.
The pilot network of City Technology Colleges, announced by the Department of
Education and Science in 1986, provides a broadly based secondary education
with a strong technological content, and involves employers in the management
of the colleges.
Curriculum and examination reforms in the secondary education system and
the Technical and Vocational Education Initiative (TVEI) will all have a marked
effect in schools. The TVEI provides four-year courses with a strong technical
and vocational element in schools and colleges for 14- to 18-year-olds and is
being expanded into a national scheme following successful pilot projects.
As part of its policy review in 1988 the DTI announced a range of other
initiatives to give both teachers and children personal experience of the world of
business. The DTI also co-operates with the Department of Education and
Science in the provision of information technology software and equipment in
schools.
246
DESIGN,
QUALITY,
STANDARDS
AND AWARDS
Design
Quality and
Standards
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The DTI has also actively encouraged the growth of links between industry and
universities in recent years, through collaborative research, the purchase of
equipment for use in higher education institutions and the development of new
engineering courses. Under the Teaching Company Scheme young graduates
undertake key projects in companies under the joint supervision of academic
and company staff.
‘Industry Year 1986’, launched by the Royal Society of Arts with the aim of
changing attitudes to industry, was successful in establishing links between
companies and schools. The campaign, which the Government strongly
supports, is continuing under the title Industry Matters'.
Advisory services to industry about design and quality form part of the DTI’s
business development initiative (see p 236). Good design is seen as crucial for
maintaining and improving the quality and competitiveness of goods and
services; the Department of Trade and Industry gives priority to its campaign to
encourage greater awareness in industry and commerce (among both producers
and customers) of the value of good design. It organises conferences to underline
the importance of design and has taken steps to include design education in the
school system and widen awareness of design in business schools.
Advice and assistance on design matters are available from the government-
sponsored Design Council. The Design Council has centres in London, Cardiff
and Glasgow, and its operations include giving advice on design problems; the
organisation of conferences and seminars on design; providing help for design
education; and the production of a range of publications. The Government’s
business development initiative on design, operated by the Design Council,
offers firms employing up to 500 people 5 to 15 days of subsidised consultancy.
The Council provides annual awards for consumer and contract goods,
engineering products and components, computer software, medical equipment,
and motor vehicles and accessories. The Society of Chartered Designers is the
representative professional body in Great Britain of industrial designers.
An important aim of government policy is to encourage industry and commerce
to recognise the importance of quality and of the use of standards. The objective
is to enhance the quality of British goods and services by encouraging an
integrated approach to quality at all stages of design, production, marketing and
delivery to customers.
The National Quality Campaign aims at increasing the competitiveness of
British industry. Through its support for consultancy projects under the
campaign, the Government is helping small and medium-sized firms to learn
about and apply quality-management techniques based on a national standard
which meets international requirements. To increase customer confidence,
companies are being encouraged to obtain certification to the standard. The
National Accreditation Council for Certification Bodies was set up to assess and
officially approve the competence and performance of organisations undertak¬
ing such certification. Companies certified by accredited bodies are permitted to
use the national quality mark.
The British Standards Institution (BSI), a voluntary body which is responsible
for standards-making nationally, works with industry and government to
produce standards which are of the required quality, relevant to the needs of the
market, internationally respected, and suitable for public purchasing and
regulatory purposes. With government support, the BSI has become increas¬
ingly involved in international standards-making; the new approach under the
European Standards Initiative will contribute to the aim of creating a single
internal market in the European Community by 1992. About a quarter of the
10,000 British Standards are now identical with international standards.
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE
247
Measurement
Standards
Industrial
Awards
RESEARCH
AND
INNOVATION
Resource, a joint venture by the BSI and the Government, has been launched to
promote collaboration with overseas countries in standards, quality assurance,
metrology and testing.
The National Physical Laboratory (NPL), a DTI research establishment, is
responsible for providing the measurement standards and calibration facilities
necessary to ensure that measurements in Britain are made on a common basis
and to the required accuracy. It maintains links with national standards
laboratories all over the world to ensure international compatibility in standards
and measurement essential for overseas trade and technological co-operation.
The NPL's National Measurement Accreditation Service (NAMAS) provides a focal
point for the voluntary accreditation of calibration and testing facilities in
Britain. It forms a link between the national standards maintained by the NPL
and accredited measurement laboratories, including those servicing manufac¬
turers and other producers, contractors, regulating bodies, quality assessment
and product certification schemes, the Government, the health service and
consumer bodies. NAMAS-accredited laboratories offer calibration of scientific
instruments and provide official certificates in many areas, primarily the
physical, chemical and engineering fields, for calibration and testing. Related
NPL functions are research in scientific and technological areas of national
importance, such as engineering materials and information technology. Stan¬
dards associated with analytical measurement are the responsibility of the
Laboratory of the Government Chemist (LGC), another DTI research establish¬
ment. International agreement is based on the provision of appropriate
standards and the utilisation of approved methods of analysis. These standards
and approved methods also form the basis for NAMAS accreditation of
laboratories carrying out analytical measurement. In addition to this work in
support of chemical analysis, the LGC undertakes research on the development
of special materials, chemical sensors and the automation of analytical
techniques.
The National Weights and Measures Laboratory, also part of the Department of
Trade and Industry, is responsible for administering the Weights and Measures
Act 1985, which is largely concerned with standards and measuring equipment
for use in trade. The Government has accepted most of the recommendations of
the committee appointed to review the metrological control of weighing and
measuring equipment for commercial use, including the introduction of a
self-verification scheme. Similar arrangements are likely to feature in new
European Community directives on measuring instruments, which will replace
national legislation by 1992, ensuring free circulation of approved equipment
within the Community.
Recognition of outstanding industrial performance is conferred annually by The
Queen’s Awards for Export and Technology. The Queen’s Awards are granted on
the recommendations of the Prime Minister’s Advisory Committee, which
includes senior representatives from industry, commerce, the trade unions and
government departments. All firms incorporated in Britain are eligible to apply,
regardless of size and the products or services they provide. Other awards
include the Export Awards for Smaller Manufacturers (for firms employing fewer
than 200 people) and the MacRobert Award, the major award for engineering in
Britain (made by the Fellowship of Engineering for successful technological
innovation).
Britain was a pioneer in both computing and telecommunications and remains
among the leading nations in the production of micro- and mini-computers as
well as in the provision of computing services and systems.
248
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Research
Policy
Research and
Development
Expenditure
Research and
Technology
Initiative
British firms are also advanced in the forefront of technical innovation in the
aerospace industry, especially in the application of electronics. In the pharma¬
ceuticals sector, four of the five best-selling drugs in the world in 1985 were
discovered in British laboratories. In the field of medical technology British
companies and hospitals have been among the leaders in applying techniques
such as magnetic resonance imaging and laser surgery.
Biotechnology has gained a new impetus from research achievements in
genetic engineering and cell fusion. The DTI and other government bodies are
encouraging the exploitation of new developments. A Biotechnology Unit at the
Laboratory of the Government Chemist is the focus for government co-operation
with industry.
British Technology Group promotes the industrial application of develop¬
ments of all kinds made in public sector research institutions and universities
(see p 250). Some of the major technical achievements which it has exploited or
supported are cephalosporin antibiotics, pyrethroid insecticides, glass-
reinforced cement, carbon fibres and advanced integrated circuits.
Priorities in science and technology policy are decided by ministers collectively
under the leadership of the Prime Minister. Ministers are assisted by the
Advisory Council on Science and Technology (ACOST) which was set up in 1987
and maintains a section in the Cabinet Office reporting directly to the Prime
Minister. With a wide independent membership and a broad brief, ACOST
advises on national priorities, on the application of the results of scientific
research both in the public and private sectors, on the co-ordination of
government policy, and on Britain’s participation in international scientific and
technical projects.
In general the Government’s view is that research should be concentrated on
areas with some commercial potential. It also supports the idea that research
should be conducted in strategically important areas.
The Government sees the prime responsibility for increasing expenditure on
industrial research and development as belonging to firms themselves. It
considers that companies’ profitability should enable them to provide more
funding in this important area.
Industrial expenditure on research and development in 1986 was £5,673
million, of which £1,309 million came from government sources, £742 million
from overseas and £3,621 million from other sources (mostly from private
sector companies themselves). The main areas of expenditure were electronics
(£1,936 million), chemicals (£1,038 million), aerospace (£958 million), motor
vehicles (£394 million), and mechanical engineering (£268 million).
Estimated outturn figures for government-funded research and development
in 1986—87 include: Ministry of Defence, £2,332 million; Department of Trade
and Industry, £366 million; Science and Engineering Research Council, £297
million; Department of Energy, £188 million; Medical Research Council, £128
million; and Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, £118 million.
Following the DTI’s review of its policies in 1988 it is concentrating on
encouraging collaborative research projects, both in Britain and internationally,
and on assisting the transfer of technology, especially that between the
academic world and industry. In consequence it has ended most of its schemes
of support to single companies, although it is continuing to provide encourage¬
ment for small high-technology companies and for very small companies in the
Development Areas (see map, p 251). The policy is focused on situations where
research is necessary before commercial applications can be developed or where
the benefits of research are likely to be widespread.
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE
249
Collaborative
Research
Technology
Transfer
In order to maximise the strengths of industries and researchers, both in
Britain and abroad, particularly in Europe, the DTI encourages British
companies to participate in technological collaboration with other firms and
research communities. There are four main ways in which collaborative
research is encouraged and supported:
1. The LINK programme encourages companies to undertake joint research
with higher education institutions and research councils. The research is
pre-competitive but industrially relevant.
2. Eureka is a scheme to encourage European co-operation in the development
and production of high-technology products with global sales potential, and
has the support of 19 European governments and the European Commis¬
sion. British companies and research institutions are full participants in 57
of the 162 projects announced and have an interest in around another 40.
3. National collaborative research programmes promote longer-term industri¬
ally led projects between British companies in advanced technologies. The
role of the DTI in these is to help establish the collaborative links both among
firms and between firms and the research community at the pre-competitive
stage. The DTI is currently running collaborative programmes in advanced
robotics, gallium arsenide (a semi-conductor material with the potential to
provide very fast microelectronic operations), and high temperature super¬
conductivity (electrical conduction with zero resistance).
4. General industrial collaborative projects have a variety of roles. Support is
given to organisations serving the research and development needs of
industries where small and medium-sized firms predominate. Some projects
encourage the adoption of technology originating in the science base,
particularly in the Government’s research establishments. Others are
collaborative projects involving only industrial participants in joint research
for companies with similar interests.
Within the context of these policies the Government has considered the next
stage in a national collaborative research programme in information technology.
The Government has already agreed to support ESPRIT II (European Strategic
Programme of Research into Information Technology), for which there will be a
British contribution through the Community budget of some £200 million. The
Government also recognises that some resources should be devoted to a national
initiative complementary to ESPRIT. Accordingly the DTI has earmarked £29
million for the period 1989—92 for programmes in this area, and the Science and
Engineering Research Council plans to devote some £55 million up to 1994 to
related academic research, mainly in partnership with companies.
British companies are also encouraged to participate in European Community
research and development programmes.
The DTI aims to encourage technology transfer particularly in three areas: links
between industry and educational institutions, research councils and govern¬
ment research establishments; the access of small firms to sources of
technology, especially in those localities where technology transfer networks are
least developed; and the diffusion of new technologies likely to have pervasive
applications but in novel and unfamiliar ways, often requiring changes in other
aspects of existing products and processes.
The range of the DTI’s programmes includes: the establishment of regional
technology centres; training, demonstrator and awareness programmes in
modern manufacturing techniques and technologies; the Teaching Company
Scheme (see p 246); and inward technology transfer.
250
DTI Research
Establishments
British
Technology
Group
REGIONAL
INDUSTRIAL
DEVELOPMENT
Northern
Ireland
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Department’s research establishments are the National Physical Laboratory
(see p 247), the National Engineering Laboratory (research and development in
mechanical engineering, including manufacturing systems and robotics, mate¬
rials applications and power systems), the Warren Spring Laboratory (environ¬
mental process engineering) and the Laboratory of the Government Chemist (see
p 247).
Following a review into the future structure of the four establishments, it was
announced in June 1988 that they should concentrate on research required by
the Government rather than on industrially relevant research and development.
In the case of the National Engineering Laboratory, where roughly three-
quarters of the work is for the benefit of industry, it was thought appropriate
that ownership be transferred to the private sector. Consideration is also being
given to establishing the National Physical Laboratory, Laboratory of the
Government Chemist and Warren Spring Laboratory as separate agencies
within the public sector, in order to increase their flexibility and responsibility.
British Technology Group (BTG) promotes the development of new technology
into commercial products, particularly where the technology originates from
public sector sources, such as universities, polytechnics, research councils and
government research establishments. It offers to take responsibility for protect¬
ing and licensing inventions from these sources, provides funds for develop¬
ment, seeks licensees and negotiates licence agreements with industry. As part
of its technology transfer role it can also offer companies up to 50 per cent of the
cost of developing new products and processes based on new technology. BTG
approaches transactions on a commercial basis and expects to recover its
investment by means of a percentage levy on sales of the resulting product or
process.
BTG currently has a portfolio of 1,413 British patents and patent applica¬
tions, 567 licensees in Britain and overseas, 495 development projects at
universities and other public sector institutions, and 173 projects with
industrial companies. Its licensing activities provide some 80 per cent of its
income.
In cases where a particular technology requires the setting up of a new
company, BTG can perform a catalytic role in launching start-up companies.
The Government has announced significant changes to regional industrial
policy, designed to increase its effectiveness. This policy operates within a
general economic framework designed to encourage enterprise and economic
growth in all areas of Britain. In some areas, however, specific additional help is
needed, which is provided under the Regional Initiative. Help is focused on the
Assisted Areas—Development Areas and Intermediate Areas (see map, opposite).
The principal instruments are regional selective assistance, available for
investment projects undertaken by firms throughout the Assisted Areas
provided they meet certain criteria, and Regional Enterprise Grants, available to
firms in Development Areas with fewer than 25 employees to support investment
and innovation. In addition, in all Assisted and Urban Programme Areas, the
DTI offers a higher level of assistance under its national programme of support
for consultancy projects in marketing, design, quality, manufacturing systems,
business planning and financial and information systems.
Regional industrial policy is the DTI's responsibility, with similar policies
administered in Scotland by the Scottish Office and in Wales by the Welsh Office.
The Industrial Development Board, formed in 1982 under the aegis of the
Northern Ireland Department of Economic Development, offers a range of
incentives similar to those available in the Assisted Areas (in some cases at
Glasgow
Manchester
Nottingham
Birmingham
London
Bristol
The Assisted Areas
Islands
Shetland
Islands
0 20 40 60 80100120 km
i—i i i i L__l
—l 1 1 1
0 20 40 60 80 miles
Development Areas
Intermediate Areas
Northern Ireland
(full range of incentives
under separate legislation)
Main offices
of Industry Departments
castle upon Tyne
Orkney
o
Isles of Scilly *
(Development Area)
252
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Development
Agencies
Rural
Industries
European
Community
Regional Policy
and Aid
European
Regional
Development
Fund
higher rates). Incentives available to manufacturing industry include training
grants, grants for key workers moving to Northern Ireland and exemption from
local authority rates (local property taxes) for manufacturing premises. Manu¬
facturing and service industry projects which create jobs may be eligible for
interest relief grants, favourable rental terms for factories, and grants to assist
with setting-up costs and research and development costs. The Board can also
provide equity and loan capital for new and expanding businesses, assist the
development of new high-technology products and processes, and promote joint
ventures with overseas companies. Other incentives include corporation tax
relief of up to 80 per cent for certain new projects; 30 per cent grants for
approved energy conservation projects; grants to attract and retain good
management; and an advisory service on production methods. A similar range of
incentives and advisory services is available to the small business sector (firms
employing fewer than 50 people) from the local Enterprise Development Unit.
The Scottish and Welsh Development Agencies promote industrial development
in their respective countries. They encourage investment by overseas com¬
panies, provide equity and loan capital for industrial projects (which they are
expected to do with a maximum of private sector participation), provide
government factories, and have powers to assist small firms, promote new
technology and undertake land reclamation and urban renewal.
The Rural Development Commission is responsible for promoting the economic
and social development of rural England. It provides small factories and
workshops which are built and managed by English Estates, and administers a
grant scheme for the conversion of redundant buildings to industrial or
commercial premises. The Commission’s Business Service provides technical,
management and financial advice, training facilities and loans to small
businesses from 31 county offices. The Commission also supports voluntary
bodies in rural areas to encourage community activity and self help and provides
finance for small-scale rural housing and transport schemes. Though its
responsibility extends over the whole of rural England, the Commission’s
resources are concentrated in the areas of greatest need, which are designated
as Rural Development Areas.
In Scotland and Wales similar services are provided generally through the
development agencies, but separate bodies cater for two particular rural areas.
In Scotland the Highlands and Islands Development Board provides loans and
grants for viable projects in manufacturing, agriculture, fisheries and services,
makes available training grants and advice, and builds factories. The Develop¬
ment Board for Rural Wales (usually referred to as ‘Mid-Wales Development’)
provides factories, key worker housing and advice for small businesses. It has a
general responsibility to promote the economic and social well-being of
mid-Wales and a particular responsibility for the new town of Newtown, Powys.
The European Community seeks to increase the degree of economic cohesion
and to ensure a more balanced distribution of economic activities within the
Community. The principal responsibility for helping depressed areas remains
with national authorities but the Community may complement schemes
through aid from a number of sources.
The European Regional Development Fund was established in 1975. Its purpose
is to contribute to the correction of the main regional imbalances within the
Community by participating in the development and structural adjustment of
regions whose development is lagging behind and in the conversion of declining
industrial regions. Following decisions taken in 1988, the Fund is to be
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE
253
European
Investment
Bank
European Coal
and Steel
Community
considerably enlarged and further concentrated on the regions of greatest need,
including Northern Ireland. By December 1987 about £2,900 million had been
allocated to Britain, mainly for the Assisted Areas (see p 250) and Northern
Ireland, since 1975. In addition, about £170 million has been allocated to
Britain for specific programmes running over several years to improve the
environment and encourage the development of employment in certain steel,
shipbuilding, textile and fisheries closure areas and in the border regions of
Northern Ireland.
The European Investment Bank (EIB) is a self-governing institution set up by
the Treaty of Rome with member states of the European Community subscrib-
ing to its capital. The Bank s aims are to help to stimulate development in
less-favoured regions, to modernise or convert industries, to help to create new
activities and to offset structural difficulties affecting certain sectors. The EIB
also serves projects of common interest to several member states or the
Community as a whole. It has lent nearly £5,500 million since 1973 for projects
in Britain, mostly for public works such as the Sullom Voe oil terminal, and
manufacturing projects in the Assisted Areas.
The European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) provides loans and grants to
encourage rational distribution of production and a high level of productivity in
the coal and steel industries while safeguarding employment and avoiding
unfair competition. Areas eligible for aid are coal industry projects, conversion
schemes, construction of housing for workers, allowances for redeployed
workers, and research, including research of a social or medical nature.
Exchange risk cover may be provided by the Government on certain ECSC loans
for projects qualifying for regional selective assistance. The British borrower
then takes on only a sterling liability.
12 Manufacturing
and Service
Industries
The manufacturing and service industries, together with construction, account
for about 90 per cent of Britain's gross domestic product (GDP), the remainder
being accounted for by energy production and agriculture. As in other developed
countries, rising living standards have led to a faster growth of demand for
services than for manufactures in recent decades, so that the proportion of GDP
accounted for by services has increased steadily and that of manufacturing has
fallen. The service industries described in this chapter are the traded ones such
as business services, distribution, and travel and tourism. Financial services
and large non-traded service sectors such as education, health and public
administration and defence are dealt with in other chapters.
Manufacturing
Structure Manufacturing accounted for 24 per cent of gross domestic product in 1987 and
for a similar proportion of the workforce in employment. Around 77 per cent of
visible exports consisted of manufactured or semi-manufactured goods, and
their value was about twice the value of exports of services.
Most manufacturing is carried out by private enterprise, though during most
of 1988 the greater part of the iron and steel industry was in public ownership.
The Government continues to reduce the extent of state ownership of industry,
and in July 1988 legislation was passed enabling the Government to return the
British Steel Corporation to the private sector. Plans were also announced for
the transfer of certain shipyards to the private sector.
Table 16 shows the number of businesses in manufacturing in 1987. About
46 per cent of those employing over 1,000 people were in engineering, metals
and minerals, and vehicle manufacturing. The largest manufacturing concerns
(by £ million turnover in the latest financial year) are BAT Industries (13,623),
Imperial Chemical Industries (10,136), Unilever (5,949), General Electric
Company (5,242), Ford Motor Company (4,374), Hanson Trust (4,312), the
British Steel Corporation (3,735), Rover Group (3,412), Gallaher (3,405) and
Thorn EMI (3,317).
Growth Manufacturing output, output per head and profitability have all risen from the
low point of the recession of 1980-81. In 1987 output was 17 per cent higher
than in 1981 (see Table 17). Output per head increased by 43 per cent between
1980 and 1987—a better record than that of the other major industrialised
economies. Net manufacturing profitability reached 8-5 per cent in 1987, the
highest real rate of return on capital for 18 years, the level having risen steadily
from 2 per cent in 1981. The index of output finally exceeded its 1979 level in
1987, reaching 109-8 (1980=100). Part of the improvement in productivity
reflects the shedding of labour in the early 1980s which firms undertook in
response to the recession. Manufacturing employment fell from 71 million in
256
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Table 16: Manufacturing—Size of Businesses by Turnover and Employment
Turnover size Number of
(£'000) businesses3
Number of
Employment businesses3 Employment
size 1987 1987
20—50b
51-100
101-250
251-500
501-1,000
1,001-5,000
over 5,000
39,400
25,419
28,255
16,413
11,452
13,519
5,356
1-9
10-19
20-49
50-99
100-199
200-499
500-999
1,000 and over
103,588
18,268
15,902
7,298
4,759
3,217
963
479
318,146
252,219
491,187
505,111
661,765
977,261
652,443
990,867
Total
139,814
Total
154,474
4,848,999
Source: Size analyses ot United Kingdom businesses 1987, Business Monitor PA 1003.
a Including companies, public corporations, partnerships, sole proprietors and non-profit-making bodies.
b The figures are compiled from value added tax returns and exclude businesses with a turnover below the tax
threshold (£19,500 in 1985—86, the period to which most turnover figures relate).
1979 to 5-8 million in 1982; in 1987 it was 51 million. Productivity, however,
has continued to increase.
The recovery since 1981 has been most notable in chemicals and electrical and
instrument engineering, both in terms of output and productivity. Productivity
Table 17: Indices of Manufacturing Output (1980 = 100)
Share of
output 1980
(weight per 1,000)
1981
1986
1987
Chemicals and man-made
fibres
Metal manufacturing
Other minerals and mineral
products
Electrical and instrument
engineering
Mechanical engineering
Other metal goods
Motor vehicles and parts
Aerospace and other
transport equipment
Food, drink and tobacco
Textiles
Clothing, footwear and
leather
Paper, printing and
publishing
Other manufacturing
92
34
56
129
144
61
57
50
135
33
38
92
79
99-6
1061
89-1
93-9
89-2
92- 2
82-9
103-5
98-3
91-8
93- 5
95-0
91-1
120-8
110-5
97-0
129-7
88-0
97- 8
82-5
96-5
102-5
98- 9
108-1
102-0
105-7
129-7
119-3
101-6
137-4
88-2
102-4
91-1
100-8
104-4
101-1
108-2
111-1
118-2
Total
1,000
94-0
104-1
109-7
Source: Central Statistical Office.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
257
High-
technology
Industries
Take-up of
Advanced
Technology
has also grown sharply in metal manufacturing (see Table 18), where there has
been extensive reorganisation and modernisation.
Investment in manufacturing tends to be cyclical and 1984 saw the beginning
of an upturn following a decline after 1979. In terms of constant (1980) prices
fixed investment increased by 34 per cent between 1983 and 1987, though it
was still less in 1987 than in 1979. Total fixed capital expenditure (excluding
leased assets) at current prices was £10,027 million in 1987, comprising £7,971
million in plant and machinery, £1,404 million in new building work and £652
million in vehicles. Investment by sector is shown in Table 18. In addition,
assets worth a further £1,067 million were leased to manufacturers by the
financial community.
The underlying level of exports ol manufactured goods has risen in volume
terms. On the basis of overseas trade statistics, the index stood at 123-8 in 1987
(1980=100). This represented a considerable recovery from 1981. Manufactur¬
ing exports rose to £61,735 million in 1987, on an industry basis, compared
with £40,535 million in 1983 and £35,052 million in 1980, at current prices.
Among the leading exports in 1987 were electrical, electronic and instrument
engineering products (£12,111 million), chemicals and man-made fibres
(£10,951 million), motor vehicles and other transport equipment (£10,479
million), mechanical engineering and metal goods (£10,270 million), mineral
products (£5,278 million) and aerospace products (£4,993 million).
Import volumes rose strongly in the 1980s, the index reaching 121-4 in 1983
and 162-6 in 1987. Imports were valued at £71,217 million in 1987.
The high-technology manufacturing industries in Britain divide into the broad
categories of electrical, electronic and instrument engineering, chemicals and
aerospace. The definition is arrived at primarily by selecting industries with the
highest levels of research and development spending in relation to their gross
output. In some cases assessments of the ratio of scientific and technical staff to
other staff are also counted.
Most of the electrical and electronic industries count for inclusion: office
machinery, electronic data-processing equipment, basic electrical equipment,
telecommunications equipment, electric instruments and control systems,
radio and electronic capital goods, and components. Within instrument
engineering, precision equipment for measuring and checking, and medical,
optical and photographic and filming equipment are included. In chemicals
the definition covers plastics materials, synthetic resins, synthetic rubbers
and pharmaceuticals. Aerospace production as a whole is defined as high-
technology.
The high-technology industries have shown strong growth in recent years
with levels of output, productivity and exports well above the average for
manufacturing. High-technology manufacturing sectoral growth now exceeds
manufacturing industrial growth as a whole.
Microelectronics are increasingly used in production processes in Britain.
Computer-aided design (CAD) facilities have been taken up by about 60 per cent
of all engineering plants (a higher percentage in the case of firms involved in
instrument, electrical and vehicle engineering). For businesses employing more
than 500 people the figure is 81 per cent. Between 1983 and 1987 the
proportion of companies using computers for some aspect of manufacturing
rose from 42 per cent to 72 per cent. The number of British firms using robots
more than doubled between 1984 and 1987. Many British concerns are also
making use of advanced materials, such as carbon fibre composites in the
aerospace industry, new types of plastics in the automotive sector and high-fibre
cholesterol-free protein in food production.
258
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
tJO
S
G
<u
a
>>
o
a
S
«
+j
G
a
■M
G
o
as
w " TZ .z,
t> Cl. "ti
o s £
O T5 U S
Cfi X —
gc=
Im
o
"3 00
S- oo
G
o
^-h -—«
° o5 §
X 05 2
OJ  I
= 8
1=
o
a
£
4)
c oB O
S 2 P
£ a
D< 3
£ ^
w
ti P
So00
.2 o
3 2 ^
° £
in VO 02 N O)
in co co <r> ^
m cd o o
IS 00
^ CD
in
in cs cs
00 02 CS
m o co
i—i CS 1
^ ^ ^
P CD IN
oo in
O <N N (N 02
m 02 ^ cd cd m
n. in cn (N cs m m
02 00
00 O
in
o
m
00 02
00 <N
CO CD
q
co
CS (N
o in
^ ^ CD 02 O
o in 02 in n
<n 02 m co
m
02 CD
IN O
02'st<^C0OCS<Nir'-C0
■QO
G
rt
1-
42
G
uo »
C "O
u C
3 n
o C/2
I s
3 42
3 .£
TO '3
£ 3
3
42
"3
42 ejo
£ .£
H fc
42
■OJ0
3
33 P
to .22
42 -3
- 32
■O 3
S "£
42
32
S o
42
cn 3
3 i^“
•3 'OJ0
■o ^
-£
TO -p
42 3
'C G
■3
£ £
S £
c/2 q
■§ g
§0 S
G V,
"S 32
£ £
4) O
S o
O £
TO
n 32
£ 5
° 3
■£ «
TO ^
42 £
42 r
TO ■
a
a tuo
33 .S
^ £
42
.£
11
TO
_42 .3
^a£
X o
/-Hi-**-'
-C a;
w a32
o£o
i: Central Statistical Office and Department of Employment.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
259
THE SECTORS
OF MANU¬
FACTURING
Chemicals and
Man-made
Fibres
In the traditional branches of heavy industry, re-equipment and rationalisa¬
tion has led to significant improvements in productivity in recent years. For
example, British Steel's modernisation of its facilities at Port Talbot in south
Wales and elsewhere helped the company to raise labour productivity levels
above those ol its Federal German and Japanese competitors. The widespread
adoption of Advanced Manufacturing Techniques (AMT) has enabled the motor
vehicle industry to become more efficient. This sector spent over 60 per cent
more on research and development in 1986 than it did three years earlier.
The Government provides extensive financial assistance to companies and
research organisations seeking to develop and improve the technologies needed
by industry. It has, for example, made available resources to encourage and
assist companies to take advantage of the emerging technologies of multi-vendor
computer communications.
The relative sizes of the various branches of manufacturing are shown in the
first columns of Tables 17 and 18. Table 18 also shows employment,
productivity and investment levels in each industry. A more detailed description
of the main branches is given in the sections that follow. The statistics in these
sections are supplied by the Statistical Division of the Department of Trade and
Industry. Unless otherwise stated, export and sales figures include parts, and
export figures include re-exports. The sales figures show the sales of principal
products made by each industry, so that they exclude, for example, any
non-electronic goods produced by firms classified as part of the electronics
industry. The labour figures show the number of people in employment in Great
Britain in mid-1987.
Britain’s chemicals industry is the third largest in Western Europe and the fifth
largest in the non-communist world. Nearly half of its production is exported
and in 1987 it contributed £10,500 million to the country’s balance of
payments. One company. Imperial Chemical Industries (ICI), accounts for about
one-half of the industry’s production and is the fourth largest chemicals
company in the world. Traditionally Britain has been a major producer of basic
industrial chemicals, such as inorganic and basic organic chemicals, plastics
and fertilisers. Although these sectors still make up about 40 per cent of the
industry’s output, the most rapid growth in recent years has been in the
production of speciality and ‘problem-solving’ chemicals, especially pharma¬
ceuticals, pesticides and cosmetics. Production of chemicals increased by 7-5
per cent in volume terms in 1987.
Pharmaceuticals were responsible for about a third of the chemical sector's
overseas trade surplus in 1987. British firms now manufacture ten of the
world’s 50 best-selling drugs. Glaxo’s ulcer treatment and Id’s beta-blocker
Tenormin, which reduces high blood pressure, are the first and third
best-selling drugs in the world respectively. The United States subsidiary of
Britain's Wellcome Foundation has been responsible for the first drug for the
treatment of AIDS (Retrovir) to win government approval and also for the first
routine treatment for the herpes group of viruses (Zovirax). Other recent major
developments pioneered in Britain are semi-synthetic penicillins and cephalo¬
sporins, new treatments for asthma, arthritis and coronary disease, and a
synthetic form of insulin. Britain is among the world leaders in the production
of antibiotics by fermentation.
In the field of biotechnology the British Celltech company was the first to be
licensed by the United States Food and Drugs Administration for the mass
production of monoclonal antibodies, proteins which each seek out a particular
natural substance. They are used to diagnose diseases and identify different
blood types and can be used in the treatment of cancer. Britain is foremost
260
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Table 19: Chemicals and Man-made Fibres
1987
Labour Sales3 Exports Imports
(’OOOs) (£ million) (£ million) (£ million)
Chemicals and man-made fibres 345 23,112 10,951 8,824
of which: basic industrial
chemicals 124 9,188 5,286 4,972
specialised industrial
products 47 4,019 1,841 1,047
pharmaceuticals 87 4,257 1,685 856
soap and toilet
preparations 33 2,417 580 360
a The overseas trade figures for some industries include imports for re-export and exports for re import. Where
this entrepot trade is substantial, it is possible for trade figures to be greater than sales.
among the world’s developers of molecular graphics, a computer-aided techni¬
que for studying the structure of complicated organic molecules on a visual
display unit, contributing to the rational design of new and improved drugs.
Notable recent British discoveries and developments in agricultural chemicals
include pyrethroid insecticides, Id’s diquat and paraquat herbicides, systemic
fungicides and aphicides, genetically engineered microbial pesticides and
methods of encouraging natural parasites to attack common pests in horticul¬
ture. A substantial proportion of world research and development in agro¬
chemicals is conducted in Britain.
Exports of cosmetics, toiletries and perfumery in 1987 were £413 million,
compared with imports of £253 million. The home market amounted to about
£980 million.
A high proportion of inorganic chemicals production consists of relatively
simple bulk chemicals, such as sulphuric acid and metallic and non-metallic
oxides, serving as basic materials for industry. The most important products in
the organic chemicals range (by weight) are ethylene (1,201,116 tonnes
produced in 1987), propylene (353,077 tonnes) and benzene (690,004 tonnes).
Over 30 per cent of plastics production is exported. Expansion in recent years
has mainly been in thermoplastic materials, of which the most important are
polyethylene, polyvinyl chloride, polystyrene and polypropylene. A new group of
plastics materials reinforced with carbon fibres is also in commercial produc¬
tion; they have up to three times the strength but are only 20 per cent of the
weight of steel, and are being increasingly used in aircraft and vehicle
manufacture. ICI has recently produced the world’s first biodegradable thermo¬
plastic, Biopol, which has so far been used as a slow release agent for drugs and
herbicides, as well as for making bottles and films that can be disposed of
without polluting the environment. Synthetic rubbers in large-scale production
include butadiene-based neoprene for tyres, high-styrene for shoe soles and
flooring, and oil-resistant nitrile rubbers.
With the development of multi-layer technology, plastics are fast replacing
traditional packaging materials such as paper, tin and glass.
Specialised products in the paint industry include new ranges of synthetic
resins and pigments, powder coatings, non-drip and quick-drying paints and
paints needing only one top coat. Two significant recent innovations have been
solid emulsion paint and a temporary water-based finish for vehicle bodies and
road markings, which can be removed easily by chemical treatment. Following
its purchase of the US Glidden concern in 1986, ICI became the world’s largest
paint manufacturer.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
261
The main types of man-made fibre are still those first developed—regenerated
cellulosic fibres such as viscose and the major synthetic fibres such as nylon
polyamide, polyester and acrylics. Extensive research continues to produce a
wide variety of innovative products with characteristics designed to meet market
needs, such as anti-static and flame-retardant fibres. More specialist products
include the aramids (with very high thermal stability and strength), elastanes
(giving very high stretch and recovery), melded fabrics (produced without the
need for knitting or weaving), and carbon fibres (originally developed for the
aerospace industry but now finding applications in other industries such as
motor vehicles and sports goods).
Mineral
Products
Iron and Steel
Products
Britain is the world’s ninth largest steel-producing nation (by volume). British
producers delivered 15 million tonnes of finished steel in 1987, of which 61 per
cent was sold on the home market and the remainder exported. British Steel is
the third largest steel company in the world and accounts for some 75 per cent of
crude steel production in Britain. British Steel’s output is now based on flat
products, plate, heavy sections, tubes and stainless items. Private sector firms
are prominent in the manufacture of engineering and other special steels, wire
rod and wire products, reinforcements for use in the construction industry, and
other more specialised goods. The major areas of steel production are Wales,
Scotland and northern England.
The industry has recorded sharp improvements in productivity in recent
years, partly as a result of an extensive programme of rationalisation and
closures: whereas it took BSC 14-3 man hours to produce a tonne of liquid steel
in 1978-79, it took only 5 man hours in 1987-88. Most private sector firms have
shown improved profitability and in 1987-88 British Steel returned a net profit
of £410 million. The first steps have been taken to return British Steel to the
private sector. Parliament has passed the necessary legislation and the
Government is planning a flotation of the company.
Non-ferrous
Metals
Output of non-ferrous metals and their alloys in 1987 included: aluminium,
with total sales of £1,542 million, of which exports were 28 per cent; nickel
(excluding cupro-nickel and nickel silver), with sales valued at £148 million, of
which 86 per cent were export sales; lead, with sales of £169 million, of which 37
per cent were accounted for by exports; and zinc, for which exports made up
about a third of a total of £40 million in sales. Primary metal production relies
mainly on imported ores, concentrates and partially refined metal.
Britain still operates a small tin mine. It also refines about 10 per cent of the
Western world’s tin production, exporting some 85 per cent of this output of £80
million in 1987.
Table 20: Mineral Products
1987
Labour Sales3 Exports Imports
(’000s) (£ million) (£ million) (£ million)
Metal manufacturing 164 6,593
of which: iron and steel products 112 4,738
non-ferrous metals 51 1,855
Non-metallic mineral products 229 6,705
of which: glass and glassware 49 1,380
ceramic and heat-
resistant goods 69 1,236
4,096
2,320
1,776
1,182
320
420
4,276
1,867
2,409
1,139
510
273
a See Table 19, footnote a.
262
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Ceramics
Other
Mineral
Products
Electrical,
Electronic and
Instrument
Engineering
Britain is a major producer of specialised alloys for high-technology require¬
ments in the aerospace, electronic, petrochemical, and nuclear and other fuel
industries. Titanium and titanium alloys are produced and used in aircraft
production, power generation and North Sea oil production.
Nearly half of the industry is situated in the Midlands and Wales. In recent
years considerable progress has been made in the development of ‘superplastic’
alloys, which are more ductile and elastic than conventional alloys. Aluminium
lithium is a relatively new alloy which has been developed by British Alcan
Aluminium and already used in experimental aircraft construction. It is up to 20
per cent lighter than traditional materials and is stronger, stiffer and more
resistant to fatigue.
Exports of all precious non-ferrous metals and their alloys reached £860
million in 1987, and those of all precious stones including diamonds accounted
for a further £1,592 million.
The ceramics industry comprises manufacturers of a wide range of clay products
including domestic pottery, sanitaryware and tiles, and clay pipes used in the
building trade. Annual turnover is over £1,500 million with exports of over £400
million. The domestic pottery industry is an important element within the
group. It includes the manufacture of china, earthenware and stoneware, and
accounts for over 50 per cent of the industry's output. Production of tableware is
concentrated in two main groups, Wedgwood and Royal Doulton. Britain is the
world s leading manufacturer of fine bone china, much of which is exported.
Research is being conducted into ceramics for use in housebuilding and diesel
and jet engines. Important industrial ceramics invented in Britain include
silicon carbides developed by the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority and
sialons developed at the University of Newcastle upon Tyne.
Among building materials glass-reinforced cement composites were invented in
Britain in the early 1970s and are manufactured under licence in over 40
countries.
Companies manufacturing bottles and jars form a large part of the glass
industry. They are major suppliers to the food and drink and the pharmaceutical
industries. Another major section is devoted to the manufacture of flat glass in
its various forms, chiefly by the float glass process developed in Britain by
Pilkington Brothers and licensed to glassmakers throughout the world.
Pilkingtons has also developed an energy-saving window glass which reflects
room heat without impairing visibility. Britain is the world’s biggest exporter of
china clay, which was the country's largest mineral export until the discovery of
North Sea oil. The main company involved is English China Clays.
This group of industries suffered much less than any other manufacturing
industries as a result of the world-wide recession of the early 1980s. Output has
grown steadily since 1982. Sales of electronic data-processing equipment nearly
tripled between 1983 and 1987. Advances in microelectronics have meant that
the borderlines between office machinery, data-processing equipment, telecom¬
munications equipment and consumer electronic equipment are becoming very
hard to define.
The computer sector, which has grown strongly over the past five years,
produces an extensive range of computer systems, central processors and
peripheral equipment, from large computers for large-scale data-processing and
scientific work to mini- and microcomputers for use in control and automation
systems and for home, educational and office use. Britain is one of the top three
markets in Western Europe for data-processing equipment; expenditure on
data-processing as a proportion of GDP is the highest in Western Europe.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
263
Table 21: Electrical, Electronic and Instrument Engineering
1987
Labour Sales3 Exports Imports
(’000s) (£ million) (£ million) (£ million)
Data-processing equipment
Basic electrical equipment
Communications equipment
Electrical instruments and
control systems
Radio and electronic capital goods
Electronic components
Consumer electrical and
electronic goods
Instrument engineering
a See Table 19, footnote a.
n.a. = not available.
78
97
38
32
65
n.a.
95
102
4,351
2,659
1,668
1,472
3,146
2,432
2,623
2,641
3,899
1,367
240
1,314
1,350
1,767
828
1,346
4,773
1,106
517
1,066
988
2,593
2,349
1,696
Reflecting the importance of Britain as a market, many of the leading overseas
manufacturers of data-processing equipment—for example, IBM, Unisys, Wang
and Seiko—have established manufacturing plants in Britain. These serve both
Britain and overseas and thus contribute to Britain’s exports. Other companies
have succeeded by developing new products for specialised markets, such as the
transputer, produced by Inmos, a Thorn EMI subsidiary; in effect a computer on
a single chip, a transputer can be combined with hundreds of others in parallel
to form a machine as powerful as existing ‘supercomputers’ but at less than a
quarter of their price. British firms and research organisations, with govern¬
ment support, are also heavily involved in the development and application of
the new family of‘three-five’ semiconductor materials, such as gallium arsenide,
which will ultimately enable much faster computers to be produced and are
already used in a number of microwave devices.
British companies are strongly involved in the development of electronic
revenue control equipment, including electronic funds transfer and point of sale
equipment. The first large-scale trial of cashless shopping in Britain began in
Northampton in 1985, using equipment manufactured by ICL. British-made
computerised ticketing equipment is being installed throughout British Rail’s
network and in the London Underground system.
The main communications products are switching and transmission equip¬
ment, telephones and terminals for telex, facsimile and teletext. British Telecom
(BT) is the main customer for network equipment and carries out research and
development work in co-operation with suppliers. Mercury Communications is
licensed to compete with BT in the provision of network services, while the
market for terminals and telephones has been fully liberalised. Innovative work
is being particularly stimulated by the expansion of cable television and the
growth in value added network services. In 1984 two cellular radio networks
began operation. They provide sophisticated telephone services on portable
telephones.
One important part of the industry produces transmission equipment and
cables for telecommunications and information networks and other purposes.
Its products include submarine and high-specification data-cariying cables. BT,
supported by a technically advanced cable industry, has led the way in the
development of optical fibre communications systems. In 1986 it opened the
world’s first international submarine optical fibre link, which has doubled the
number of telephone lines between Britain and Belgium. BT has also paved the
264
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
way for simpler and cheaper optical cables by laying the first non-repeatered
cable, over 100 km (62 miles) long, and developing the first all-optical repeater.
Well over half of the world’s undersea communications cables (of all types) have
been made and laid by another British company, STC Submarine Systems,
which plans, with its US and French partners, to complete the laying of the first
transatlantic optical fibre cable in 1988. Britain also has a world lead in the
transmission of computerised data along telephone lines for reproduction on
television screens. British Telecom’s Prestel service is now capable of transmit¬
ting full-colour photographs to domestic television reception quality. Sales of
telegraph and telephone apparatus and equipment by British firms more than
doubled between 1979 and 1987.
Another expanding sector of the industry is that which covers the manufac¬
ture of radio communications equipment, radar, radio and sonar navigational
aids for ships and aircraft, thermal imaging systems, alarms and signalling
equipment, public broadcasting equipment and other capital goods. Radar was
invented in Britain and British firms are still in the forefront of technical
advances. Racal Avionics’ new X-band radar can distinguish different types of
aircraft flying at very low altitude and is already in use at airports in several
countries. GLORIA is a new type of ship-towed side-scan sonar, developed at
Britain’s Institute of Oceanographic Sciences and now being used by the United
States Geological Survey to map the ocean floor within the US 200-mile
Exclusive Economic Zones. The Cable and Wireless company has a submarine
cable-laying robot ‘CIRRUS’, which can work at depths of up to 1 km (3,280 ft)
controlled entirely by a computer on its mother ship.
A range of electrical and electronic measurement and test equipment is made
in Britain, as well as analytical instruments. Production of process control
equipment is a large and expanding area along with the manufacture of
numerical control and indication equipment for use in machine tools. British
companies are among the leaders in several types of advanced electronic medical
equipment. Pioneering work has been undertaken in magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI), a technique in which the patient is placed in a strong magnetic
field and scanned with radiofrequency (RF) energy. The body interacts with this
energy and the information generated is processed by computer to construct
images of internal organs and tissues. MRI enables large areas of the body to be
examined internally without recourse to surgery or potentially harmful radia¬
tion. Developments in the field of laser technology over the last 25 years helped
British doctors in 1986 to invent new techniques for destroying cancers in their
early stages and for unblocking arteries.
British companies also produce other advanced electronic medical equipment
including ultrasound scanners, electromyography systems and patient monitor¬
ing systems for intensive and coronary care and other uses.
The comprehensive indigenous electronics components industry is sup¬
plemented by subsidiaries of a number of large overseas companies. The
manufacture of integrated circuits is an area of particularly rapid change.
Britain has strength in the manufacture of advanced components over a wide
range of products and application areas.
The electrical engineering industry manufactures a wide variety of products
for the generation, transmission, distribution and utilisation of electricity,
ranging from power plant, transformers and switchgear to lighting, plugs and
sockets. A mature industry, it nevertheless makes extensive use of advanced
technologies in its products and processes. It also earns a considerable foreign
trade surplus; for example, GEC won a £165 million contract in 1988 to design
and supply a 2 x 362 MW power station to China.
The domestic electrical appliance sector is dominated by a few large firms. The
major electronic consumer goods produced are radio and television sets, and
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
265
Mechanical
Engineering
and Metal
Goods
high-fidelity audio and video equipment. In the audio field British manufac¬
turers have a reputation for high-quality goods but are less strong in the
mass market.
The instrument engineering industry produces measuring, photographic,
cinematographic and reprographic equipment; watches, clocks and other
timing devices, and medical and surgical instruments and appliances. Its
precision instrument and medical branches both earn significant and growing
export surpluses, but the sector as a whole is contracting.
Since much of the production of this industry is of capital equipment, it suffered
particularly during the recession which began in 1979. However, from 1984
there was a recovery in some parts of the industry. In 1987 sales of all types of
printing machinery rose by 7 per cent, while machinery for the processing and
packaging of food, drink and tobacco had sales 12 per cent higher. Over 40 per
cent of the industry’s sales go to overseas buyers, and exports of mechanical
engineering equipment amounted to about 13 per cent of all visible exports.
Of particular importance are fabricated steel products such as pressure
vessels, heat exchangers and storage tanks for chemical and oil-refining
(process) plant, steam-raising boilers (including those of high capacity for power
stations), nuclear reactors, water and sewage treatment plant, and fabricated
steelwork for bridges, buildings and industrial installations.
Although the agricultural machinery industry’s output fell sharply as world
demand contracted in the 1970s, Britain is still the Western world’s largest
producer of tractors, which make up two-thirds of the country’s total output of
agricultural equipment. In 1987 this was £1,032 million, of which 76 per cent
was exported, with a trade surplus of £296 million. Recent technical innova¬
tions include computer-controlled tractors, a highly efficient pesticide sprayer
and combined mower/conditioners that significantly reduce the drying time for
grass. Much of the new machinery is designed for use in a variety of conditions
to meet the needs of overseas farmers, and since 1984 the Royal International
Agricultural Show, held annually near Coventry, has had a specialised tropical
machinery centre, where demonstrations of such machinery are given.
Table 22: Mechanical Engineering and Metal Goods
1987
Labour Sales9 Exports Imports
(’000s) (£ million) (£ million) (£ million)
Mechanical engineering 709 21,052 8,983
of which: industrial plant and
steelwork 75 3,222 494
agricultural machinery
and tractors 23 1,312 943
machine tools 75 1,680 643
machinery for
process industries
and non-metallic
materials working 79 2,578 1,749
mining, construction and
mechanical handling
equipment 73 3,356 1,557
Other metal goods 297 9,607 1,287
7,578
342
689
667
1,824
1,114
1,777
a See Table 19, footnote a.
266
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Almost all of Britain's machine tools are purchased by the engineering,
vehicles and metal goods industries. The most commonly used metal-cutting
machine tools are milling, grinding and turning machines. The manufacture of
computerised numerically controlled machine tools and the adoption of flexible
manufacturing systems have become increasingly important. Output of metal¬
working machine tools was 57 per cent higher in 1987 than in 1983, and
exports were nearly 50 per cent higher over the same period, both having
recovered during the period 1984—86.
In 1987, 83 per cent of the sales of textile machinery were to export markets.
Recent British innovations in this field include computerised colour matching
and weave simulation, friction spinning, high-speed computer-controlled knit¬
ting machines and electronic jacquard attachments for weaving looms.
The ordnance, small arms and munitions industry earned a foreign trade
surplus of nearly £400 million in 1987. The Government sold its Royal Ordnance
factories to British Aerospace in 1987.
Overseas sales of mining machinery and tunnelling equipment are substan¬
tial, while exports of construction equipment amounted to £902 million in 1987
(91 per cent of output). J. C. Bamford Ltd is the world’s second largest
manufacturer of backhoe loaders. It exports over 60 per cent of its output. The
British mining equipment industry is very strong, especially in the production
of coal-cutting and road-heading (shearing) equipment, hydraulic roof supports,
conveying equipment, flameproof transformers, switchgear, and subsurface
transport equipment and control systems. The main products of the mechanical
handling equipment industry are cranes and transporters, lifts, escalators,
conveyors, elevators, hoists, powered industrial trucks and air bridges. Electro¬
nically controlled and completely automatic handling systems are also produced.
Britain is an important producer of other machinery such as industrial engines,
pumps, valves and compressors, and pneumatic and hydraulic equipment.
Despite an overall decline in the castings industry, some foundries have been
investing in new melting, moulding and quality control equipment. Cosworth
Engineering, for example, has developed a high-quality aluminium casting
process and uses it to produce cylinder heads in quantity for Mercedes Benz and
Ford cars.
Motor Vehicles
and Other
Transport
Equipment
(excluding
Aerospace)
Output of cars is dominated by five groups, accounting for over 95 per cent of
the total. They are Rover (in which the Government had a majority shareholding
prior to the company’s sale to British Aerospace in 1988), Ford, Vauxhall,
Peugeot-Talbot and Nissan. The remainder is in the hands of smaller, specialist
producers such as Jaguar and Rolls-Royce, whose cars are renowned for their
quality and durability (some 65 per cent of all Rolls-Royce cars built since 1904
Table 23: Motor Vehicles and Other Transport Equipment
1987
Labour
(’000s)
Sales3
(£ million)
Exports
(£ million)
Imports
(£ million)
Motor vehicles (including
bodies, trailers, caravans
and engines)
Motor vehicle parts
Other transport equipment
of which: shipbuilding and
repairing
137
103
261
75
10,454
4,113
8,267
728
2,639
2,363
5,477
319
6,408
2,629
3,212
198
See Table 19, footnote a.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
267
Shipbuilding
and Marine
Engineering
Aerospace
are still roadworthy). The West Midlands and the South East account for around
two-thirds of total employment in the motor industry.
In recent years the industry has faced increased competition from imports,
particularly from the rest oi Europe and Japan. However, British manufacturers
are responding to the situation, largely by resorting to collaboration. Rover
launched its new executive car, which was designed and developed in
collaboration with Honda, with which it is working on a new range of
medium-sized cars. The industry remains a major exporter: exports by Jaguar
alone in 1987 amounted to £785 million.
Because of over-capacity in the European truck industry. General Motors
(which owns Vauxhall) ended production of civilian trucks in 1986 and, the
following year, sold its Dunstable plant to AWD. Also in 1987, Rover merged its
truck, van, associated parts and certain overseas operations with those of the
Dutch DAE company to form a new joint venture, Leyland DAE.
Major component manufacturers include GKN and Lucas, which has de¬
veloped a new cheap anti-lock braking system and the first direct fuel injection
system for small, high-speed, automotive diesel engines.
About half the domestic market for pedal cycles is supplied by British firms,
the largest being Raleigh, which was taken over by the specially created Derby
International Corporation in 1987.
Britain has a long tradition of shipbuilding and remains active in the
construction, conversion and repair of merchant vessels, warships and offshore
structures.
The largest sector is the building of warships, including both nuclear-powered
and diesel-electric submarines, frigates, glass-reinforced plastics vessels, fast
patrol craft and specialist naval auxiliaries. As well as meeting all the needs of
the Royal Navy, the warship yards build and convert ships for overseas
governments.
British yards build some of the most sophisticated and technologically
complex merchant vessels in the world, including ferries and offshore support
and research vessels, as well as more traditional ships and craft of all kinds for
the leisure market. In 1987 British companies accounted for about 2 per cent of
world merchant ship completions, about 33 per cent of which were for overseas
registration. The shipbuilding industry is supplemented by ship-repairers,
including the Royal Dockyards, which the Government leased to commercial
management in 1987. Repairers also modernise and convert all types of vessels
and floating structures.
The British marine equipment industry offers a range of products from
anchors to sophisticated navigational systems. Exports account for 70 per cent
of the industry's production.
Nearly two decades of oil exploration and exploitation in the North Sea have
generated a major offshore industry in Britain. Shipbuilders and fabricators
build fixed platforms and semi-submersible units for drilling, production and
emergency/maintenance support, drill ships, jack-up rigs, modules and offshore
loading systems. Over 4,000 manufacturing and service industry firms supply a
wide range of goods and services, including consultancy, design, project
management, and research and development, to the offshore industry. In
conjunction with the Offshore Supplies Office of the Department of Energy, the
Department of Trade and Industry has a responsibility for promoting Britain’s
offshore interests overseas and maintains a central co-ordination unit to assist
this activity.
Britain’s aerospace industry is the third largest in the world, behind those of the
United States and the Soviet Union. In 1987 it had a turnover of £9,000 million,
268
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
with exports totalling £5,600 million, and contributed £2,400 million to the
balance of payments. Almost half of this export effort was due to the country’s
main airframe manufacturer, British Aerospace (BAe), which had an order-book
at the beginning of 1988 worth some £10,200 million. BAe manufactures a
uniquely extensive range of aerospace, space and electronics products. Its major
aircraft programmes are: on the civil side, the 146 family of regional airliners
(the quietest jetliner in the world), the new ATP advanced turboprop airliner, the
Jetstream 31 commuterliner and the 125 business jet; and, on the military side,
the V-STOL Harrier, the Hawk trainer and, in collaboration with Federal
German and Italian aerospace manufacturers, the Tornado combat aircraft.
Together with companies from Italy, Spain and the Federal Republic of
Germany, BAe is a partner in the Eurofighter Company, which was set up in
Munich to develop the high-technology European Fighter Aircraft (EFA). The
Experimental Aircraft Programme (EAP) demonstrator aircraft, developed jointly
by BAe and Aeritalia, is to be used as a flying test rig in support of the EFA
programme.
BAe owns 20 per cent of the European consortium Airbus Industrie which, at
the end of the first quarter of 1988, had 460 orders for its wide-bodied A300 and
A310 Airbuses and 480 firm orders and options for the new narrow-bodied
A320, for all of which the British company makes the wings. Both the A320 and
the EAP demonstrator aircraft use the new ‘fly-by-wire’ system, which controls
an aircraft by electronic rather than mechanical means. This ‘active control
technology' greatly improves manoeuvrability and allows much more aerodyna-
mically efficient aircraft to be built.
BAe is a major producer of air-, sea- and ground-launched guided weapons,
including the Rapier air defence system. Collaborative guided weapon projects
between Britain and its NATO partners are becoming increasingly important. In
1988 BAe expanded into motor vehicles with the acquisition of Rover from the
Government.
The government-owned firm Short Brothers of Belfast produces the Sherpa
military transporter, the Tucano basic trainer aircraft (to be used by the Royal
Air Force), the SD330 and 360 commuter airliners, a wide variety of airframe
components for manufacturers in many countries, and missiles. In addition to
performing a wide range of aerospace equipment work, Westland Helicopters
manufactures the Sea King and Lynx military helicopters, the civilian W30, and
is collaborating with Agusta of Italy to produce the multi-role EH 101 for the early
1990s. In 1986 a Lynx fitted with Westland’s new ‘Berp-tip’ rotor set a new
helicopter world speed record at over 400 km/h (249 mph).
Rolls-Royce, which was privatised in 1987, is one of the three largest
manufacturers of aero-engines in the world. The order-book at the beginning of
1988 stood at £4,000 million. The company’s civil engine group produces
Table 24: Aerospace
Labour Sales3 Exports Imports
1987 (’000s) (£ million) (£ million) (£ million)
Aircraft and parts 1 3,356 3,158 1,489
Aero-engines and parts l 162 1,917 1,641 1,138
Guided weapons and parts J 955 94 73
Total, including products
not specified above 8,990 4,933 2,724
See Table 19. footnote a.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
269
Food, Drink
and Tobacco
engines for airliners, transport aircraft and executive and corporate jets. Of its
RB211 family of engines, the 524G and 524H were launched in 1986 with orders
from Cathay Pacific and British Airways to power the new Boeing 747-400
airliner; 70 per cent of customers for the Boeing 757 have specified the 535
version. The new Tay turbofan has gone into service with the Gulfstream IV and
Fokker 100 aircraft, and almost 600 more were on order at the end of 1987.
Rolls-Royce is also a major partner in the five-nation International Aero Engines
(IAE) consortium that is producing the V2500, scheduled for entry into service
in 1989 on the new Airbus A320.
The military engine group of Rolls-Royce is responsible for a wide range of
engines for military aircraft and helicopters. These engines include the
Turbo-Union RBI99 for the Panavia Tornado aircraft, the unique Pegasus
vectored-thrust engine for the Harrier, the Adour, the Spey and the advanced
RTM322 helicopter engine. Rolls-Royce is a partner in the consortium formed to
develop the EJ200 for the proposed European Fighter Aircraft. In addition, the
company produces gas turbines for power generation and for oil and gas
pumping. It provides gas turbine power for vessels of 25 of the world’s naval
forces and the propulsion systems for the Royal Navy's nuclear-powered
submarines.
Aviation equipment manufacturers provide a wide range of systems essential
to engines and aircraft, including engine and flight controls, electrical genera¬
tion, mechanical and hydraulic power systems, cabin furnishings, flight deck
control and information displays. British firms have made important advances
in the development of ejector seats, fire-fighting equipment and flight simula¬
tors, and are playing a major role in the development of both fly-by-wire and
fly-by-light technology. They supply radar and air traffic control equipment and
ground power supplies to airports and airlines throughout the world.
The main trade association for the industry is the Society of British Aerospace
Companies, which organises a major international air show at Farnborough,
Hampshire, eveiy two years (the next in September 1990).
The British space industry’s major strength is in the manufacture of satellites.
BAe is Europe’s largest—and the world's third largest—producer of communica¬
tions satellites. It has been the prime contractor for all such spacecraft launched
by the European Space Agency (ESA), as well as for scientific probes such as the
Giotto satellite. BAe has developed and built 18 space pallets (payload and
instrument carriers) for the United States Space Shuttle and has 25 orders for
the SPELDA lightweight payload bay structure for the ESA’s Ariane 4 rocket
launcher, which enables Ariane to launch two or more spacecraft independently
during the same mission.
Marconi Space Systems (a subsidiary of GEC) has acted as principal
contractor on many telecommunications satellite payloads including those for
the ESA's Olympus satellite, to be launched in 1989, and the spacecraft of the
International Maritime Satellite Organisation (Inmarsat). BAe is prime contrac¬
tor for the second generation of Inmarsat satellites. In 1987 BAe and Marconi
together won an order from NATO for military communications satellites worth
more than £100 million, the first time such an order had gone to a non-US
company.
Britain has a large and sophisticated food processing industry, which has
accounted for a growing proportion of total domestic food supply in recent
decades. While Britain is a net importer of foodstuffs, in 1987 the trade gap
narrowed significantly as exports of food and drink grew by 11 per cent and
imports by only 1 per cent; much of this change was due to an improved balance
of trade in meat, fish and sugar preparations.
Convenience foods, particularly frozen foods, yoghurts and instant snacks,
270
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
have formed the fastest-growing sector of the food market. The market is also
growing in foods for consumers concerned about the effects of their diet on their
health and weight.
Food from Britain is a body with a wide remit to improve the marketing of
British food and agricultural produce both domestically and overseas. It has
selected France, the Federal Republic of Germany, the Benelux countries and the
United States as key export markets.
Production of milk was some 14,765 million litres in 1987, of which just
under half was for sale as liquid milk. Eight out of ten households in Britain
receive pasteurised milk through a door-step delivery system employing about
37,000 roundsmen (not included in the employment figure in the table) driving
electric vehicles. Domestic milk consumption per head (2-3 litres—41 pints—
per week in 1987) is among the highest in the world; consumption of skimmed
milk is rising as people attempt to reduce the fat content of their diet.
The main milk products are butter (176,500 tonnes produced in 1987), cheese
(263,900 tonnes), condensed whole milk (81,900 tonnes), condensed skimmed
milk (39,100 tonnes), and dried whole and skimmed milk (289,600 tonnes).
These levels of production have remained approximately the same since 1981,
after significant rises in butter and cheese production in the late 1970s. The
dairy industry accounted for 66 per cent of new butter supplies to the British
market in 1987, 62 per cent of new cheese supplies, and nearly all of other milk
products. Butter exports in 1987 were 129,000 tonnes and cheese exports
36,600 tonnes, compared with 16,000 tonnes and 10,700 tonnes in 1976. The
other main exports are skimmed milk powder (102,200 tonnes in 1987) and
whole milk powder (61,100 tonnes).
About 70 per cent of bread is manufactured in large mechanised bakeries,
most of which use a British process (the ‘Chorleywood' process) widely used in
other countries. After years of decline, overall consumption of bread stabilised in
the 1980s. There has been increased demand for wholemeal varieties at the
expense of the standard sliced white loaf, though recently this has slackened
with the introduction of soft-grained white bread. Biscuit exports (£136 million
in 1987) are more than double the value of imports.
Of prime importance among the alcoholic drinks produced in Britain, and in
Table 25: Food, Drink and Tobacco
1987
Labour Sales Exports Imports
(’000s) (£ million) (£ million) (£ million)
Food manufacturing 437 28,609 2,824 6,495
of which; meat products 90 3,934 647 1,660
milk and milk products 37 3,687 317 666
flour-based products 129 4,245 147 86
sugar and confectionery 1 1,748 99 438
cocoa and chocolate > 63
goods J 2,534 306 364
animal feedstuffs 19 3,792 136 155
Drinks9 91 5,496 1,484 1,340
of which; brewing and malting 45 2,024 108 148
distilling and
compounding 17 1,548 1,299 148
soft drinks 25 1,634 42 248
Tobacco9 18 2,185 430 114
Sales figures exclude duty paid.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
271
Textiles,
Footwear,
Clothing and
Leather
the food and drink industry as a whole, is Scotch whisky. There are 114
distilleries in Scotland and the well-known brands of blended Scotch whisky are
made from the products of a number of different distilleries. Guinness pic,
owners of the Distillers Company and Arthur Bell and Sons, accounts for 40 per
cent of Scotch whisky output and 25 per cent of the British market. Some 85 per
cent of all Scotch whisky produced is exported. The value of whisky exports was
over £1,142 million in 1987, the United States taking about a fifth.
In the brewing and malting industry there are six major brewery groups whose
products are sold nationally. Demand for traditional cask-conditioned ales grew
substantially in the 1970s but has now stabilised. The main raw materials used
are malt, hops and some sugar. British malt, which is made almost entirely from
home-grown barley, is used by brewers throughout the world. Lager has
increased steadily in popularity since the late 1960s and accounts for over 50 per
cent of beer sales.
The soft drinks industry has expanded markedly in the last decade. There are
some very large companies among about 20 producing brands which are
marketed on a national scale.
The British tobacco industry manufactures 95 per cent of cigarettes and
tobacco goods sold in Britain. Approximately 90 per cent of output is provided by
three major manufacturers (Imperial Tobacco, Gallaher and Carreras Roth¬
mans). The industry specialises in the production of high-quality cigarettes
made from flue-cured tobacco and achieves significant exports, mainly of
cigarettes—countries in Europe, the Middle East and Africa are important
markets. Britain’s most important sources of raw tobacco are Brazil, the United
States, Zimbabwe, India and Canada. By voluntary agreement with the
Government, cigarette manufacturers restrict their advertising, print health
warnings on packets and advertisements and are reducing the tar yield of
cigarettes.
Textiles and clothing make a substantial contribution to the British economy in
terms of employment, exports and turnover. Together, they employ 500,000,
equal to about 2 per cent of total employment and almost 9 per cent of
manufacturing employment. For textiles, there is a high degree of regional
concentration. Particularly important areas are the North West (mainly cotton),
West Yorkshire (mainly wool), the East Midlands (lace and knitwear), Scotland
and Northern Ireland. Most of the clothing industry is widely scattered
throughout the country and does not represent a large proportion of employ¬
ment in any region although there are significant concentrations in certain
inner city areas such as Manchester, Leeds and east London. The industries’
main products are yarn, woven and knitted fabrics, apparel, industrial and
household textiles, and carpets based mainly on wool, cotton and man-made
fibres.
The textile industry has around 5,000 firms, comprising a few large
multi-process companies including two of the largest in the world—Coats Viyella
and Courtaulds—and a large number of small and medium-sized firms.
Increased investment in new machinery and enhanced attention to design,
training and marketing have helped the industry to raise its competitiveness.
The Multi-Fibre Arrangement (MFA) of the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade allows a measure of restraint on imports of textiles and clothing from
low-cost countries into the European Community; agreement on a fourth MFA
was reached in 1986.
Britain’s woollen industry is one of the largest in the world; it includes the
world’s biggest wool textile company, Illingworth Morris. In the last few years the
industry’s export earnings have been consistently high. There are two main
branches, woollens and worsted. An increasing amount of man-made fibre is
272
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Other
Manufacturing
Table 26: Textiles, Footwear, Clothing and Leather
1987
Labour Sales3 Exports Imports
(’000s) (£ million) (£ million) (£ million)
Textile industry 232 6,288 2,068 3,831
of which: woollen and worsted
industry 38 1,417 555 437
cotton and silk industry 35 1,100 480 1,771
hosiery and other
knitwear 82 1,859 487 834
carpets, rugs and matting 19 1,023 191 381
Footwear 53 1,116 190 823
Clothing, hats and gloves 209 4,105 957 2,002
Made-up textiles 29 890 120 213
Leather and leather goods 18 863 344 499
1 See Table 19, footnote a.
blended with wool. West Yorkshire is the main producing area, but Scotland and
the west of England are also famous as specialised producers of high-quality
yarn and cloth. Large quantities of raw wool are scoured and cleaned in Britain
in preparation for spinning. British mills also process the bulk of rare fibres
such as cashmere and mohair.
Low-cost competition has cut progressively into British markets for cotton.
Production includes yarn and fabrics of cotton, spun man-made fibres and
mixtures of these. The linen industry is centred in Northern Ireland, where the
lighter types of fabrics for apparel, furnishings and household textiles are
produced. The heavyweight canvas for sailcloth, tents, awnings and tarpaulins
is mainly produced in Scotland.
Some 60 per cent of the value of carpet and rug output is made up of tufted
carpets, in the production of which the pile, usually with a high man-made fibre
content, is inserted into a pre-woven backing. Woven carpets, mainly Axminster,
account for most of the remainder of sales. There is a higher wool content in
woven types, although in these, too, more use is being made of man-made fibres.
The high quality and variety of design make Britain one of the world’s leading
producers of woven carpets.
Jute products are manufactured in the Dundee area. Jute yarn and
man-made polypropylene yarn are used in the manufacture of carpets, cordage
and ropes and woven into fabrics for a wide range of applications in the
packaging, upholstery, building and motor vehicle industries.
The clothing industry is labour intensive with about 9,000 companies
accounting for around 4 per cent of total manufacturing employment. While a
wide range of clothing is imported from the rest of Europe and Asia, British
industry supplies two-thirds of domestic demand. Exports have risen since the
mid-1970s and the British fashion designer industry has become prominent
during the 1980s. The hosiery and knitwear industry comprises about 1,700
companies, mainly in the East Midlands and Scotland, of which most are of
small to medium size. The footwear manufacturing industry is made up
predominantly of small companies. It supplies 36 per cent of all the shoes sold in
Britain. Imports have risen in recent years. About one-third of leather
production is exported.
The furniture industry comprises some 2,500 companies, mostly small to
medium sized. Domestic production of softwood timber has been steadily
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
273
Table 27: Other Manufacturing
1987
Labour Sales3 Exports Imports
(’000s) (£ million) (£ million) (£ million)
Timber and wooden furniture
214 6,438
139 7,881
347 10,060
416
1,094
909
2,751
3,864
704
Paper and paper products
Printing and publishing
Processing of rubber and
plastics
212
22
8,850
511
1,973 2,652
327 579
Toys and sports goods
See Table 19, footnote a.
increasing but the timber-using industries are mainly dependent on imported
supplies. There were about 110 paper and board mills employing 35,000 people
in 1987, operated by 68 companies; total production was 4-3 million tonnes.
Among the largest British groups are Wiggins Teape, the Dickinson Robinson
Group and Davidsons. Overseas paper and board groups with manufacturing
investments in Britain include Georgia Pacific, Kimberly Clark, Consolidated
Bathurst, the Scott Corporation and United Paper Mills of Finland.
There has been a substantial growth in newsprint production in Britain.
British newsprint producers now supply about 35 per cent of British demand.
Announcements have been made of further major investments, which will lead
to significant new capacity from 1990.
There has been a significant trend towards waste-based packaging grades in
order to reduce the industry’s reliance on imported woodpulp supplies. The use
of recycled waste paper is increasing and research is helping to extend it. Waste
paper provides about half of the industry’s fibre needs. Domestically produced
wood pulp represents only a small percentage of raw material supplies.
Mergers have led to the formation of large groups in newspaper, magazine and
book publishing, the largest being the Maxwell Communications Corporation;
but general printing, engraving, bookbinding and a large part of publishing still
include many small firms. With increasing use of new technology, such as
computer typesetting, fragmentation of the industry into small specialised units
has taken place in the 1980s. The book publishing industry is a major exporter,
selling one-third of production in overseas markets. Security printers (of, for
example, banknotes and postage stamps) are important exporters, the major
company being De La Rue.
Tyres and tubes represent about 45 per cent of sales of rubber manufactures,
the most important other goods being vehicle components and accessories,
conveyor belting, cables, hoses, latex foam products, and footwear, gloves and
clothing. Tyre manufacturers include subsidiaries of United States and other
overseas companies. The industry’s consumption of rubber includes natural,
synthetic and recycled rubber.
There are 450 manufacturers of a wide range of toys and games, but few of
significant size. About 60 per cent of total production is exported. There are 250
manufacturers of sports equipment. British fishing tackle and golf and tennis
equipment are established in export markets. Jewellery, gold and silverware and
the refining of precious metals is an industry with a strong craft tradition.
Construction
The construction industry accounts for 6 per cent of gross domestic product.
The industry experienced rapid growth during 1987, with the total value of
274
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Structure
Housing
Civil
Engineering
Projects
output in Great Britain in 1987 reaching £34,600 million, of which new work
accounted for £19,070 million (55 per cent) and repairs and maintenance the
remainder. In housing, new work was valued at £6,750 million and repairs and
maintenance at £8,360 million. About 1 million people are employed in the
industry (including apprentices), accounting for about 4 per cent of the
employed labour force. There are also about 540,000 self-employed.
Efficiency and productivity are benefiting from new computerised techniques
such as the use of electronic load safety measures for cranes, distance
measuring equipment, computerised stock ordering and job costing, and
computer-aided design. Increasingly, major contractors are managing projects
(particularly higher value ones) and using subcontractors to do the actual work.
Government promotion of the construction market is the responsibility of the
Department of the Environment. Building regulations prescribe minimum
standards of construction in England and Wales. Made by the Secretary of State
for the Environment and administered and enforced by local authorities, the
regulations apply to new building, the installation or replacement of fittings,
and alterations and extensions to existing buildings. There are broadly similar
controls under separate legislation in Scotland and Northern Ireland. As an
alternative to local authority building control and in order to simplify proce¬
dures, an optional system of private certification of compliance with building
regulations is provided for in the Housing and Building Control Act 1984 and
was introduced in 1985. The British Board of Agrement, sponsored by the
Department, assesses and issues reports and certificates relating to products
and systems for use in the construction industry. The Government is keen to see
quality assurance extended to the construction process as well as the materials
used. In 1986 the Institute of Plumbing became the first body to have its register
covered by the British Standards Institution's Public Register Inspection
Maintenance Assessment (PRIMA) scheme.
Construction work is carried out both by private contractors and by public
authorities which employ their own labour. In 1987, 90 per cent of the work was
done by private firms. Although there were about 96,000 firms employing two or
more people, 95 per cent of them employed fewer than 25. Some large firms are
vertically integrated, owning quarries and workshops, mechanised plant and
standard builders’ equipment; some undertake responsibility for projects from
initial design to finished building. All but the smallest projects are generally
carried out under professional direction, either by architects or, in the case of
the more complicated civil engineering projects, by consulting engineers. The
latter, acting on behalf of a client, may advise on the feasibility of projects, draw
up plans and supervise the construction work.
The Property Services Agency (PSA), which is part of the Department of the
Environment, is responsible for the construction programmes undertaken
directly by the Government, including work for the armed forces both in Britain
and overseas. From April 1988 government departments have been able to use
agents other than the PSA for civil building projects costing more than
£150,000.
During 1987 a total of 223,000 dwellings were started in Great Britain. Starts in
the public sector were 32,000 and those for private owners 191,000. Some
203,000 dwellings were completed, 32,000 in the public sector and 171,000 in
the private sector.
Among important construction projects in hand or recently completed in Britain
were the Heysham and Torness nuclear power stations, the Thames Barrier,
which forms part of London’s flood defences, new air terminals at Heathrow and
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
275
Research and
Advisory
Services
Overseas
Construction
Gatwick, the new Lloyd’s insurance building, the Queen Elizabeth II Conference
Centre in London, the new British Library, the Docklands Light Railway and
associated development in London s former docklands, the M25 motorway, the
Channel Tunnel and the Dartford Crossing of the Thames.
The Government's national research and advisory body on construction and
building is the Building Research Establishment, which is part of the
Department of the Environment. It has four laboratories, including a fire
research station, and is the site of a building energy management systems
centre.
Research is also carried out by the major construction and materials firms,
universities, colleges of technology and research associations. The research
associations provide advisory services.
The Building Centre Group consists of four building centres throughout
Britain, most of which provide exhibition and information services on mate¬
rials, products, techniques and building services.
In 1987 British construction companies carried out work overseas valued at
£1,700 million. They won new contracts worth £2,450 million and at the end of
the year the total value of work outstanding stood at £2,600 million. Building
material and components companies also exported goods to the value of £1,500
million. British consulting engineers, process engineers, architects and sur¬
veyors contributed some £900 million to the nation’s invisible earnings. The
industry’s most important markets in the year were the Americas and Oceania.
British companies provided consulting engineering services in 1987 for many
projects around the world. Among the biggest were the Greater Cairo Waste-
water Scheme, valued at some £1,000 million; the Baghdad Metro in Iraq, worth
£4,000 million; the Great Man-made River Project in Libya, costed at £2,300
million; and an extensive hydro-electric development in Sri Lanka worth over
£650 million. Overseas construction contracts awarded to British companies in
1987 included a section of the trans-Turkey highway, valued at £44 million; a
£60 million hotel in Nassau, the Bahamas; and a new military township worth
£40 million in Egypt.
The export interests of the various sectors of the British construction industry
are promoted by the Export Group for the Constructional Industries, the
Association of Consulting Engineers, the British Consultants Bureau (whose
members include architects, surveyors and management consultants), the
Building Materials Export Group, the Federation of Manufacturers of Construc¬
tion Equipment and Cranes, and the British Water Industries Group.
Service Industries
In 1987 services contributed around 60 per cent of gross domestic product,
compared with 45 per cent in 1960, and accounted for 68 per cent of employees
in employment, compared with 48 per cent in 1960. Overseas trade in services,
particularly financial services, has also grown, and in 1987 overseas earnings
from services amounted to nearly half the value of exports of manufactures.
Between 1976 and 1980 total service employment rose by 800,000; it then fell
for two years, but recovered again to grow from about 13-1 million in 1982 to
14-5 million in 1987. The net increase between 1976 and 1987 was 1-8 million
jobs, compared with a net decline of 2-3 million in production industries. Much
of this was accounted for by growth in part-time (principally female) employ¬
ment. Since the late 1970s employment has grown more rapidly in the private
sector than in the public sector, a reversal of the pattern of the 1960s and
the early 1970s, partially reflecting the Government’s policy of restricting
276
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
DISTRIBUTION
WHOLESALE
TRADES
employment in public sector services. The fastest-growing sectors in the 1970s,
measured by employment, were leisure and personal services, financial services
and distribution, hotels and catering. In the 1980s the financial services have
continued to grow strongly.
Among the reasons for the growth in services is the tendency to spend a
greater proportion of income on personal, financial and leisure services as real
incomes rise. While, to some extent, consumers have exchanged services (such
as public transport, laundries and cinemas) for goods (motor cars, washing-
machines and television sets), this has generated demand for fresh services in
the distribution, maintenance and repair of these goods. Increased consumer
expenditure on the running costs of motor cars is a significant factor in the rise
in consumer expenditure on services. Demand for British air travel, hotel and
catering services has resulted from the increase in real incomes in other
countries.
Other factors include a greater readiness to use banking services and the
spread of home ownership, which has increased demand for legal and estate
agency services. Demographic changes, such as the increase in the elderly as a
component of the population, help to explain the growth of medical services.
Shorter working hours tend to raise the demand for leisure services.
Changes in technology have also played a part in the growth of services.
Examples range from the computer services industry to the provision of cash
and credit by means of cards and the growth of information systems such as
viewdata and teletext.
A notable trend is a growth in franchising, an operation in which a company
owning the rights to a particular form of trading licenses them to franchisees,
usually by means of an initial payment with continuing royalties. Cleaning
services, film processing, print shops, car rental, engine tuning and servicing,
and fast food retailing have been among the major areas where franchising has
developed.
There were just under 4-5 million people engaged in the distributive and allied
trades in Great Britain in mid-1987, together with a large number of owners of
businesses. There were 916,000 people in wholesaling, just over 2 million in
retailing, 1 million in hotels and catering, and 245,000 in the repair of vehicles
and consumer goods. The distributive and allied trades accounted for about
14 per cent of national income in 1987.
In 1986 there were 112,000 businesses engaged in wholesaling and dealing,
with a turnover (including sales to other wholesalers and dealers) of £167,000
million. The main areas in which wholesalers are dominant are food and drink
(turnover £31,500 million in 1986), petroleum products (£21,000 million) and
industrial materials (£30,000 million).
London's wholesale markets play a significant part in the distribution of
foodstuffs. New Covent Garden is the main market for fruit and vegetables,
Smithfield for meat and Billingsgate for fish.
The co-operative movement in Britain has its own wholesale organisation, the
Co-operative Wholesale Society (CWS), to serve the needs of retail societies; its
turnover was £2,402 million in 1987—88. Retail societies are encouraged to buy
from the CWS, which supplies the greater proportion of their requirements.
In the food and drink trade a number of large retailers carry out the functions
of the wholesaler by having their own warehouses and buying and distributive
organisations. Elsewhere in the trade voluntary groups have been formed by
wholesalers with small independent retailers, in which the retailers are
encouraged by discounts and other incentives to buy as much as possible from
the wholesaler. This has helped to preserve many smaller retail outlets for the
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
277
RETAIL
TRADES
wholesaler, including the traditional ‘corner shops’ and village stores, of value to
local communities, and has given small retailers the advantages of bulk buying
and co-ordinated distribution.
Turnover of the retail trades has been growing slowly in real terms in recent
years. In 1987 retail sales were 8-3 per cent higher than in 1986, representing a
6 per cent increase in volume. There are around 250,000 businesses in the retail
trade in Great Britain (see Table 28). Their turnover was about £100,000 million
and they invested some £2,600 million. As the large multiple retailers (those
with ten or more outlets) have grown in size and diversified their product
ranges, there has been a decline in the number of retail businesses and outlets.
The decline has been particularly evident among small independent businesses
and retail co-operative societies. Shops selling durable household goods have
experienced the fastest growth in turnover in recent years, while food retailers
have recorded the slowest growth.
The largest multiple retailers in the packaged grocery market are the retail
co-operatives, Sainsbury, Tesco, Asda, Dee Corporation, Argyll Stores and the
Kwik Save Discount Group. Retail co-operative societies are voluntary organisa¬
tions controlled by their members, membership being open to anyone paying a
small deposit on a minimum share; at the end of 1987 the 95 retail societies had
8 million members and 5,325 retail outlets. Turnover in 1987 amounted to
£4,600 million. Retail co-operatives and the Co-operative Wholesale Society (see
p 276) are members of the Co-operative Union, as are a number of other
co-operative bodies such as the Co-operative Bank. In 1987-88 Sainsbury had
some 390 stores and the company’s sales amounted to over £5,000 million.
Tesco had about 380 outlets and sales were valued at over £4,000 million.
The leading mixed retail businesses are Marks and Spencer (with sales of
Table 28: Retail Trade in Great Britain 1986£
Number of
people
Number of Number of engaged Turnoverb
businesses outlets (’000s) (£ million)
Single-outlet retailers 217,050 217,050
Small multiple retailers 26,331 66,765
Large multiple retailers (ten
or more retail outlets) 904 60,144
838
328
27,935
11,950
1,169 56,540
Food retailers 77,301 100,171 813 34,761
Drink, confectionery and
tobacco retailers 44,379 56,858 277 9,969
Clothing, footwear and
leather goods retailers 32,711 58,874 290 9,199
Household goods retailers 42,785 60,839 302 14,719
Other non-food retailers 39,395 51,357 235 8,234
Mixed retail businesses 4,853 10,077 382 18,224
Hire and repair businesses 2,861 5,783 36 1,319
Total retail trade
244,285 343,959
2,335
96,425
Source: British Business.
a Figures cover businesses registered for value added tax.
b Includes value added tax.
Note-. Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
278
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Trends
Large
Shopping
Centres
Diversifica tion
£4,200 million in 1987—88), F. W. Woolworth, Boots, Great Universal Stores,
John Lewis Partnership, Sears, Burtons, Littlewoods, Storehouse and the
House of Fraser.
About 20 million people regularly shop by post. In 1986 sales by general mail
order firms totalled some £3,200 million, representing 3-3 per cent of retail sales
and 5-2 per cent of retail sales excluding food shops. The volume of mail order
sales increased rapidly in the 1970s but fell off in the period 1980-84. Leading
items sold by mail order are clothing, footwear, furniture, household textiles,
and radio, television and electrical goods.
One of the most significant trends in retailing in recent years has been the
increase in the proportion of turnover accounted for by large multiple retailers;
they have 59 per cent of retail turnover. Other developments include an increase
in very large self-service stores selling a wide variety of products, diversification
by food multiples into selling a wider range of goods, the creation of specially
designed shopping precincts, the growth of shops selling computers, software
and video-cassettes, and an increasing emphasis on price competition.
Britain has a wide range of complementary shopping facilities inside and
outside town and city centres. There continues to be a strong demand for the
services provided by small, specialised shops, but the trend is towards larger
shops in order to increase efficiency and the range of goods available. The main
multiple grocery companies have been steadily increasing the size of their stores
both in towns and cities and on suburban and out-of-town sites. Also, retailers
of goods such as do-it-yourself products, furniture and electrical appliances have
for some years found it advantageous to develop retail warehouses outside town
and city centres, particularly to attract shoppers with cars. More recently, there
has been a trend towards the grouping of retail warehouses into retail
warehouse parks.
Proposals have also been made recently for a number of regional out-of-town
shopping centres, sometimes as part of retail/leisure complexes, on sites near
motorway interchanges so as to offer good access to large numbers of customers
with cars and ample space for car parking, and to benefit from low acquisition
and operating costs. One of the few such centres built to date is the Metro Centre
at Gateshead, Tyne and Wear, which includes over 93,000 sq m (1 million sq ft)
of floorspace.
Britain also has a wide variety of purpose-built shopping centres in towns and
cities, and there is increasing interest in the modernisation and redevelopment
of these and other town centre facilities in order to improve their attractiveness
and their ability to compete efficiently.
All new retail development requires planning permission from the local
planning authority. These authorities must consult the Department of the
Environment before granting permission for developments of 250,000 sq ft
(23,325 sq m) or more. In January 1988 the Government issued new guidance
on major retail development, indicating the relevant planning considerations.
Many of the large multiple groups have diversified over the last few years to offer
a much bigger range of goods and services than previously. This has been
especially noticeable for the large food retailers, which often sell non-food
products, such as beer, wines and spirits, clothing and household appliances,
as well as packaged groceries. Another trend is that many superstores and large
supermarkets offer fresh as well as packaged food, often with special counters or
areas for fresh meat, fish, vegetables and bread baked on the premises. Some
large retailers have in recent years begun to provide financial and estate agency
services.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
279
Promotions
Use of
Technology
Vehicle and
Petrol Retailing
Hotels and
Catering
Retailers are placing greater emphasis both on price competition and quality as
a means of promoting sales. With the growth of payments by credit card, certain
of the large retailers have issued their own credit cards for regular customers in
an attempt to increase sales, particularly of high-value goods.
Laser-scanning electronic check-outs are already having a major impact on
retailing in Britain. Substantial savings are expected from improved stock
control and a reduction of individual price marking in stores. Key Markets
introduced the first operational laser-scanning electronic check-out in Britain at
Spalding (Lincolnshire) in 1979. Computerised shopping services are being
introduced in the home which enable people to order goods from retailers. Some
large multiple retailers are using electronic order and invoice systems in dealing
with their suppliers, following a legal change permitting tax invoices in forms
other than paper. Small independent retailers, also, are using electronic
ordering, pricing and deliveiy systems. High-speed labelling techniques are
being adopted, including the use of electronic printers which can overprint
labels, the use of pressure-sensitive glues and printing in foil instead of ink.
A single nationwide ‘electronic funds transfer at point of sale’ (EFTPOS) sys¬
tem is being established for the retail market in co-operation with the English
and Scottish clearing banks. The system will use magnetically striped cards and
terminals installed in retail premises to transfer funds instantaneously from
card-holders accounts to the retailers’ accounts. Various pilot projects are
already in operation and a large-scale system with 2,000 terminals—in Leeds,
Southampton and Edinburgh—is planned for 1989.
In September 1987 some 233,000 people were employed in Great Britain in the
retail distribution ol motor vehicles and parts and in petrol stations. In spite of
the continuing increase in the number of road vehicles, the number of petrol
stations is declining and at the end of 1987 there were some 20,000 (2-2 per cent
fewer than in 1986), of which 32 per cent were owned by oil companies. There
were about 12,700 outlets selling diesel fuel. Self-service stations are becoming
increasingly important and in 1987 they accounted for 45 per cent of petrol
stations. Some 217,000 people were employed in the repair of motor vehicles in
September 1987.
The hotel and catering trades employed 1 • 1 million people in Great Britain in
mid-1987: 266,000 in hotels and other residential establishments; 239,000 in
restaurants, cafes and snack bars; 284,000 in public houses and bars; 150,000
in clubs; and 137,000 in canteens. A large number of self-employed people are
also engaged in hotels and catering. There were 12,800 hotel businesses in
Great Britain in 1987, with a turnover of £4,260 million. Many licensed hotels
as well as most of the numerous guest houses are small, with fewer than 20
rooms. Of the major hotel business groups the biggest is Trusthouse Forte pic,
which runs 800 hotels including over 200 in Britain, and has catering and
leisure interests. The total turnover of holiday camps and camping and caravan
sites was £562 million in 1986. Among the largest firms running holiday centres
(including holiday camps with full board, self-catering centres and caravan
parks) are Butlins, Pontins, Ladbroke Holidays, Warners and Haven Leisure.
There were over 42,600 businesses in Great Britain in 1986, with a total
turnover of more than £4,600 million, which were engaged in the sale of food for
consumption both on and off the premises. These include restaurants, snack
bars, cafes, fish and chip shops and other establishments selling ‘take-away’
food. Britain has a very wide range of restaurants of which a substantial number
specialise in Chinese, Italian, Indian and Greek foods. Fast-food’ catering, in
which establishments sell hot food such as hamburgers or chicken to be eaten
280
BUSINESS
SERVICES
Advertising
Computing
Services
Management
Consultancy
Market
Research
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
either on the premises or elsewhere, is becoming increasingly significant. There
are about 42,000 ‘pubs' (public houses, which mainly sell beer, wines and spirits
for consumption on the premises) in Great Britain, which had a total turnover of
£7,900 million in 1986.
Business services include advertising, market research, management consul¬
tancy, exhibition and conference facilities, computing services and auction
houses. Most of these sectors have grown rapidly in recent years.
Advertising expenditure rose by 8-5 per cent in 1987 to £5,781 million, with
that going to television increasing by 7-4 per cent, according to the Advertising
Association. That in the press accounted for 61-6 per cent of the total, television
for 32-4 per cent, posters for 3-7 per cent, and commercial radio and cinema for
the rest. Advertising has been growing fastest in the free distribution press and
directories. Campaigns are planned mainly by advertising agencies, of which
there are several hundred in Britain; in some cases they also provide marketing,
consumer research and other services.
The industry comprises software houses, which provide professional services
such as consultancy, the writing of programs to meet the computing needs of
their clients, and, increasingly, packaged software designed for a wider market;
computer bureaux, where the main emphasis is on processing customers’ data;
and systems houses, which specialise in the provision of complete systems
(hardware and software).
The computing services industry is one of the fastest growing sectors of the
British economy. Annual growth has run at 15 to 20 per cent since the
mid-1970s and annual turnover now stands at £2,000 million. The industry
employs around 50,000 people, excluding several hundred thousand who work
in computer maintenance and on ‘in-house’ computer activities. Most of the
leading British companies provide a whole range of professional services, which
include custom programming, facilities management and consultancy. They are
also paying particular attention to the adoption of advanced software engineer¬
ing techniques and the use of systems kernels, designed to assist productivity
and product quality.
There are thought to be well over 9,000 management consultants in Britain, of
whom 3,250 are practising members of the Institute of Management Consul¬
tants. Among the largest management consultancy companies are the 27
members of the Management Consultancies Association, whose turnover
amounted to £300 million in 1987. Revenue earned within Britain comprised
£270 million, an increase of 32 per cent on the previous year, while overseas
revenue amounted to £30 million. The Association reports a growing demand
for services supporting the application of information technology, particularly
micro-processing, to all aspects of business. The Association’s members account
for some 65 per cent of Britain’s fee-paying management consultancy market.
The 32 members of the Association of Market Survey Organisations (AMSO)
accounted for about 75 per cent of total turnover by market research companies
in 1987. The turnover of AMSO members increased to £177 million from £152
million in 1986. The largest company, the AGB group, had a turnover of £33
million. Research on behalf of food and soft drinks companies by AMSO
members accounted for 18 per cent of revenue, and research for all consumer
goods accounted for 42 per cent of revenue, as against 58 per cent for
business-to-business services and industrial goods.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
281
Exhibition and
Conference
Centres
With the steady increase in new and renovated facilities, some 80 towns and
cities are well equipped to hold conferences and exhibitions. Among the most
modern facilities are the National Exhibition Centre at Birmingham, the
Wembley Conference Centre, the Queen Elizabeth II Conference Centre and the
Barbican Centre for Arts and Conferences in London, the Brighton Centre in
Sussex, the Harrogate Centre in North Yorkshire, the Bournemouth Interna¬
tional Centre in Dorset, St David s Hall in Cardiff, the Scottish Exhibition and
Conference Centre in Glasgow, the G-MEX Centre in Manchester, the Royal
Centre in Nottingham, the English Riviera Centre in Torquay, the Corn
Exchange in Cambridge and the Aberdeen Exhibition and Conference Centre.
Other large facilities are the Earls Court, Olympia and Wembley Arena sites in
London. New centres are being constructed in Birmingham, London’s dock¬
lands, Glasgow and Cardiff. Britain is one of the world’s three leading countries
for international conferences (the others being the United States and France).
Auction
Houses
MISCEL¬
LANEOUS
SERVICES
Film and
Television
Britain's chief auction houses are active in the international auction markets for
works of art, trading on the acknowledged expertise of British valuers and
dealers. The two largest houses, Sotheby’s and Christie’s, are established
world-wide and had turnovers of £865 million and £639 million in 1987-88
respectively.
Some 121,000 people were employed in film, theatre, literary, musical,
broadcasting and related services in Great Britain in mid-1987, 390,000 in
sanitary services, 108,000 in research and development services, and 300,000
in services connected with sport, recreation, gambling and betting. Other
services provided included hairdressing and beauty parlours (95,000 em¬
ployees), laundries, dyers and dry cleaners (67,000), photographic studios,
religious organisations, tourist offices, learned societies, employers’ and trade
union organisations, and funeral services.
Recent years have seen further development of the independent programme
production sector, and of specialised film and television services. The BBC and
the commercial television stations have agreed to meet a government target
whereby 25 per cent of original programmes will be made by independent
producers by 1993. New technical developments include origination on profes¬
sional standard video as opposed to film, and an increasing use of computer¬
generated graphics and picture manipulation in both production and post¬
production work. Production of films for cinema (an activity particularly cyclical
in nature) declined in the mid-1980s.
The Department of Trade and Industry conducts an annual inquiry into the
value of overseas transactions relating to the production and exhibition of
cinema and television material. For many years the inquiry has shown a surplus
of receipts over expenditure. In 1986 receipts by film and television companies
were £310 million, while expenditure was £195 million. Film companies’
receipts totalled £209 million and television companies’ receipts £101 million,
the North American market accounting for over half of revenue in both cases. A
total of 280 film companies and 17 television broadcasting companies were
covered in the 1986 inquiry.
TOURISM
AND
TRAVEL
Tourism is one of Britain’s most important industries and is recognised as a
major and growing source of employment. Spending by British residents and
overseas visitors on tourism in Britain during 1987 amounted to around
£18,000 million (including fares paid on travel to and from Britain). It is
estimated that about 1-4 million jobs in Britain were supported directly or
282
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
indirectly by tourism spending in 1987. The British Tourist Authority forecasts
that around 200,000 new jobs will be created in the period 1988-93.
In 1987 overseas residents made 15-4 million visits to Britain (11 per cent
more than in 1986), spending £6,200 million, compared with £5,600 million in
the previous year. British residents made 27-4 million trips abroad and spent
£7,300 million, giving a deficit on the travel account of over £1,000 million.
About 60 per cent of overseas visitors to Britain came from Western Europe, 22
per cent from North America and about 18 per cent from elsewhere in the world.
There was a 10 per cent increase in visits abroad by British residents in 1987;
the majority of visits (86 per cent) were to Western Europe.
Some 2,900 travel agencies, with about 7,100 offices (over 90 per cent of the
total), belong to the Association of British Travel Agents (ABTA). In general travel
agents are small businesses but many ABTA members have more than one
office. There are a few large firms—for example, Lunn Poly, with some 420
branches and Thomas Cook, with about 320. Computerised information and
booking systems are being introduced in travel agencies. There are also 760 tour
operator members of ABTA; some 336 companies are both retail agents and tour
operators. ABTA operates financial protection schemes to safeguard its mem¬
bers’ customers, maintains codes of conduct drawn up with the Office of Fair
Trading, and offers a free conciliation service to help to resolve complaints
against members and an independent arbitration scheme for tour operators’
customers.
Official support for the promotion of tourism to and within Britain is provided
by the British Tourist Authority and the tourist boards for England, Scotland,
Wales and Northern Ireland. Funding for the tourist boards has been further
increased for 1988—89 and the boards have been asked by the Government to
encourage tourism in regions of the country where unemployment is high and
where there is potential for development. Voluntary registration schemes exist
for tourist accommodation throughout Britain and facilities offered by regis¬
tered establishments are listed in the boards' accommodation guides. At the
beginning of 1987 the boards for England, Scotland and Wales introduced a
one- to five-crown classification scheme for hotels and other serviced accom¬
modation, based on facilities offered, and a quality grading scheme for caravan,
chalet and camping parks. Information on tourist facilities and accommodation
is available from official information centres throughout Britain (most of which
are administered by local authorities) and on videotex information services in
Britain and overseas.
13 Energy
and Natural
Resources
Energy and non-fuel minerals make an important contribution to the British
economy. The approximate value of minerals produced in 1986 was £17,514
million (representing about 5-5 per cent of gross domestic product), of which
crude oil accounted for 51 per cent, coal 26 per cent and natural gas 12 per cent.
All minerals in Great Britain are privately owned, with the exception of gold,
silver, oil and natural gas (which are owned by the Crown), and coal and some
minerals associated with coal. In Northern Ireland gold and silver are owned by
the Crown, while rights to petroleum and other minerals are vested in the
Government. On the United Kingdom Continental Shelf the right to exploit all
minerals except coal is vested in the Crown. The exclusive right to extract coal,
or license others to do so, both on land in Great Britain and under the sea, is
vested in the British Coal Corporation. Normally, ownership of minerals belongs
to the owner of the land surface but in some areas, particularly where mining
has taken place, these rights have become separated. Mining and quarrying,
apart from coalmining, are usually carried out by privately owned companies.
Water resources are normally sufficient for domestic and industrial require¬
ments; supplies are obtained from surface sources such as mountain lakes and
from underground sources by such means as wells and boreholes.
Energy
Britain has the largest energy resources of any country in the European
Community and is a major world producer of oil, natural gas and coal. The other
main primary sources are nuclear power and some water power; secondary
sources are electricity, coke and very small quantities of town gas. Since 1980
Britain has been self-sufficient in energy in net terms as a result of the growth in
offshore oil production, and self-sufficiency should be maintained for a number
of years. Coal is the country’s richest natural resource and is expected to
maintain its role in meeting Britain’s energy needs. Nuclear power provided
about 20 per cent of electricity available from the British public supply system in
1987, and this proportion is expected to increase.
Privately owned companies predominate in offshore oil and gas production
and oil refining, while publicly owned bodies are responsible for most coal
production and electricity generation and distribution, although the Govern¬
ment has announced plans to privatise the electricity supply industry in Great
Britain. The Secretary of State for Energy is responsible for these industries in
Great Britain, except for electricity in Scotland which is the responsibility of the
Secretary of State for Scotland. The Secretary of State for Northern Ireland is
responsible for all energy matters there.
284
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Energy Policy
ENERGY
CONSUMPTION
ENERGY
EFFICIENCY
The Government’s energy policy is designed to ensure the secure, adequate and
economic provision of energy to meet Britain's requirements. The Government
seeks to ensure that all economic forms of energy are produced, supplied and
used as efficiently as possible, having regard also to the international
application of the technologies involved. Oil and gas resources continue to be
developed profitably. The Government attaches importance to the development
of a competitive coal industry and to the safe and economic development of
nuclear power. Particular attention is paid to achieving the most cost-effective
use of energy through the adoption of energy efficiency measures.
Britain is actively engaged in international collaboration on energy questions,
notably through its membership of the European Community and of the
International Energy Agency (IEA, a body with 21 member countries attached to
the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development).
Inland primary energy consumption amounted to 338-1 million tonnes of coal
equivalent in 1987 (see Table 29), 0-9 per cent more than in 1986. Energy
consumption by final users in 1987 amounted to 58,677 million therms1 on a
‘heat supplied’ basis, of which domestic users consumed about 29 per cent,
transport 29 per cent, industrial users 28 per cent, and commerce, agriculture
and public services 13 per cent.
Table 29: Inland Energy Consumption (in terms of primary sources)
million tonnes coal equivalent
1977
1982
1985
1986 1987
Oil
Coal
Natural gas
Nuclear energy
Hydro-electric power
Net imports of electricity
136-6
62-8
14-3
2-0
111-1
122-7 110-7
71-7
16-0
2-4
115-0 112-6 109-3
105-3
82-3
22-1
2-1
113-5 116-2
83-6
21-3
2-4
1-7
85-9
19-8
2-1
4-7
Total
338-4
311-9 326-9 335-2 338-1
Source: Department of Energy.
Note: Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
Studies have indicated that the potential for improvements in Britain's energy
use resulting from cost-effective energy efficiency measures is at least 20 per
cent, or over £7,600 million a year. The Energy Efficiency Office has a wide
range of schemes to encourage the more efficient use of energy and to highlight
the financial benefits. It targets its work on areas where help can be most
effective, and grants to various community insulation projects have led to the
establishment of 440 schemes during 1987—88 which have insulated nearly
500,000 homes of pensioners and low-income households.
In the industrial and commercial field 12 regional energy efficiency officers
promote energy efficiency through advice to companies, seminars, exhibitions
and the encouragement of training. They have helped to establish a nationwide
network of energy managers’ groups, with about 10,000 members, which
promote the benefits of improved energy efficiency, monitor the energy
consumption of their organisations and exchange information about the latest
developments in energy management. Energy management systems which
1 therm = 105,506 kilojoules.
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
285
OIL AND GAS
Offshore
Supplies
OIL
North Sea
Fields
monitor where energy is used and set targets for savings are being developed in
18 sectors of industry and commerce, and are in use on some 380 major sites.
The energy efficiency demonstration scheme offers grants to people who are
able to demonstrate either new or improved technologies or new applications of
established technologies which enable energy to be used more efficiently. The
demonstration projects in operation have achieved savings of some £140 million
a year.
The Energy Efficiency Office has also promoted the use of combined heat and
power employing waste heat generated in producing electricity to provide hot
water and steam. Three major projects in Edinburgh, Belfast and Leicester have
explored the technical and economic prospects of district heating by this route.
Britain s energy position is strengthened by substantial oil and gas reserves
offshore in the United Kingdom Continental Shelf (UKCS). The total area
covered by production licences is 97,283 sq km (37,940 sq miles) out of a total
designated area of about 651,650 sq km (251,600 sq miles), over which Britain
has exercised its rights to explore and exploit the seabed and subsoil.
Expenditure on offshore and onshore exploration and development amounted to
some £2,816 million in 1987. By the end of 1987, 3,320 wells had been or were
being drilled in the UKCS (1,509 development wells, 1,178 exploration wells and
633 appraisal wells).
The Offshore Supplies Office of the Department of Energy is responsible for
ensuring that British industry has a full and fair opportunity in the supply of
goods and services to the UKCS; for supporting British firms’ research and
development projects for use in oil and gas exploration; and for promoting
Britain’s offshore interests overseas. Britain’s offshore supplies industry is the
second largest in the world (after that of the United States). In 1987 goods and
services valued at £1,869 million were ordered for UKCS developments, the
British share of orders received being £1,630 million (87 per cent).
Before the 1970s Britain was almost wholly dependent for its oil supplies on
imports, the only indigenous supplies coming from a small number of
land-based oilfields. However, the first notable offshore discovery of oil in the
UKCS was made in 1969 and the first oil was brought ashore in 1975. Output of
crude oil from the UKCS in 1987 averaged 2-4 million barrels (321,000 tonnes) a
day, making Britain the world's sixth largest producer.
There were 35 offshore fields producing crude oil at the end of 1987, while in
1987-88 the Secretary of State for Energy approved 13 new UKCS develop¬
ments, including the Kittiwake, Glamis, Arbroath, Ness and Chanter fields. The
largest producing fields are Brent and Forties. Production from most large fields
is controlled from production platforms of either steel or concrete which have
been built to withstand severe weather including gusts of wind of up to
260 km/h (160 mph) and waves of 30 m (100 ft).
Primary oil production, including condensates and petroleum gases,
amounted to about 123 million tonnes in 1987 (see Table 30). Output is around
its maximum, and production is forecast to decline slowly. Britain should
remain a significant producer well into the 1990s and, on a smaller scale, into
the twenty-first century. The Government’s oil policy is intended to encourage
exploration and development with the objective of maximising economic oil
production for the foreseeable future. Remaining recoverable reserves of UKCS
oil in the proven plus probable categories amount to between 690 and 1,290
million tonnes while the total remaining reserves of the UKCS could be as high
as 4,390 million tonnes. The Petroleum Act 1987 empowers the Secretary of
Oil
50
l
100 150 km
_i i
 1
100 miles
Offshore oilfields in production
or under development
Onshore oil finds
Oil refineries (over 1 million
tonnes annual capacity)
Crude oil pipelines
Terminals
Norway,
Magnus
Deveron
Eider
N Cormorant
Tern
S Cormorant
N W Hutton
,(?
Sullom Voe
Shetland
Islands
Heather
-Thistle
■Murchison
-Statfjord
•Dunlin
• Brent
\V—Hutton
\ '—N Alwyn
'—Ninian
Orkney Chanter
Islands viiiFlo119,,. , .plp®r^l
—-JHiqhlander 1
Ness»|
Beryl
Brae
Brae
Balmoral
Glamis
Maureen
(Cyrus
forties
Cruden Bay Kfttiwake*^-^ontrose
'-Arbroath
c i /—Clyde
Fulmar./ jEkofisk
Auk^^Ar8y||
Innes^^
Duncan
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
287
Structure of the
Oil Industry
Land-based
Fields
Refineries
Consumption
and Trade
Oil Pipelines
State to require those responsible to draw up programmes for the abandonment
of offshore installations when the first fields cease production in the early
1QQHc J
About 250 companies, including several large oil companies, operate in Britain
or engage in work in the UKCS. The two leading British oil companies are
British Petroleum (BP) and Shell Transport and Trading, which are the two
largest industrial companies in Britain in terms of turnover. The exploration
and development of the UKCS is carried out by the private sector. From 1989 the
Government will take all royalty from UKCS oil in cash, instead of marketing the
crude oil received as petroleum royalty taken in kind, and has announced its
intention to end its rights under participation agreements with the oil
companies.
Onshore production of crude oil is much less significant than offshore
production. In 1987 it amounted to 583,000 tonnes, about 50 per cent of which
came from Britain s largest onshore field at Wytch Farm (Dorset), which started
production in 1979. In addition to minor production from various mining
licensees, there are seven other onshore fields, including Humbly Grove
(Hampshire) and Welton (Lincolnshire); Stainton and Nettleham (Lincolnshire),
West Beckingham and Farleys Wood (Nottinghamshire) and Crosby Warren
(Humberside) are under development; and West Firsby (Lincolnshire) is a recent
discovery. At the end of 1987, 110 new-style exploration licences were in force. In
1988 the Government announced 60 exploration licence awards in Great Britain
in its second onshore licensing round.
At the beginning of 1988 the distillation capacity of Britain’s 14 oil refineries
stood at 91 million tonnes a year. Excess capacity has largely been eliminated,
while existing refineries are being adapted to the changing pattern of demand by
the construction of new upgrading facilities (‘catalytic crackers’) which are
leading to a higher output of motor spirit and naphtha at the expense of fuel oil.
Deliveries of petroleum products for inland consumption (excluding refinery
consumption) in 1987 totalled some 68 million tonnes, including 22 million
tonnes of motor spirit, 7-8 million tonnes of kerosene, 17-1 million tonnes of gas
and diesel oil (including derv fuel used in road vehicles) and 9-9 million tonnes of
fuel oil.
Exports of crude oil amounted to 80-6 million tonnes in 1987. Virtually all
exports went to Britain’s partners in the European Community and the IEA, the
largest markets being the Netherlands, France, the Federal Republic of Germany
and the United States. Some 18-5 million tonnes of petroleum products were
also exported. Though self-sufficient, Britain continues to import other crude
oils, to enable the full range of petroleum products to be made efficiently and
economically. The main sources of imports in 1987 were Norway (which
supplied about 50 per cent by value), Turkey (11-4 per cent), Saudi Arabia (7-3
per cent) and Mexico (6-4 per cent).
Oil pipelines brought ashore about 78 per cent of offshore oil in 1987. Some
1,686 km (1,048 miles) of major submarine pipeline brings oil ashore from the
North Sea oilfields (see map, opposite). Major crude oil onshore pipelines in
operation from harbours, land terminals or offshore moorings to refineries
include those connecting Finnart to Grangemouth, Tranmere to Stanlow, and
Cruden Bay to Grangemouth. Onshore pipelines also carry refined products to
major marketing areas; for example, a 423-km (263-mile) pipeline runs from
Milford Haven to the Midlands and Manchester.
288
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Research
GAS
Structure
Table 30: Oil Statistics
million tonnes
1977 1982
1985
1986 1987
Oil production3
land
offshore
Refinery output
Deliveries of petroleum products
for inland consumption
Exports (including re-exports):
crude petroleum
refined petroleum products
and process oils
Imports:
crude petroleum
refined petroleum products
and process oils
01 0-2 0-4
38 1 103-0 127-2
0-5 0-6
126-5 122-7
86-3
82-8
70-7 72-9
67-2 69-8
2-9 60-3
16-5 14-5
104-3 28-3
23-0 17-2
79-6
18-9
26-9
25-0
74-1
69-2
82-1
20-2
74-7
67-7
80-6
18-5
32-6 33-1
22-9 20-5
Sources: Department of Energy and HM Customs and Excise.
a Crude oil plus condensates and petroleum gases derived at onshore treatment plants.
The leading oil companies have extensive research and development pro¬
grammes in support of oil exploration and production and on new and improved
fuels. All aspects of production are covered, including the design of production
facilities and enhanced oil recovery techniques. There are research centres at
Sunbury-on-Thames in Surrey (BP), Thornton in Cheshire and Sittingbourne in
Kent (Shell), and Abingdon in Oxfordshire (Esso). The main government
research and development effort in offshore technology is undertaken by the
Department of Energy. Advice on offshore safety is provided by the Offshore
Safety and Technology Board. The Offshore Energy Technology Board advises
the supply industries and has identified four priority areas: subsea systems and
equipment for subsea production; weight reduction of production platform
topside equipment; exploration; and drilling and production technology. In
1987—88 the Department spent some £9-3 million on these activities.
Public supply of manufactured gas in Britain began in the early nineteenth
century in central London. For many years gas was produced from coal but
during the 1960s, growing imports of oil brought about production of town gas
from oil-based feedstocks. Following the first commercial natural gas discovery
in the UKCS in 1965 and the start of offshore gas production in 1967, supplies
of offshore natural gas grew rapidly and by 1977 natural gas had replaced town
gas in the public supply system in Great Britain.
Under the Gas Act 1986, the gas industry in Great Britain, in state ownership
since 1949, was privatised and the assets of the British Gas Corporation
transferred to the new company, British Gas pic. The Act also established the
Office of Gas Supply, to monitor British Gas’s activities as a public gas supplier,
and the Gas Consumers Council, to look after the interests of consumers.
British Gas has about 3 million shareholders. The Government holds
approximately 3-3 per cent of the shares, which were set aside for the share
bonus for private shareholders who retain shares for three years. In 1987-88 the
turnover of British Gas and its subsidiary companies amounted to £7,364
Gas
290
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Production
Transmission
and Storage
Consumption
Research
million, of which gas supply accounted for £6,679 million. Current cost
operating profit was £1,008 million. British Gas has some 82,000 employees.
In 1987 indigenous production of natural gas, excluding that flared or vented at
terminals or fields, amounted to 47,641 million cubic metres, of which 3,609
million cubic metres were used for drilling, production and pumping operations
offshore. Supplies of UKCS gas to British Gas (44,000 million cubic metres in
1987) were slightly higher than in 1986 and accounted for 78-5 per cent of its
total natural gas supplies, the remainder coming from Norway. UKCS produc¬
tion comes mainly from seven major gasfields: Leman, Frigg (UK), Indefatigable,
Viking, Hewett, West Sole and Victor. In addition, gas from the South
Morecambe field in the Irish Sea and from the twin North Sean and South Sean
fields is used to augment supplies to meet peak demand in winter.
Recently approved field developments are Cleeton, South Ravenspurn, South
Valiant, Vanguard and Vulcan in 1986; Audrey and North Valiant in 1987; and
North Ravenspurn and Sole Pit (core) in 1988.
Remaining recoverable gas reserves, including possible gas from existing
discoveries and potential future discoveries, are estimated to be in the range of
889,000 million to 3-01 million million cubic metres. Indigenous offshore
natural gas reserves are likely to meet most of the British market demand well
into the 1990s.
The British Gas national high-pressure pipeline system of some 5,330 km
(3,330 miles) provides for the distribution of natural gas. It is supplied by feeder
mains from four North Sea shore terminals, and from a terminal in Barrow-in-
Furness (Cumbria). The whole of the high-pressure transmission system is
regularly inspected.
Various methods of storage of natural gas to meet peak load conditions are
used including salt cavities and storage facilities for liquefied natural gas.
British Gas has also developed the partially depleted Rough field as a major gas
store. This, the first such use of an offshore field, involves the injection into the
Rough reservoir in summer of gas drawn from the national transmission system
for recovery at high rates during periods of peak winter demand.
Sales of gas by the supply industry in Britain totalled 19,373 million therms in
1987, 4-7 per cent more than in 1986. About 45 per cent of all gas sold by British
Gas to its 17 million consumers is for industrial and commercial purposes, the
remainder being for household use. Gas is used extensively in industries
requiring the control of temperatures to a fine degree of accuracy such as the
pottery industry and certain processes for making iron and steel products. In
1987, 5,743 million therms of gas were sold to industry in Britain, 139 million
therms to fuel producers, and 2,991 million therms to commercial and other
non-domestic users. An increasingly large part of domestic demand is for gas for
central heating. In 1987, 10,500 million therms were sold to domestic users.
British Gas spends some £75 million a year on its research and development
programme, carried out at five research stations throughout Britain. It has
information exchange and research agreements with a number of overseas gas
companies and carries out research in collaboration with universities and
industry both in Britain and overseas. Its research programme covers engineer¬
ing, design, materials technology and instrumentation, and electronics, related
to all aspects of the gas business, from exploration and production, storage and
transmission, and pipeline inspection to distribution and utilisation.
British Gas’s international consultancy service makes available a wide range
of technology, products and processes for sale overseas.
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
291
COAL
British Coal
Corporation
Production
Development
Consumption
Research
Coalmining in Britain can be traced back to the thirteenth century. It played a
crucial part in the industrial revolution of the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries, and in its peak year, 1913, the industry produced 292 million tonnes
of coal, exported 74-2 million tonnes and employed over a million workers. In
1947 the coalmines passed into public ownership by means of the Coal Industry
Nationalisation Act 1946, which set up the National Coal Board as a statutory
corporation to manage the industry. In 1987 the Board’s name was changed to
the British Coal Corporation.
British Coal has, with limited exceptions, exclusive rights over the extraction of
coal in Great Britain, but is empowered to license private operators to work
small mines and opencast sites. It also has powers to work other minerals, where
discoveries are made in the course of searching for, or working, coal; and to
enSa§e in certain petrochemicals activities beneficial to the future of the coal
industry. Retail sales are largely in private hands, although British Coal makes
bulk sales to large industrial consumers.
In 1987—88 total output of 102-3 million tonnes comprised 83-1 million tonnes
of deep-mined coal, 16-3 million tonnes from opencast mines and 2-9 million
tonnes from other sources (including licensed collieries and tip coal). At the end
of March 1988 there were 94 British Coal collieries in operation. The main
coal-bearing regions are shown on the map on p 292.
Britain’s coal industry is one of the largest in Western Europe, and one of
the world’s most technologically advanced. British Coal has a substantial capital
investment programme, which amounted to £650 million in 1987-88. Techni¬
cal progress has been concentrated on equipment capable of obtaining higher
output from fewer faces. By early 1988 some 45 per cent of all coal faces were
equipped with heavy duty supports available in all seam sections. New designs of
power loader and face conveyor are being brought in whenever they are
cost-effective. Production at the new mining complex at Selby in North Yorkshire
(one of the world's most advanced deep mines) is planned to build up to 10
million tonnes a year. Investment of £400 million has been allocated to develop a
new mine at Asfordby within the Vale of Belvoir (Leicestershire); the Vale
contains recoverable reserves estimated at 510 million tonnes. British Coal has
also submitted planning applications for a new mine at Hawkhurst Moor
(Warwickshire), which would produce some 145 million tonnes following an
initial investment of about £400 million.
The first coal to be discovered on a significant scale in Northern Ireland is
some 1,000 million tonnes of lignite (brown coal) on the eastern shore of Lough
Neagh and under the lake bed. Further deposits have been discovered and are
being appraised to determine their size and the feasibility of mining.
In 1987-88 inland consumption of coal was 115-8 million tonnes, of which 74
per cent was by power stations, 9 per cent by coke ovens and 4 per cent by
domestic users. With a substantial proportion of coal being used by power
stations for electricity generation, British Coal sales of coal to them totalled 80-2
million tonnes in 1987-88. Exports of coal in 1987-88 were 2-2 million tonnes,
while imports amounted to 11 million tonnes.
In 1987-88 British Coal spent £48-4 million on research. It has two main
research establishments: the Technical Department at Stanhope Bretby (Staf¬
fordshire), for work on mining methods and equipment and developing systems
for remote and automatic control; and the Coal Research Establishment at
Stoke Orchard (near Cheltenham), concerned with the utilisation of coal,
ilasgow
Edinburgh .
Newcastle^
upon Tynej
tf223®* Carlisle A J
Workington Durham
Liverpool
toncastei
SheffielSl
iManchester
iNottingham
Vale of Belvoir
Birminghamj
London
Bristol
Coalfields
Coalfields
Shetland
Islands
80 miles
Orkney
Islands
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 km
I I I I I I I
Potential coalfields
Potential lignite fields
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
293
ELECTRICITY
Structure
Consumption
including research and development on improved combustion and coal and ash
andling techniques, together with new ways of making gaseous, liquid and
smokeless fuels from coal. Agreements to exchange technical information have
een signed by British Coal with several countries. Britain is responsible
t rough a British Coal subsidiary for the management of a service which
provides information on and analyses of coal topics under the auspices of the
International Energy Agency.
Under the Electricity Act 1947 the electricity supply industry in Great Britain
was brought into public ownership in 1948, although two subsequent Acts
(1954 and 1957) effected a measure of decentralisation. Electricity from the
public supply system is available to all premises in Britain except for some very
remote households. The public supply industry employed over 150,000 people
and invested £1,589 million in 1987-88. The main transmission system
(natronal grid) in Great Britain is one of the largest fully interconnected power
networks in the Western world. In 1987-88 the income of the industry in
England and Wales was £11,367 million. In Scotland the turnover of the South
of Scotland Electricity Board (SSEB) and the North of Scotland Hydro-Electric
Board (NSHEB) was £925 million and £332 million respectively.
In 1988 the Government announced proposals for privatisation of the industry
effectively a monopoly despite the introduction of more competition by the
Energy Act 1983. In England and Wales the Central Electricity Generating Board
(CEGB), responsible for the operation and maintenance of power stations and
owner of the national grid, would be split into three companies: one owning 30
per cent of the CEGB’s generating capacity, all non-nuclear; one comprising the
remainder of the CEGB’s generating capacity, fossil-fuelled and nuclear; and the
other a national grid company, ownership of which would be transferred to the
existing 12 area electricity boards (each with a statutory duty to supply
electricity). These would be privatised as 12 distribution companies, with which
existing and potential private generators would generally establish contracts.
The Electricity Council, the central co-ordinating body of the industry in
England and Wales, would be abolished.
In Scotland the NSHEB and the SSEB generate, transmit and distribute
electricity. The boundary separating their areas runs from Dumbarton on the
Firth oi Clyde to Newburgh on the Firth of Tay (see map, p 294). The
Government’s proposals for privatisation in Scotland would involve the creation
of two vertically integrated, regional companies, one based on the SSEB the
other on the NSHEB.
The Government has also announced its intention to privatise the electricity
supply industry in Northern Ireland, where generation, transmission and
distribution are at present carried out by Northern Ireland Electricity, a public
corporation.
Sales of electricity in 1987 amounted to 256,189 gigawatt hours (GWh).
Domestic users took 36 per cent of the total, industry 36 per cent and
commercial and other users the remainder. About one-fifth of domestic sales is
for space heating, one-sixth for water heating and one-tenth for cooking.
Electricity is used in industry mainly for motive power, melting, heating and
lighting. It is supplied to almost 25 million consumers of whom 22 million are in
England and Wales, 1-7 million are supplied by the SSEB, 590,000 by the
NSHEB and 573,000 are in Northern Ireland.
Generation
Generation by the public electricity supply industry in Britain amounted to
282,695 GWh in 1987. Conventional steam power stations provided over 80 per
Electricity
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
295
cent of the total, nuclear stations 17-8 per cent and gas turbine, hydro-electric
and diesel plant 21 per cent. Public supply power stations consumed 121-3
million tonnes of coal equivalent in 1987, of which coal accounted for 71 per
cent and oil 7 per cent. The output capacity of the 191 generating stations of the
electricity boards at the end of March 1988 totalled 63,847 megawatts (MW)
including 53,954 MW run by the CEGB, 5,518 MW by the SSEB, 2,575 MW by
the NSHEB and 1,800 MW by Northern Ireland Electricity. An analysis of
electricity generation by and output capacity of the public supply system is given
in Table 31.
Generation of electricity outside the public supply system is relatively small
(19,759 GWh in 1987). The major sources outside the fuel industries are the
chemicals, engineering, paper, and iron and steel industries, and the nuclear
power plants of the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority (UKAEA) and
British Nuclear Fuels pic. In 1987 these nuclear plants supplied 4,956 GWh of
electricity to the public supply system.
The most recent large-scale power stations are based on units of 500 MW and
660 MW. Station capacities have increased and there are 15 stations each with a
capacity of 2,000 MW or more including Kingsnorth (Kent), Europe's largest
mixed-fuel station burning either coal or oil. The Drax coal-fired station (North
Yorkshire), which has an output capacity of 4,000 MW, is the largest coal-fired
station in Western Europe. The larger units have a higher thermal efficiency (the
ratio of the net electrical energy output to the heat energy input) than earlier
units, and their introduction, coupled with the closure of less efficient plant,
has resulted in a gradual rise in overall thermal efficiency, leading to substantial
savings in fuel consumption. Average thermal efficiency of conventional steam
stations in England and Wales rose from 20-9 per cent in 1947-48 to 35-3 per
cent in 1987-88. The CEGB has put forward proposals for new coal-fired power
stations at West Burton (Nottinghamshire), Kingsnorth B (Kent) and Fawley
(Hampshire). The Government is considering proposals for future generation in
Northern Ireland, to take effect from the mid-1990s, including a lignite-fired
power station.
To control acid emissions the CEGB plans to fit the coal-fired power stations,
at Drax (North Yorkshire) and Fiddler’s Ferry (Cheshire)—6,000 MW of
generating capacity—with flue gas desulphurisation equipment over ten years
Table 31: Generation by and Capacity of Public Supply Power Stations
Electricity generated (GWh) Output
Per cent capacity3
(MW)
1977
1982
1987
Nuclear plant
Other steam plant
Gas turbines and
oil engines
Pumped-storage plant
Other hydro-electric plant
36,417 40,001 50,282
220,019 209,957 226,382
966
1,313
3,330
517 512
1,080 2,207
3,884 3,312
1987
18
80
6,519
50,254
3,007
2,788
1,301
Total
262,045 255,439 282,695
100 63,869
Electricity supplied (net)b 242,477 237,787 261,884
Source: Department of Energy.
aAt 31 December 1987.
b Electricity generated less electricity used at power stations (including electricity used for pumping at
pumped-storage stations). 6
296
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Nuclear Power
Nuclear Power
Development
British Nuclear
Fuels
at an estimated cost of £660 million. In addition, the Government has endorsed
a ten-year programme to control nitrogen oxide emissions through the
installation of low nitrogen oxide burners at the CEGB’s 12 largest power
stations, at a cost of £180 million.
The pumped-storage station at Dinorwig (Gwynedd), the largest of its type in
Europe, has an average generated output of 1,728 MW. (In pumped-storage
schemes electricity generated in off-peak periods is used to pump water to
high-level reservoirs from which it descends to drive turbines, rapidly providing
a large supply of electricity at peak periods or to meet sudden increases in
demand.)
The CEGB, together with Electricite de France, has constructed a 2,000-MW
cross-Channel cable link, which started operating in 1986, increasing the
capacity for the transmission of electricity between the two countries.
Britain has been developing nuclear power for several decades and in 1956 the
world's first industrial-scale nuclear power station, at Calder Hall (Cumbria),
began to supply electricity to the national grid. The Government believes that
nuclear power has a vital role in helping to meet Britain’s long-term energy
requirements. There are 13 nuclear power stations in operation controlled by
the CEGB and three by the SSEB. Four other stations also feed electricity to the
national grid: the two original Magnox stations (both with a net capacity of
about 200 MW) operated by British Nuclear Fuels pic at Calder Hall and
Chapelcross (Dumfries and Galloway); and two prototype stations run by the
UKAEA—at Winfrith (Dorset) and Dounreay (Highland).
Under the first commercial programme, nine Magnox stations with a total gross
capacity of about 4,000 MW were commissioned between 1962 and 1971, the
largest being Wylfa (Gwynedd), which has a capacity of 840 MW. The second
series of orders was based on the Advanced Gas-eooled Reactor (AGR). Hinkley
Point B (Somerset) and Hunterston B (Strathclyde) began operating in 1976,
while three more AGRs began operating in 1984: Dungeness B (Kent),
Hartlepool (Cleveland) and Heysham (Lancashire). Two further AGRs—a second
station at Heysham and a station at Torness (Lothian)—began operating in
1988. All the AGRs are 1,320-MW units except Dungeness B (1,200 MW) and
Torness (1,400 MW). Construction of a pressurised water reactor (PWR) of
1,182 MW at Sizewell (Suffolk) has started and the £ 1,750 million project should
be completed in 1992. A public inquiry into the CEGB’s plans for a PWR at
Hinkley Point C will begin in October 1988.
British Nuclear Fuels pic provides nuclear fuel services covering the whole fuel
cycle: uranium conversion, uranium enrichment (through its shareholding in
Urenco Ltd), fuel element fabrication, transport and reprocessing of spent fuel,
and the manufacture of specialised fuel element components. All of its shares
are held by the Government. The company, with headquarters at Risley
(Cheshire), conducts operations at four sites: Springfields (Lancashire), where
fuel is manufactured: Capenhurst (Cheshire), where uranium is enriched to
provide fuel for nuclear reactors: Sellafield (Cumbria), where spent fuel is
reprocessed; and Chapelcross.
There is a large-scale investment programme in progress involving expendi¬
ture of some £4,500 million over the next ten years. The major part of this
expenditure relates to the Sellafield site and comprises the refurbishment of
facilities for treating spent fuel from Magnox power stations, the construction of
a thermal oxide reprocessing plant (THORP) which will take spent fuel from
Britain’s AGRs and overseas reactors, and the construction of facilities to
process and package radioactive waste. The remainder of the programme
THE CHANNEL TUNNEL
The site below Shakespeare Cliff,
near Folkestone, from where the
Channel Tunnel will link Britain
and mainland Europe. The
Tunnel will be the largest civil
engineering project in Europe to
be financed and constructed by
the private sector.
Lining of the service tunnel in
progress.
DEVELOPMENTS IN AEROSPACE
The European Space Agency’s
Olympus multi-role
communications satellite, due to
be launched in 1989. British
Aerospace is the prime
contractor.
The BAe 125-800 is the latest
model of this successful
business jet design, which first
entered service in 1964.
Rolls-Royce’s 535E4, which
powers the Boeing 757 airliner, is
an economical and quiet jet
engine of advanced design.
0
GEC Avionics is the
world’s largest
manufacturer of
the head-up display
(HUD), which
projects flight and
navigation
information
electronically into
the pilot’s view
ahead.
Opened in 1987,
London City airport
is designed solely
for use by short
take-off and
landing airliners.
COMPUTERS IN MANUFACTURING
Shoe bottoms are
prepared for sole
attaching with the aid of
a computer which can
memorize processing
information on up to
196 shoe styles. Its
manufacturer, BUSM of
Leicester, can provide
equipment for many
stages of shoemaking.
In the modern textiles
industry, a new pattern
can be produced in
hours using this
computer-aided
patterning system,
developed by the Bonas
Machine Company of
Sunderland, and a high¬
speed electronic
jacquard.
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
297
Nuclear
Research
Nuclear
Safety
involves the construction of further centrifuge enrichment plant at Capenhurst,
and refurbishment and construction of new plant at Springfields.
The UKAEA carries out research and development to ensure that nuclear power
is economic, safe and environmentally acceptable. Its work is undertaken by
research establishments at Harwell (Oxfordshire), Risley, Winfrith, Springfields,
Windscale (Cumbria), Dounreay and Culham (Oxfordshire). In addition, safety
research is carried out at the Safety and Reliability Directorate at Culcheth
(Cheshire). The UKAEA operates as a trading fund, which allows it to function
on a commercial basis. Under these arrangements the UKAEA’s research and
development work funded by the Department of Energy is on a customer-
contractor basis. The UKAEA also carries out work for a number of other
customers including the electricity generating boards, British Nuclear Fuels pic,
other government departments and industry.
Co-operation on nuclear energy between Britain and other countries takes
place within a framework of intergovernmental agreements and membership of
bodies such as the International Atomic Energy Agency, and through direct
links on research between the UKAEA and equivalent organisations overseas.
Britain takes part in the co-operative research programmes of the European
Atomic Energy Community (Euratom), including one on establishing the
feasibility of achieving controlled thermonuclear fusion. A major component of
this programme is the Joint European Torus (JET) project at Culham, which
started operating in 1983.
The Government and the nuclear industry give high priority to safety at nuclear
installations and the industry has an excellent safety record. Britain has a
rigorous system of nuclear safety control. The Health and Safety Executive’s
Nuclear Installations Inspectorate is the industry’s regulator and ensures that
high standards of safety are used in the design, construction, operation and
maintenance of all nuclear plant. While the safety of such plant in Britain is the
ultimate responsibility of the nuclear operator, the Inspectorate has extensive
powers and an operator must satisfy it before a licence is granted. The
Inspectorate also has the power to shut down a plant if it is believed to be unsafe
and may also require improvements to an installation if it believes the
appropriate safety standards are not being met. Operators must protect their
workers and the public by complying with the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act
1974, with conditions of their nuclear site licences under the Nuclear
Installations Act 1965 and by keeping discharges within the limits and
conditions set by authorisations granted under the Radioactive Substances Act
1960. In England and Wales authorisations are granted jointly by the Secretary
of State for the Environment and the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and
Food, and in Scotland by the Secretary of State for Scotland. The terms of the
authorisations are designed to ensure that those most exposed to the effects of
discharges receive less than the maximum dose limit recommended by the
International Commission on Radiological Protection. Within the limits, opera¬
tors of nuclear facilities are required to keep discharges as low as reasonably
achievable and failure to do so makes them liable to prosecution. Compliance
with the legislation is overseen by the Nuclear Installations Inspectorate, by the
Inspectorate of Pollution in England and Wales, and by the Industrial Pollution
Inspectorate in Scotland.
Britain plays a major part in international discussions on nuclear safety.
International conventions have been established on the early notification of a
nuclear accident which might have possible transboundary effects, and an
exchange of information concerning the operation and management of nuclear
facilities.
298
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Emergency
Plans
Research on
Electricity
RENEWABLE
SOURCES OF
ENERGY
The precautions taken in the design and construction of nuclear installations in
Britain and the high safety standards in their operation and maintenance make
accidents which might significantly affect the public unlikely. However, all
operators, including the UKAEA, are required by the Nuclear Installations
Inspectorate, as a condition of site licences, to prepare emergency plans,
including those for dealing with an accidental release of radioactivity, which are
regularly tested under the Inspectorate's supervision. They cover emergency
procedures at the site and off-site arrangements to protect the public, including
monitoring up to 40 km (25 miles) and evacuation up to 2 to 3 km (1-25 to 2
miles).
The Electricity Council draws up a general programme of research, some of it
direct research carried out by the Council and electricity boards and some of it in
co-operation with selected industrial research associations and through re¬
search contracts placed with universities and other organisations. Some of the
work is done in collaboration with the two Scottish electricity boards and
Northern Ireland Electricity, which contribute towards its cost (£194 million in
1987—88). There is also collaboration between the supply industry and the plant
manufacturers to co-ordinate research on plant and systems. The research
establishments run by the CEGB comprise the Central Electricity Research
Laboratories at Leatherhead (Surrey), the Berkeley Nuclear Laboratories in
Gloucestershire and the Marchwood Engineering Laboratories on Southampton
Water. Research on distribution technology and electricity utilisation is
undertaken at the Electricity Council Research Centre at Capenhurst (Cheshire)
and by the area boards.
The Department of Energy is supporting research and development in the
renewable energy technologies, to stimulate the full economic exploitation of
alternative energy sources and encourage industry to develop internal and
export markets. The present phase of its detailed research programme,
published in 1988, aims to promote the commercialisation of those renewable
technologies which are economically attractive and to reduce the uncertainty in
the economics and potential contribution of those which are promising but still
uncertain. The Department is providing £16-2 million in funding for 1988—89
and work is concentrated on the most promising technologies, including wind
power, geothermal hot dry rocks, tidal energy, passive solar design and biofuels.
Wind power constitutes the most promising renewable energy source for
electricity generation. Three demonstration wind parks, jointly funded by the
Department of Energy and the CEGB, and costing £28 million, are to be built
between 1990 and 1992 at sites in England and Wales. Each park will have an
area of 3 to 4 sq km (1-2 to 1-5 sq miles) and will contain 25 vertical- or
horizontal-axis turbines each 30 m (100 ft) high with 30 m diameter blades and
with an output of 300 to 500 kW. They are expected to provide electricity for
15,000 people. Three other major projects are in progress. At Carmarthen Bay
(Dyfed) a vertical-axis wind turbine with a 25 m (82 ft) diameter horizontal rotor
connected to a 130-kW generator system was inaugurated in 1986. On Orkney,
in collaboration with the NSHEB, the Department is supporting a 60 m (200 ft)
diameter, 3-MW horizontal wind turbine which was inaugurated in 1987. At
Richborough (Kent) a 1-MW, 55 m (180 ft) diameter wind turbine is expected to
be commissioned in 1989. The Energy Research Group of the Science and
Engineering Research Council is supporting a number of projects on the
integration of wind and diesel electrical generation, which has particular
relevance to small, isolated communities.
Under its geothermal hot dry rock programme, the Department is investi¬
gating the economic possibilities of extracting heat from rocks at a depth of 2 to
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
299
Exploration
Production
6 km (1 -25 to 4 miles). Research, involving government expenditure of over £25
million since 1977, has been extended at a cost of £8 -15 million over three years
from 1988. The work is mainly carried out by the Camborne School of Mines in
Cornwall, where a project is being conducted to establish the technology for
creating a suitable deep underground heat exchange zone from which the heat
could be withdrawn, and where a potential resource of between 750 and 3,000
terawatt hours1 has been identified.
Tidal power is one of the most promising of the renewable technologies for
large-scale electricity generation. Its exceptionally high tidal range makes the
Severn estuary one of the best potential sites in the world and the Department of
Energy is funding, with the Severn Tidal Power Group, a £4-2 million study into
the economic viability of a Severn tidal barrage. The Government is also making
a 50 per cent contribution to a further phase of studies, costing £1-3 million,
into an energy barrage on the Mersey estuary, and to generic and environmental
impact studies.
Passive solar design is considered the best way to utilise solar energy in
Britain and has already proved cost-effective in both domestic and non-domestic
buildings, using their form and fabric to admit, store and distribute solar energy
for heating and improving daylight. The Department of Energy has increased
expenditure on its research and development programme, which includes 36
projects worth some £3-6 million and involves architects and schools of
architecture. A major project initiated in 1987, with European Community
backing and including the British glass manufacturer Pilkingtons pic, was the
establishment of a test centre at Strathclyde University, which will facilitate
experiments on passive solar design and equipment.
Biofuels offer possibly the largest contribution from the renewable energy
resources in the medium term. The main work of the Department’s programme
is on the combustion ol wastes, anaerobic digestion (particularly as applied to
the production and use of landfill gas) and energy forestry.
The Department also has a low-level research and development programme
into wave energy, supporting an inshore project on the island of Islay following a
feasibility study at the Queen’s University of Belfast.
Non-fuel Minerals
Although much of Britain’s requirements of industrial raw materials is met by
imports, non-fuel minerals produced in Britain make an important contribution
to the economy. Output of non-fuel minerals in 1986 totalled 318 million
tonnes, valued at £1,521 million. The total number of employees in the
extraction industry was some 33,000 in 1986. The locations of some of the more
important minerals produced in Britain are shown on the map on p 300.
Exploring for and exploiting indigenous metalliferous mineral resources to meet
the needs of industry are being encouraged by the Government. The British
Geological Survey is carrying out a long-term programme for the Department of
Trade and Industry aimed at identifying areas with the potential for economic
extraction of minerals.
The tonnage extracted of some of the main non-fuel minerals produced in
Britain is given in Table 32. In terms of value, production of common sand and
gravel was estimated at £420 million in 1986, limestone and dolomite £388
million, clays £236 million, igneous rock £163 million, salt £70 million, potash
£50 million, sandstone £49 million, chalk £32 million, gypsum and anhydrite
1 1 terawatt hour = 1,000 million kilowatt hours.
CHESHIRE-
SALTFIELD
•gold
'gypsum
gypsum
MARLSTONE r
ROCKBED''-'/1 • fuller’s earth
celestite
gypsum
• ball clay
ballclay pj
^chinaclay
tungsten, tin
china clay
china day •
tin .•tin, zinc
0 20 40 60 80100120 km
I—I—I—I I I I
1 I
60 80 miles
lead
barytes
zinc
lead
zinc
Major metallic
and industrial
mineral workings
Major mineral deposits
(unworked)
sand
barytes
silica
j Currently producing
ironfield
silica
sand
r
fluorspar
N PENNINE
diatomite1
to*9
\ S'
******* *1
gypsum^ •
barytes
silica sand
silica
SOUTHERN #0 FRoniNni-iam
sand PENNINE ^
/~L OREFIELD IRONbTUNt
ca
^fluorspar, barytes, lead
• gypsum
salt
i •
Some Minerals Produced in Britain
Orkney
Islands
Shetland
Islands
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
301
£20 million, tin £19 million and fluorspar £16 million. Britain is a major world
producer of several important industrial minerals including china clay, ball clay,
fullers earth, celestite and gypsum, and produces significant amounts of
limestone, dolomite, chalk, slate, fluorspar, potash, salt, silica sands, fireclay,
common clay and shale, barytes and talc, mostly for home consumption. Small
amounts of diatomite, calcspar, chert and flint, anhydrite and china stone are
also produced. In 1986 the production of metal in non-ferrous ores totalled
11,100 tonnes, mainly tin and zinc from Cornwall. The Cornish mines, the only
significant tin mines in the European Community, produced some 4,300 tonnes
in 1986, satisfying about half of Britain’s demand. Small amounts of copper and
silver were produced in association with tin and zinc, and some lead and zinc
with barytes and fluorspar. A little gold came from a mine in north Wales.
Planning permission has been granted for a large opencast tungsten mine at
Hemerdon (near Plymouth).
Production of sand, gravel and crushed rock (from limestone, igneous rock
and sandstone) as aggregates for use in construction constitutes two-thirds, by
value, of Britain's output of non-fuel minerals. Britain is the world’s second
largest producer of marine-dredged sand and gravel (17-6 million tonnes in
1986).
Table 32: Production of Some of the Main Non-fuel Minerals
million tonnes
1976 1981 1986
Common sand and gravel
Silica sand
Igneous rock
Limestone and dolomite
Chalk
Sandstone
Gypsum
Salt including salt in brine
Common clay and shale
China clay and ball clay
Fireclay
Iron ore
Potash
Fluorspar
Source: United Kingdom Mineral Statistics 1986.
a Great Britain only.
117-8 97-0 112-0
5-9 4-5 4-1
37-1 30-8 41-0
89-3 79-1 100-5
16-3 11 -8a l2-5a
13-6 12-2 14-0
3-3 2-9 3-4
8-0 6-7 6-9
26-1 18-8a 17-6
3- 8 3-3 3-5
1-5 l-0a 0-9
4- 6 0-7 0-3
0-1 0-5 0-7
0-2 0-2 0-1
Water
Britain’s water supplies are obtained partly from surface sources such as
mountain lakes, streams impounded in upland gathering grounds and river
intakes, and partly from underground sources by means of wells, adits and
boreholes. Water for public supply in Britain amounted to about 17,000
megalitres (Ml) a day in 1986-87 and average daily supply per head was nearly
340 litres. About 99 per cent of the population in Great Britain and over 97 per
cent in Northern Ireland are connected to the public water supply system.
In general, householders pay for their domestic water supply, sewerage and
sewage disposal services through charges based on the rateable value of their
property, although the proposed abolition of domestic rates would require the
302
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
England and
Wales
Water
Authorities
Statutory Water
Companies
Supplies
introduction of another method of charging. Industrial users are charged for
their water supply according to actual metered consumption. Since 1981
optional metering for domestic users has been available throughout England
and Wales. The Government and the water industry have announced a series of
large-scale trials of compulsory domestic metering in England to start in 1989,
and last for about three years. The water industry is to be enabled to require that
all new houses have meters, or are so plumbed that they may be installed.
In England and Wales the Secretaries of State for the Environment and for Wales
are responsible for policy in relation to the conservation, augmentation,
distribution and proper use of water resources and provision of water supplies;
the provision of sewerage and sewage disposal services; the restoration and
maintenance of the wholesomeness of rivers and other inland waters; and the
use of inland waters for navigation and recreation. The Minister of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food and the Secretary of State for Wales are responsible for policy
relating to land drainage, flood protection, sea defence, and the protection and
development of fisheries.
Nine regional water authorities in England and the Welsh Water Authority in
Wales are responsible for the management of water services; the development of
water resources; water distribution and supply; the prevention of pollution;
sewerage; sewage treatment; river management; land drainage; sea defence;
recreation; and freshwater fisheries. Water authorities’ estimated revenue for
1988—89 is £3,095 million. Their management boards are appointed by
ministers.
However, legislation is planned to privatise the water authorities’ utility
functions of water supply, sewerage and sewage treatment and disposal in
England and Wales, with a view to removing government financial controls,
improving services and involving the public and the workforce more closely in
ownership of the industry. A system of economic regulation, overseen by a
Director General of Water Services, would be established to safeguard con¬
sumers. A National Rivers Authority (NRA) would be set up to take over
responsibility for the regulatory and river management functions, including
pollution control and water quality regulation, water conservation and resource
planning, fisheries, land drainage and flood protection.
Under the privatisation legislation district councils would lose their presump¬
tive rights to act as agents of water authorities for the design, construction,
operation and maintenance of public sewers in their areas. The private water
utility companies would be able to choose their agent or carry out the work
themselves.
There are 29 statutory water supply companies, accounting for about one-
quarter of total supplies, which are operating under the Water Act 1973. Special
arrangements govern the relationship of these companies to the water
authorities and they will stand in the same relationship to the NRA as the
privatised companies.
Some 26,360 Ml a day were abstracted in England and Wales in 1986, of which
public water supplies accounted for 16,590 Ml a day. The Central Electricity
Generating Board took some 4,300 Ml a day primarily for cooling in connection
with electricity generation, other industry about 4,100 Ml a day, and the
remainder was used in agriculture and fish farming.
Water authorities have powers to restrict consumption when there are severe
water shortages. Under the Drought Act 1976 they can limit or prohibit the use
of water and, if necessary, restrict domestic water supplies.
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
303
Scotland
Northern
Ireland
Development
Projects
Research
In Scotland responsibility for public water supply, sewerage and sewage disposal
rests with the nine regional and three islands councils. In addition, the Central
Scotland Water Development Board is primarily responsible for developing large
water sources and supplying water in bulk to its five constituent member
authorities, the regional councils in central Scotland.
Scotland has a relative abundance of unpolluted water from upland sources,
n average of 2,214 Ml a day was supplied in Scotland in 1986-87. The
Secretary of State for Scotland is responsible for the promotion of the
conservation of water resources and the provision by water authorities of
adequate water supplies, and also has a duty to promote the cleanliness of rivers
and other inland waters and the tidal waters of Scotland.
The Water Service of the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland is
responsible for water supply and sewerage throughout Northern Ireland. The
Department is also responsible for the conservation, cleanliness and planned
development of Northern Ireland’s water resources. Northern Ireland has
abundant potential supplies of water for both domestic and industrial use. An
average of 670 Ml of water a day was supplied in 1987.
Investment is taking place to ensure that there is an adequate water supply to
meet future demand. The Thames Water Authority is constructing an 80-km
(50-mile) distribution system to meet the growing demand for water in London.
When completed in 1994, it will be the largest urban distribution system in the
world. North West Water has embarked on a major 25-year programme of
investment to clean up the polluted rivers of the Mersey Basin. In 1987—88
capital expenditure on water supply, sewerage and sewage disposal amounted to
some £958 million in England and Wales, £96 million in Scotland and £25
million in Northern Ireland.
The central research organisation for the water industry in Britain is the Water
Research Centre. Its membership includes water undertakings, consulting
engineers, manufacturers and overseas organisations. It has three laboratories:
at Stevenage (Hertfordshire), which deals with water and waste water treatment:
at Medmenham (Buckinghamshire), which is concerned with environmental
protection (including water quality and pollution); and at Swindon (Wiltshire),
which is concerned with instrumentation, water mains and sewers. Other
organisations conducting research include Hydraulics Research Limited, uni¬
versities, the Meteorological Office and several institutes of the Natural
Environment Research Council.
14 Agriculture,
Fisheries
and Forestry
Agriculture
British agriculture is noted lor its high level of efficiency and productivity. About
2-4 per cent of the working population are engaged in agriculture and the
industry produces nearly two-thirds of Britain’s food requirements compared
with just under a half in 1960, and four-fifths of that which can be grown in a
temperate climate compared with nearly two-thirds in 1960. Food accounted for
10 per cent of Britain’s imports by value in 1987, compared with about a quarter
in the 1960s. The agricultural contribution to gross domestic product was
£5,901 million in 1987, about 1-7 per cent of the total. Britain is also a major
exporter of agricultural produce and food products, agrochemicals and agri¬
cultural machinery.
The Government aims to foster an efficient and competitive agriculture
industry through the provision and sponsorship of research, development and
advisory services, the provision of financial support where appropriate,
measures to control disease, pests and pollution, and improved marketing
arrangements for food and food products. It also encourages the industry to
adopt high standards on animal welfare. The Agriculture Act 1986 gives
agriculture ministers a responsibility to achieve a balance between the interests
of agriculture, the economic and social interests of rural areas, conservation and
recreation, and schemes have been introduced to encourage the planting of new
farm woodlands and the use of farmland for a variety of alternative projects. A
set-aside scheme to reduce the production of surplus arable crops has been
introduced by the European Community.
Land Use Just over three-quarters of the land area is used for agriculture, the rest being
mountain, forest or put to urban and other uses. The area of agricultural land
has been declining, although there has been a reduction in the net rate of loss in
recent years. There are 12 million hectares (30 million acres) under crops and
grass. In hill country, where the area of cultivated land is often small, some 6
million hectares (over 15 million acres) are also used for rough grazing. Soils
vary from the thin poor ones of highland Britain to the rich fertile soils of
low-lying areas such as the fenlands of eastern England. The cool temperate
climate and the even distribution of rainfall ensure a long growing season;
streams rarely dry up and grassland is green throughout the year.
Farming In 1987 there were some 254,000 farm holdings in Britain, of which 72 per cent
in England, Scotland and Wales were wholly or mainly owner-occupied, while
virtually all the farms in Northern Ireland are owner-occupied. The average area
(including rough grazing) of full-time businesses is 106 hectares (262 acres). It
is estimated that the 11-6 per cent of holdings in the largest size group
306
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
PRODUCTION
Livestock
Cattle and
Sheep
accounted for about 55 per cent of output, while the smallest size of holding
(which accounted for 43 per cent of farms) produced only 2-5 per cent of output.
In Wales and Northern Ireland output from smaller farms is more significant
than in the rest of Britain.
The number of people engaged in agriculture in 1987 was about 670,000,
2 per cent less than in 1986. Labour productivity has improved substantially
since 1977. Total farming income in 1987 was an estimated £1,404 million.
There are over 500,000 tractors and some 54,000 combine harvesters in use.
A wide variety of other machines for harvesting and preserving grass are also
employed. Horticultural crops such as blackcurrants and brussels sprouts are
frequently harvested by machine, and milking machines are used on the vast
majority of dairy farms. The majority of farms have a direct electricity supply, the
remainder having their own generators.
Dairy herd monitoring, account analysis, budgeting and the monitoring of
cash-flow and performance have all benefited in recent years from computer
technology. Computer models of typical farms allow many varieties of crops and
livestock to be considered, as well as demands for labour, land, capital and
buildings.
Home production of the principal foods is shown as a percentage by weight of
total supplies (that is, output plus imports minus exports) in Table 33.
Table 33: British Production as a Percentage of Total Supplies
Food product
1976-78
average
1987
(provisional)
Meat
Eggs
Milk for human consumption (as liquid)
Cheese
Butter
Sugar (as refined)
Wheat
Potatoes for human consumption
82
101
100
65
30
35£
62
86
90
99
100
66
112
58
131
86
Source: Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
a In 1976—77 the sugar beet crop was seriously affected by bad weather and disease.
About three-fifths of full-time farms are devoted mainly to dairying or beef cattle
and sheep. The majority of sheep and cattle are reared in the hill and moorland
areas of Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and northern and south-western
England. Beef fattening occurs partly in better grassland areas, as does
dairying, and partly on arable farms. British livestock breeders have developed
many of the cattle, sheep and pig breeds with world-wide reputations, for
example, the Hereford and Aberdeen Angus beef breeds, the Jersey, Guernsey
and Ayrshire dairy breeds, Large White pigs and a number of sheep breeds.
Because of developments in artificial insemination and embryo transfer, Britain
is able to export semen and embryos from high-quality donor animals.
Table 34 shows the number of livestock and output of livestock products.
Most dairy cattle in England and Wales and a significant proportion in Scotland
and Northern Ireland are bred by artificial insemination. In 1987 the average
size of dairy herds in Britain was 59 while the average yield of milk per dairy cow
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
307
Pigs and
Poultry
Animal Welfare
Table 34: Livestock and Livestock Products
1976-78 1985 1986 1987
average (provisional)
Cattle and calves ('000 head)
Sheep and lambs (’000 head)
Pigs ('000 head)
Poultry (’000 head)3
Milk (million litres)
Eggs (million dozen)
Beef and veal (’000 tonnes)
Mutton and lamb (’000 tonnes)
Pork (’000 tonnes)
Bacon and ham (’000 tonnes)
Poultry meat (’000 tonnes)
Source: Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
•’ Excluding ducks, geese and turkeys. Data for 1985-^7 cannot be compared with data for earlier years owing to
changes in coverage of poultry holdings. ^ K
13,895
28,771
7,817
131,696
14,550
1,164
1,050
238
623
221
713
12,911
35,628
7,865
119,456
15,420
1,022
1,123
315
743
203
874
12,533
37,016
7,937
120,740
15,631
1,020
1,046
303
760
206
922
12,158
38,701
7,942
128,628
14,741
1,041
1,077
325
775
202
978
was 4,850 litres (1,067 gallons). Average household consumption of liquid
(including low-fat) milk per head in 1987 was 21 litres (3-7 pints) per week.
About two-thirds of home-fed beef production derives from the national dairy
herd, in which the Friesian breed is predominant. The remainder is derived
from suckler herds producing high-quality beef calves in the hills and uplands,
where the traditional British beef breeds, such as Hereford and Aberdeen Angus,
continue to be important. Imported breeds which have established themselves
include the Charolais, Limousin, Simmental and Belgian Blue.
Britain has a long tradition of sheep production with more than 40 breeds and
many crosses between them. Research has provided vaccine and serum
protection against nearly all the epidemic diseases. Although lamb production is
the main source of income for sheep farmers, wool is also important.
Grass supplies 60 to 80 per cent of the feed for cattle and sheep; grass
production has been enhanced by the increased use of fertilisers, irrigation and
methods of grazing control, and improved herbage conservation for winter feed.
Rough grazings are used for extensively grazed sheep and cattle, producing
young animals for fattening elsewhere.
Pig production occurs in most areas but is particularly important in eastern and
northern England. There is an increasing concentration into specialist units
and larger herds.
Output of poultry meat has continued to benefit from better husbandry and
genetic improvements. Since 1976 production has increased by almost a half
and reached about 978,000 tonnes in 1987. Production of broilers from
holdings of over 100,000 birds accounts for over a half of total production. In
1987 egg production was over 1,000 million dozen. Over two-thirds of laying
birds are in flocks of 20,000 or more. Britain remains broadly self-sufficient in
poultry meat and eggs.
The welfare of farm animals is protected by regulations and it is an offence to
cause unnecessary pain or distress to commercially reared livestock. For
example, there are regulations to control such operations as castration and tail
docking, and requiring owners of intensive units to arrange for the daily
inspection of their stock and the equipment on which it depends. There are
308
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Crops
Horticulture
advisory codes and recommendations for the welfare of all major species of farm
animals and compliance is monitored by the State Veterinary Service. In
1987-88 the Government introduced regulations for the phasing-out, from
1990, of single-pen veal crates and for prescribing minimum floor space in cages
for battery hens.
The Farm Animal Welfare Council, an independent body set up by the
Government, keeps under review the welfare of farm animals on agricultural
land, at markets, in transit and at the place of slaughter, and advises on any
legislative changes it considers necessary. In 1987 it issued a report recom¬
mending greater protection for animals at markets and at horse sales.
The farms devoted primarily to arable crops are found mainly in eastern
and central southern England and eastern Scotland. In Britain in 1987 cereals
were grown on 3-94 million hectares (9-74 million acres). Total cereal produc¬
tion, at some 21-5 million tonnes, was affected by the worst weather conditions
for 20 years. About 25 per cent of the wheat crop is normally used for flour
milling, and some 40 per cent for animal feed. Up to 20 per cent of the barley
crop is used for malting and distilling and some 40 per cent for animal feed.
There were record exports in 1986-87 from the 1986 harvest and the stocks in
intervention, accounting for over a third of total production. There has been a
substantial increase in both the area grown and the yield of oilseed rape; the
seed is crushed to obtain vegetable oil and the solid matter left is used for animal
feed.
Large-scale potato and vegetable production is undertaken in the fens (in
Cambridgeshire and south Lincolnshire), the alluvial areas around the rivers
Thames and Humber and the peaty lands in south Lancashire. Early potatoes
are an important crop in south-west Wales, Kent and south-west England.
High-grade seed potatoes are grown in Scotland and Northern Ireland.
Sugar from home-grown sugar beet provides about 50 per cent of require¬
ments, most of the remainder being refined from raw cane sugar imported from
developing countries under the Lome Convention.
Table 35 gives figures on the area, harvest and yield of the main crops.
In 1987 the land utilised for horticulture was about 193,500 hectares (478,200
acres). Vegetables grown in the open (excluding potatoes) accounted for 66-3 per
cent, orchards for 18-6 per cent, small fruit for 7-7 per cent, hardy nursery stock
for 3-6 per cent and bulbs and flowers grown in the open for 2-7 per cent. Crops
grown in glasshouses accounted for 11 per cent. More than one vegetable crop
is, in some cases, taken from the same area of land in a year, so that the
estimated area actually cropped in 1987 was 253,000 hectares (625,200 acres).
The top fruit and glasshouse sectors in south-east England were especially
affected by the great storm of October 1987, which has had an impact on all
sectors of the horticultural industry.
Field vegetables account for about 40 per cent of the value of horticultural
output and are widely grown throughout the country. Most horticultural
enterprises are increasing productivity with the help of improved planting
material, new techniques and the widespread use of machinery. Some field
vegetables, for example, are raised in blocks of compressed peat or loose-filled
cells, a technique which reduces root damage and allows plants to establish
themselves more reliably and evenly.
Glasshouses are used for growing tomatoes, cucumbers, sweet peppers,
lettuce, flowers, pot plants and nursery stock. Widespread use is made of
automatic control of heating and ventilation, and semi-automatic control of
watering. Energy-efficient glasshouses use thermal screens, while low-cost
plastic tunnels extend the season for certain crops previously grown in the open.
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
309
EXPORTS
Table 35: Main Crops
1976-78 1985 1986 1987
average (provisional)
Wheat
Area ( 000 hectares) 1,190
Harvest ('000 tonnes) 5,542
Yield (tonnes per hectare) 4-67
Barley
Area (’000 hectares) 2,314
Harvest (’000 tonnes) 9,342
Yield (tonnes per hectare) 4 03
Oats
Area (’000 hectares) 203
Harvest (’000 tonnes) 753
Yield (tonnes per hectare) 3-71
Potatoes
Area (’000 hectares) 223
Harvest (’000 tonnes) 6,247
Yield (tonnes per hectare) 28-10
Oilseed Rape
Area (’000 hectares) 56
Harvest (’000 tonnes) 136
Yield (tonnes per hectare) 2-43
Sugar Beet
Area (’000 hectares) 207
Harvest (’000 tonnes) 6,596
Yield (tonnes per hectare) 32-69
1,902 1,997 1,994
12,046 13,911 12,011
6-33 6-96 6-03
1,965 1,916 1,830
9,740 10,014 9,219
4-95 5-22 5 02
133 97 99
614 503 436
4-59 5-16 4-38
191 178 177
6,892 6,447 6,595
35-84 36-04 36-70
296 299 388
891 951 1,318
3-01 3-18 3-37
205 205 206
7,717 8,118 7,992
38-28 40-35 39-31
Sources: Annual Review of Agriculture 1988 and Agricultural Census June 1987.
Note-. A slight discrepancy in sugar-beet yield figures is due to rounding of area and harvest figures.
Under the European Community’s Common Agricultural Policy (see p 310), a
wide range of horticultural produce is subject to common quality standards.
The Government is keen to encourage the growth of exports related to
agriculture and their value is increasing in real terms; they amounted to £6,717
million in 1987, of which exports of food and drink accounted for £5,575
million, with the main markets being Western Europe, North America and the
Middle East. Exports include speciality products such as fresh salmon, Scotch
whisky, biscuits, jams and conserves, as well as beef and lamb carcasses and
cheese. Food from Britain is a national organisation which promotes the selling
of food and agricultural produce in the domestic and overseas markets. One
aspect of its export activities is covered by the British Food Export Council. The
Agricultural Engineers Association provides a similar service for companies
exporting agricultural and horticultural machinery. In 1987 Britain exported
£694 million of farm machinery.
One of the world’s largest agricultural events, the annual Royal International
Agricultural Show, held at Stoneleigh in Warwickshire, provides an opportunity
for overseas visitors to see the latest techniques and improvements in British
agriculture. A typical attendance for the four open days is 200,000, including
310
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
MARKETING
Co-operatives
ROLE OF THE
GOVERNMENT
Common
Agricultural
Policy
nearly 20,000 from overseas. Virtually every British agricultural machinery
manufacturer is represented at the show, which is also the most important
pedigree livestock event in the country. Other major agricultural displays
include the annual Royal Smithfield Show, held in London, which exhibits
agricultural machinery, livestock and carcasses, the Royal Highland Show, the
Royal Welsh Show, and the Royal Ulster Agricultural Show. There are also
several important regional shows.
Agricultural products are marketed by private traders, producers’ co-operatives
and marketing boards, the latter being producers’ organisations (each including
a minority of independent members appointed by agriculture ministers) with
certain statutory powers to regulate the marketing of milk, wool and potatoes.
For the most part the boards buy from producers or control contracts between
first buyers; the Potato Marketing Board, however, maintains only a broad
control over marketing conditions leaving producers free to deal individually
with buyers. For home-grown cereals, meat and livestock, apples and pears,
there are marketing organisations representing producer, distributor and
independent interests.
Food from Britain is responsible for improving the marketing of food and
agricultural products, both in the domestic market and abroad. It has
introduced a ‘Foodmark’ symbol under which producers are able to guarantee
the quality of fresh and lightly processed foods to the consumer.
Substantial investment—over £100 million in new fixed assets between 1977
and 1987—has been made by agricultural and horticultural co-operatives
concerned with marketing and storing products. A number of central co¬
operative grain stores have been established, and new vegetable groups have
been formed to meet the demand from retailers for a continuous supply of fresh,
quality produce; fruit marketing co-operatives are also expanding. Food from
Britain provides a full range of advisory services for co-operatives and the
Government assists their development with grants.
Four government departments have joint responsibility—the Ministry of Agri¬
culture, Fisheries and Food, the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for
Scotland, the Welsh Office and the Department of Agriculture for Northern
Ireland.
The aims of the European Community’s Common Agricultural Policy (CAP),
which accounts for about two-thirds of the Community’s budget, are to increase
agricultural productivity to ensure stable agricultural markets and a fair
standard of living for agricultural producers, to guarantee regular supplies of
food and to provide these supplies at a reasonable price to consumers.
The CAP seeks to achieve these objectives in a number of ways. For many
commodities minimum prices are set annually at which agencies of the member
states will purchase products and there are levies on imports to maintain
internal support prices. Intervention stocks can be disposed of within the
Community where this can be done without disrupting internal markets.
Exports are facilitated by the provision of export refunds to bridge any gap
between Community and world prices. In some cases, in particular in the beef
and sheep sectors, there are also direct payments to producers.
The support prices, as well as rates of levy, export refunds and other aids, are
set in European Currency Units and are converted into the currencies of the
member states at fixed rates of exchange—‘green rates’—which can be out of line
with the market rate of exchange between each currency and the European
Currency Unit. Monetary compensatory amounts, based on the percentage
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
311
Price
Guarantees,
Grants and
Subsidies
Smallholdings
and Crofts
Tenancy
Legislation
difference between the green and market rates of each currency, are applied to
prevent distortions in trade. They operate as import subsidies and export levies
tor countries whose currencies’ market rates are below the green rates, and as
import levies and export subsidies in the opposite case.
Agricultural production under the CAP has increased considerably in recent
years, partly in response to rapid technical progress and farming efficiency, but
also reflecting the high level of price support under the CAP. As consumption
remamed relatively stable, this has resulted in the emergence of surpluses.
The Government’s view is that supply and demand must be better balanced
and budgetary discipline improved. A number of measures have been taken in
recent years, the most significant of which is the agreement reached by the
Community in February 1988; under the agreement, expenditure will be subject
to binding budgetary discipline. The agreement also introduced (or extended)
stabilisers in all the main CAP sectors. These mostly involve increased use of
guarantee threshold arrangements under which full levels of CAP support are
linked to predetermined limits on production, more in line with actual need. If
guarantee thresholds are exceeded, support levels are reduced.
The Community's agricultural expenditure (£18,800 million in 1987) is
channelled through the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund.
The Fund s guarantee section finances market support arrangements, while the
guidance section provides funds for structural reform—for example, farm
modernisation and investment—and payments to assist certain farmers to
change to alternative enterprises.
Expenditure in Britain in 1987-88 on price guarantees, grants and subsidies
and on Common Agricultural Policy market regulations was estimated to be
£255 million and £1,481 million respectively. About £1,010 million was
reimbursed from the Community budget.
Potatoes and wool are not covered by the Common Agricultural Policy; potato
market support measures are operated through the Potato Marketing Board and
the Department of Agriculture for Northern Ireland, and a price stabilisation
fund for wool is administered by the British Wool Marketing Board.
Producers also receive support through certain capital and production grants,
some based on Community decisions. Grants are available to assist farmers and
horticulturists with farm improvement plans, and there is special financial help
for hill and upland farmers in the form of headage payments on cattle and sheep
(known as compensatory allowances). Community assistance may also be made
to help to improve facilities for the marketing and processing of agricultural
products and to provide a premium payment to specialised beef producers, while
launching aid is available to production and marketing groups in the
horticultural sector.
Local authorities provide some 6,100 statutory smallholdings in England and
950 in Wales. They make loans of up to 75 per cent of required working capital to
their tenants. Land settlement in Scotland has always been carried out by the
Government, which, while now seeking to dispose of holdings to sitting tenants,
still owns and maintains about 117,650 hectares (290,000 acres) of land
settlement estates, comprising some 1,550 crofts and holdings.
Within the crofting areas of Scotland (in Strathclyde, Highland, Western Isles,
Orkney and Shetland) much of the land is held by tenants known as crofters.
Crofting is administered by the Crofters Commission, and benefits from
government grants for land improvements and some other agricultural work.
The agricultural holdings legislation protects the interests and rights of
landlords and tenants, with provision for arbitration in the event of a dispute.
312
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Agriculture and
Protection of
the Countryside
Professional,
Scientific and
Technical
Services
Most agricultural tenants have the right to contest a notice to quit, which is
then ineffective unless the landlord obtains consent to its operation from an
independent body (in England and Wales, the Agricultural Land Tribunal and in
Scotland, the Scottish Land Court). On termination of tenancy, the tenant is
entitled to compensation in accordance with a special code. Practically all farms
in Northern Ireland are owner-occupied, but, under a practice known as
‘conacre’, occupiers not wishing to farm all their land let it annually to others.
About one-fifth of agricultural land is so let, and is used mainly for grazing.
Agriculture ministers have a general duty to seek to achieve a reasonable balance
between the needs of an efficient and stable agriculture industry and other
interests in the countryside, including the conservation of its natural beauty
and amenity and the promotion of its enjoyment by the public. In addition, they
are required to further conservation of the countryside in the administration of
farm capital grant schemes both in national parks and in sites of special
scientific interest designated by the Nature Conservancy Council.
The Government has designated 19 areas in Britain, which are of particular
importance for landscape, historic interest and wildlife, as ‘environmentally
sensitive areas’. The areas are diverse in character and include the Broads,
Pennine Dales and Shropshire Borders (in England), Breadalbane and the
Machair of the Uists and associated islands of the Western Isles (in Scotland),
the Lleyn Peninsula (in Wales) and the Mountains of Mourne (in Northern
Ireland). In these areas farmers are offered agreements under which they receive
payments for farming along traditional lines intended to conserve the special
character of the area. Throughout Britain the agricultural advisory services (see
below) advise farmers on, and actively promote, aspects of conservation such as
wildlife habitats, landscape features and farm buildings, and encourage the
industry to adopt high standards of pollution control.
In 1987 government plans to encourage alternative uses of farmland, increase
diversity on farms and in the rural economy generally, and enhance environ¬
mental protection were announced. Under the Farm Diversification Scheme, £3
million will be made available annually for capital grants and £ 1 million towards
the cost of feasibility studies and employing marketing personnel at the start of
a diversified business. The Farm Woodland Scheme provides grants to assist the
planting of 90 million trees on 36,000 hectares (88,960 acres) over three years
and offers more generous terms for broadleaf planting and incentives to plant on
more productive lowland areas. In addition, the European Community set-aside
scheme offers compensation to farmers willing to take at least 20 per cent of
their land carrying surplus arable crops out of production for a period of five
years. Set-aside land may be left fallow (provided the land is kept in good
agricultural condition), planted with trees or put to non-agricultural uses.
In England and Wales the Government’s Agricultural Development and Advisory
Service (ADAS), reorganised in 1986-87, provides a wide range of professional,
scientific, technical and veterinary services for agriculture and its ancillary
industries. Most types of advice and servicing are on a fee-paying basis,
although advice to farmers on conservation, rural diversification and animal
welfare is available free. Similar services are provided in Scotland by the
Department of Agriculture and Fisheries, the Scottish Agricultural Colleges and
a section of the State Veterinary Service. In Northern Ireland these services are
available from the Department of Agriculture’s advisory service.
Information and advice are given on business management, cropping,
horticulture, livestock, land management, design and product marketing, and
through analytical laboratory tests and special product services. These organisa¬
tions also advise the Government on the scientific, technical and business
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
313
CONTROL OF
DISEASES AND
PESTS
Animals
Plants
Pesticides
Veterinary
Medicinal
Products
AGRICULTURAL
AND FOOD
RESEARCH
implications of policy proposals and assist in implementing policies concerning
animal and plant health, disease and pest eradication, food hygiene, animal
welfare, land drainage and other capital grant schemes, and safeguarding
agricultural land in relation to other land uses.
ADAS carries out research and development work under commission from the
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, and, since 1986, will do work under
contract directly for others and for levy-funded bodies. The Service runs two
Central Agricultural Laboratories, 19 experimental husbandry farms and
horticulture stations, six regional laboratories with three sub-centres, and three
veterinary laboratories. A diagnostic service for the practising veterinary
surgeon is provided by 19 veterinary investigation centres.
Britain is free from many serious animal diseases. If they were to occur, diseases
such as foot-and-mouth disease and swine vesicular disease would be combated
y a slaughter policy applied to all infected animals and those exposed to
infection, and by control over animal movements during the outbreaks.
Significant progress has been made towards the eradication of Aujeszky’s
disease in pigs. Rigorous measures to eradicate warble fly and sheep scab have
resulted in the virtual elimination of the former and a continued decline in the
number of confirmed outbreaks of the latter. England and Wales were declared
free of brucellosis for all practical purposes in 1981, and Northern Ireland in
1982, following a similar declaration for Scotland in 1980.
Strict controls are exercised on the import of animals, poultry meat and meat
products so as to prevent the introduction of animal or poultry diseases. Special
measures apply to prevent the introduction of rabies, and dogs, cats and certain
other mammals are subject to import licence and six months' quarantine. There
are severe penalties for breaking the law. There have been no cases of rabies
outside quarantine in Britain since 1970.
Professional advice and action on the control of animal disease and the welfare
of farm livestock are the responsibility of the government veterinary services,
which have laboratory facilities and investigation centres performing specialist
research work and advising private practitioners responsible for treating
animals on the farm.
The agricultural departments are responsible for limiting the spread of plant
pests and diseases and for preventing the introduction of new ones. They also
issue the health certificates required by other countries to accompany plant
material exported from Britain. Certification schemes are operated to encourage
the development of healthy, vigorous and true-to-type planting stocks.
The supply and use of pesticides are controlled under the Food and Environment
Protection Act 1985 and the Control of Pesticides Regulations 1986 made under
it. All pesticides supplied for use in Britain must have been approved under
statutory arrangements for their safety, efficacy and, where appropriate,
humaneness in use.
The manufacture, sale and supply of veterinary medicinal products are
prohibited except under licence. Licences are issued by the agriculture
ministers, who are advised on safety, quality and efficacy by the Veterinary
Products Committee comprising independent experts.
The agriculture departments, the Agricultural and Food Research Council
(AFRC) and private industry share responsibility for research, which is carried
out in a network of research institutes, specialist laboratories and experimental
farms, and in university departments.
314
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
EDUCATION
AND
TRAINING
The total government-funded programme of research and development
in agriculture and food amounts to some £200 million a year. The work
of the AFRC and the agriculture departments is co-ordinated into national
programmes, primarily on the recommendations of the Priorities Board for Re¬
search and Development in Agriculture and Food, which advises on the research
needs of the industries and the allocation of available resources between and
within areas of research.
The AFRC, an autonomous body, receives funds from the science budget
through the Department of Education and Science and income from work
commissioned by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, by industry
and by other outside bodies. The Council supports research at its eight
institutes which specialise in animal health, animal physiology and genetics,
grassland and animal production, arable crops, horticulture, plant science, food
and engineering. The Council also funds a number of groups or departments in
universities and, through its research grants scheme, supports many projects in
universities, polytechnics and colleges. In addition to commissioning research
with the AFRC and other organisations, the Ministry carries out research and
development work in the laboratories, experimental husbandry farms and
horticulture stations of ADAS and in its food science laboratories. The five
Scottish Agricultural Research Institutes, funded by the Department of Agricul¬
ture and Fisheries for Scotland, cover areas of research complementary to those
of the AFRC institutes, while including work relevant to the soils, crops and
livestock of northern Britain. Development work in Scotland is carried out by
three agricultural colleges. Research in Northern Ireland is carried out by the
Department of Agriculture in association with the Queen's University of Belfast.
Research in crops and animal husbandry is carried out at the Agricultural
Research Institute of Northern Ireland and in agricultural science and food
technology at three agricultural colleges.
Agricultural research is also conducted or sponsored by private industry, in
particular by related industries such as agrochemicals and agricultural machin¬
ery. The Government's policy is to increase the contribution by the agriculture
industry as a whole towards the cost of research from which it benefits. The
main aim of agricultural research is to maintain an efficient and competitive
industry in Britain consistent with high standards of animal welfare and care
for the environment.
About 80 per cent of food research is financed by the food industry.
Government-funded research is directed primarily at aspects of consumer
protection such as diet, and to basic research supporting the food industry's
efforts to improve its competitiveness, for example by improving the look and
taste of food.
Recent research developments include a four-year investigation into the
prolificacy of the Chinese Meishan pig, which can rear 14 to 16 piglets in one
litter; an integrated ADAS—AFRC programme to ensure that the needs of the
horticultural industry will be efficiently and economically met; and new projects
on rhizomania, a serious blight of beet crops. A complete in vitro system for
culturing chick embryos is under trial. Investigation into the reported beneficial
effect of calcium intake derived from dairy products on hypertension is in hand.
Non-toxic chemicals that control insect behaviour are being studied to control
aphid-borne virus diseases in cereals. Other investigations into biological
control methods have led to the development of new microbial pesticides. Both
approaches are reducing reliance on chemical pesticides.
University and other degree and postgraduate courses provide training in the
scientific and technological aspects of agriculture and horticulture, the empha¬
sis being on science and economics. The agriculture departments give post-
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
315
Fish Caught
The Fishing
Fleet
graduate awards annually for subjects relating to food and agriculture and there
are degree and postgraduate courses in veterinary medicine. Science-based
sandwich courses, leading to a Business & Technician Education Council
(BTEC) Higher National Diploma and available at agricultural colleges, are
designed for students wishing to enter farming or horticulture with a good
knowledge of the managerial and technological aspects of the industiy.
In Great Britain the Agricultural Training Board runs the Agricultural and
Horticultural Training Scheme, for mature as well as young workers, which can
lead to the issue of craft certificates or to a full apprenticeship. In Northern
Ireland training is provided by the Department of Agriculture.
Fisheries
Britain is one of Europe’s most important fishing nations. The fishing industry
provides about 66 per cent of British fish supplies, and is an important source of
employment and income in a number of ports. Cod, haddock, whiting, herring,
plaice and sole are found in the North Sea off the east coasts of Scotland and
England; mackerel, together with hake and other demersal fish, off the west
coast of Scotland; sole, plhice, cod and whiting in the Irish Sea; and mackerel,
sole and plaice off the south-west coast of England. Nephrops, crabs, lobsters
and other shellfish are found in the inshore waters all around the coast. In 1987
there were 17,000 fishermen in regular employment and nearly 5,400 occa¬
sionally employed. The Government aims to encourage the development of a
viable, efficient and market-orientated fisheries industry within the framework
of the European Community’s common fisheries policy. The main concerns of
government fisheries policy are conservation and exploitation of sea fish stocks,
financial support for fleet modernisation and other measures, improvement of
the industry’s technical and economic performance, development of a viable fish
farming industry and protection of the aquatic environment.
In 1987 demersal fish (caught on or near the bottom of the sea) accounted for
about 48 per cent by weight of total British landings, pelagic fish (caught near
the surface) for 39 per cent and shellfish for 13 per cent. Landings of all types of
fish (excluding salmon and trout) by British fishing vessels totalled 783,000
tonnes. Cod and haddock represented 25 and 23 per cent respectively of the total
value of demersal and pelagic fish landed, while sole (8 per cent), whiting (7 per
cent), plaice (7 per cent) and mackerel (6 per cent) were the other most
important sources of earnings to the industry.
Imports of fresh, frozen, cured and canned fish and shellfish in 1987 totalled
419,000 tonnes, those of fish meal 249,000 tonnes and those of fish oils
184,000 tonnes. Exports and re-exports of fish and fish products amounted to
406,000 tonnes. The European Community has banned the import of primary
whale products in order to help to conserve whale populations.
In 1987 the British fishing fleet consisted of some 8,100 inshore vessels under
24-4 m (80 ft) in length and 250 deep-sea vessels longer than 24-4 m. Among
the main ports from which the fishing fleet operates are Aberdeen, Peterhead,
Fraserburgh (Grampian), Lerwick (Shetland), Kinlochbervie, Ullapool (High¬
land), North Shields (Tyne and Wear), Grimsby (Humberside), Lowestoft
(Suffolk), Brixham (Devon), and Newlyn (Cornwall). The deep-sea fleet has been
reduced in number as fishing opportunities and the profitability of operations
in distant waters have declined.
Fish Farming
Fish farming has maintained considerable growth in recent years, contributing
in particular to social and economic development on the west coast and islands
316
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Administration
Fishery Limits
Common
Fisheries Policy
of Scotland. Total Scottish fish farm production in 1987 was valued at some £65
million, including 15,000 tonnes each of trout and salmon. The Government
has provided £25 million in aid to the industry through the Highlands and
Islands Development Board. The most rapid development has been in salmon,
but there is also a significant growth in shellfish, based originally on mussel
production, but now developing in other spheres, including oysters, clams and
scallops. Rainbow trout production has continued to increase in England and
Wales. The turnover of aquaculture in Britain is estimated at £100 million a
year.
It is planned to increase production of shellfish, eels and some marine fish,
and to rear juvenile sea bass, sea bream, turbot and warm-water prawns for
continued growth in the Mediterranean and elsewhere overseas.
The fisheries departments are responsible for the administration of legislation
concerning the fishing industry and for fisheries research. The safety and
welfare of crews of fishing vessels and other matters common to shipping
generally are provided for under legislation administered by the Department of
Transport.
The Sea Fish Industry Authority provides financial aid for the purchase of new
fishing vessels, vessel improvements, the provision and improvement of
processing plants, cold stores and ice plants, and towards the formation of
fishermen’s co-operatives. Other functions include research and development,
training, dissemination of information, publicity and promotion.
Community countries, and certain non-Community countries having fishery
agreements with the Community, may fish up to Britain's 12-mile limit.
Designated countries may also fish in specified areas of Britain’s 6- to 12-mile
zone. No foreign vessels may fish within Britain’s 6-mile limit.
With the extension of fishery limits to 200 miles in the mid-1970s, new
arrangements became necessary to control Community fishing in the greatly
extended area. Britain has a particularly strong interest in such control, since a
sizeable proportion of the total catch within the 200-mile limits of member
states is taken in British waters, while the loss of fishing opportunities in
distant waters (such as Iceland) has reduced the British industry’s total catch
more than that of other Community states.
In 1983 member states reached an agreement on a common fisheries policy
providing for new arrangements on access to coastal waters applicable for a
period of at least 20 years. Other features included a revised marketing regime,
regulations covering technical conservation measures such as mesh sizes for
nets and temporary closure of fisheries, the allocation of catch quotas among
member states within each year’s total allowable catch, effective enforcement of
the rules and financial aid to promote the adaptation and development of the
Community fishing fleet and the fish farming industry.
In 1986 Britain, particularly during its tenure of the Presidency of the
European Community, was influential in promoting decisions which will
strengthen technical measures to conserve fish stocks in Community waters;
introduce more effective monitoring of member states’ compliance with
Community fishing policy; implement a ten-year structural policy for the
Community’s fishing industry, involving a commitment of about £500 million
over the first five years; and adopt reciprocal fisheries agreements with
non-Community countries while consolidating existing ones.
Fishery relations between the European Community and other countries are
governed by long-term framework agreements including reciprocal agreements
with Norway, the Faroe Islands and Sweden and non-reciprocal agreements with
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
317
Fisheries
Research
Freshwater
Fisheries
The Forestry
Commission and
Forestry Policy
several other countries. Annual Community quotas have also been established
in international waters in the north-west Atlantic and around Svalbard.
The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has a research directorate
comprising laboratories dealing with marine and freshwater fisheries, shellfish
marine pollution, fish farming and diseases. There are two seagoing research
vessels. In Scotland the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland
provides a similar range of research and has three seagoing vessels. Work on the
utilisation of fish is undertaken by a research station at Torry, Aberdeen
Department of Agriculture laboratories in Northern Ireland monitor marine and
freshwater fisheries.
The most valuable freshwater fish are salmon and sea-trout. Sea fishing for
salmon is prohibited in waters outside a limit of six miles from the coasts of the
British Isles. In Scotland salmon fishing is a private right. In England and Wales
water authority licences are required for coastal and estuary netting. In
Northern Ireland over 60 public angling waters provide game and coarse fishing
and salmon rivers are accessible to Department of Agriculture permit holders.
Forestry
Woodland covers an estimated 2-27 million hectares (5-61 million acres) in Great
Britain: about 7-3 per cent of England, 14-6 per cent of Scotland and 11-9 per
cent of Wales. The Government supports the continued expansion of forestry in
order to reduce dependence on imports of timber and to provide employment in
forestry and related industries.
The area of productive forest in Great Britain is 21 million hectares (5-2
million acres), 43 per cent of which is managed by the Forestry Commission and
the rest by private owners. The rate of new planting in 1986-87 was 5,342
hectares (13,200 acres) by the Commission and some 19,100 hectares (47,200
acres) by private woodland owners mainly in Scotland. Most planting is of
conifers in upland areas though the planting of broadleaved trees is encouraged
on suitable sites. An increasing proportion of new planting is being done by
private owners. During 1986-87 the Commission grant-aided 1,348 hectares
(3,330 acres) of new broadleaved planting under its various schemes. In 1988
the Commission closed its existing schemes and introduced the Woodland
Grant Scheme. Grants for broadleaved planting, including planting as a
component of mixed woodland, were increased to three to four times those
offered for conifers—depending on the area covered.
Total employment in state and private forests in Great Britain was estimated
at about 30,300 in 1986—87, with a further 9,140 people engaged in processing
home-grown timber.
British woodlands meet only 12-1 per cent of the nation’s consumption of
wood and wood products. At present only just over half of the Commission’s
woodlands are in production. Home timber production, however, is expected to
double over the next 20 years.
The Forestry Commission is the national forestry authority in Great Britain. The
Commissioners give advice on forestry matters and are responsible to the
Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and the Secretaries of State for
Scotland and Wales. In pursuing timber production, forestry policy also takes
into account amenity, environmental and employment criteria, and the
Commission’s activities include wildlife conservation, the landscaping of
plantations and the provision of facilities for recreation. Felling licences are
granted to private owners on condition that replanting into attractive and more
318
Replanting
after Storm
Damage
Forestry
Research
Forestry in
Northern
Ireland
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
varied landscapes, with a mixture of types and ages of trees, is carried out. The
Commission has also encouraged the establishment of new timber-using
industries. Forestry research is carried out by the Commission at two research
stations (see below). Aid is also given for research work in universities and other
institutions, including the Commonwealth Forestry Institute in Oxford. To
rationalise its holdings and achieve greater efficiency and commercial effective¬
ness, the Commission has reduced its land and plantations by selling 60,000
hectares (148,000 acres) since 1981. The Commission is financed partly by the
Government and partly by receipts from sales of timber and other produce and
from rents.
A substantial number of private woods are in ownerships of under 100
hectares (250 acres) in extent.
The great storm which affected southern England in October 1987 caused
widespread destruction to trees: an estimated 70 per cent of losses were in
private woodlands; 25 per cent in woodlands owned by the Forestry Commis¬
sion; and 5 per cent in hedgerows, parks and gardens. In West Sussex, East
Sussex, Suffolk and Kent, 20 per cent of all timber was estimated to have been
brought down. The Government has contributed £6 million towards replanting
and additional grants to agencies to assist tree replacement and renewal of
hedges, shelter belts and windbreaks.
The Forestry Commission maintains two principal research stations, at Alice
Holt Lodge near Farnham (Surrey) and at Bush Estate near Edinburgh, for basic
and applied research into all aspects of forestry.
The Forestry Commission conducts an annual forest health survey which
monitors the effects of air pollution and other stress factors on a growing range
of broadleaves and conifers. It has also increased research into wildlife
conservation and is evaluating agroforestry systems combining wide-spaced
conifers and broadleaves with sheep grazing.
The Department of Agriculture may acquire land for afforestation and give
financial and technical assistance for private planting. The state forest area has
grown steadily since 1945. By 1988, 60,028 hectares (148,332 acres) of
plantable land had been acquired, of which 58,398 hectares (144,304 acres)
were planted. There were 14,150 hectares (34,965 acres) of privately owned
forest. Some 440 professional and industrial staff work in state forests.
15
ROADS
Developments
Transport and
Communications
Major improvements in the nation's infrastructure have resulted from the
construction of a network of motorways, the extension of fast inter-city rail
services (such as those operated by high-speed trains), and expansion schemes
at many airports. Further improvements are in progress and the Channel
Tunnel now being built will have a significant impact on travel between Britain
and the continent oi Europe when it starts operation in 1993.
Transport policy rests on the fundamental aims of promoting economic
growth and higher national prosperity, and ensuring a reasonable level of
personal mobility, while improving safety, minimising damage to the environ¬
ment and using energy economically. Britain is taking an active part in the
development of a common transport policy by the European Community, this
being seen as essential for the application of the Treaty of Rome’s competition
rules and the completion of the Community’s internal market by 1992.
Measures to increase competition have been taken in a number of sectors, such
as the bus industry and airline services, with the aim of ensuring value for
money in transport services. These include privatisation of the Government's
shareholdings in a number of publicly owned transport undertakings including
road haulage, airline services, airports and most of its interest in bus
operations.
Inland Transport
Passenger and freight traffic is carried mainly by road. At the end of 1987 there
were 22-2 million vehicles licensed for use on the roads of Great Britain, of
which 19-2 million were private cars and light goods vehicles, 0-6 million other
goods vehicles, 1 million motor cycles, scooters and mopeds, and 129,000 public
transport vehicles (including taxis). Private ownership of cars has been growing
for many years and the car is the most popular form of transport, with car and
taxi travel accounting for some 82 per cent of passenger mileage within Great
Britain. Buses and coaches account for about 8 per cent of passenger mileage,
rail for 7 per cent and air less than 1 per cent. Road haulage has a dominant
position in the movement of inland freight, accounting for about 80 per cent of
tonnage carried and for nearly three-fifths of tonne-km. Railways, inland
waterways, coastal shipping and pipelines are important in carrying certain
types of freight, particularly bulk goods.
Motor vehicle traffic in Great Britain is continuing to grow, having risen by 5 per
cent in 1987 to some 316,800 million vehicle-km. In 1987 the road network in
Britain totalled some 376,100 km (233,700 miles), of which 2,990 km (1,860
miles) were trunk motorways (see Table 36). Although motorways and trunk
roads account for 4 per cent of road mileage, they carry 33 per cent of road traffic
including nearly 60 per cent of heavy goods vehicle traffic, and traffic on these
roads has been growing at a higher rate than on other roads.
New and improved roads have resulted in much shorter travelling times,
particularly for long-distance journeys and those between cities, and have
320
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Administration
Table 36: Road Length (as at April 1987)
km
Trunk roads
Public (including
roads motorways)
Trunk
motorways3
England
Scotland
Wales
Northern Ireland
268,456
51,125
32,745
23,783
10,469
3,135
1,736
594
2,540
220
120
112
Britain
376,109
15,934
2,992
Sources: Department of Transport, Northern Ireland Department of the Environment, Scottish Development
Department and Welsh Office.
a In addition, there were 77 km (48 miles) of local authority motorway in England and 24 km (15 miles) in
Scotland. In April 1988, 69 km (43 miles) of trunk motorway were under construction in England.
brought considerable benefits to industry, commerce and road haulage opera¬
tors, and increased personal mobility. The Government’s programme to improve
motorways and other trunk roads (which form a basic network linking major
centres of population, industrial areas and ports) is intended to assist economic
growth by reducing transport costs, removing through traffic (especially lorries)
from unsuitable roads in towns and villages, and enhancing road safety.
There are some 360 schemes in the motorway and trunk road programme in
England, worth some £5,000 million. Bypasses and relief roads account for
nearly 45 per cent of the programme, which also includes projects intended to
increase the traffic capacity of major through routes and to improve junctions
on heavily used roads. Of the 14 schemes added since April 1987, seven formed
part of the Government's Inner Cities Initiative announced in March 1988. In
addition, the Department of Transport is supporting 340 major local authority
road schemes, the majority of which are bypasses. Work on a privately financed
project costing £86 million to provide a new bridge across the Thames between
Dartford and Thurrock began in August 1988 and should be completed by 1991.
In Wales the priorities are improvements to the coast road in north Wales
(including the construction under the Conwy estuary of the first immersed tube
road tunnel to be built in Britain) and the upgrading of roads which are
important for industrial redevelopment. A second crossing of the Severn is
planned by the mid-1990s.
The programme in Scotland includes planned extensions to the M74, M8 and
M80 motorways, the improvement of strategic routes beyond central Scotland to
areas such as the north east and some of the west-coast routes, and the
construction of more bypasses.
In Northern Ireland the emphasis is on improving arterial routes, construct¬
ing more bypasses, and improving roads in the Belfast area, including the
construction of a new cross-harbour link planned for the mid-1990s.
Responsibility for trunk road motorways and other trunk roads in Great Britain
rests in England with the Secretary of State for Transport, in Scotland with the
Secretary of State for Scotland and in Wales with the Secretary of State for Wales.
The costs of construction, improvement and maintenance are paid for by central
government. The highway authorities for non-trunk roads in England are the
county councils, the metropolitan district councils, the London borough
councils and the Common Council of the City of London. In Wales the
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
321
Road Safety
authorities are the county councils, and in Scotland the regional or islands
councils. In Northern Ireland the Northern Ireland Department of the Environ-
public'roads^01181516 ^ ^ COnstruction’ improvement and maintenance of
Research into all aspects of road construction, traffic engineering and
safety, and into problems associated with transport, is carried out by the
ransport and Road Research Laboratoiy, the research arm of the Department
^ Britain haS °ne °f the highest densities of road traffic in the
world, it has a good record on road safety, with one of the lowest road accident
death rates in the European Community. In 1987, 5,100 people were killed on
oan nnnS ,OWeSt number since 1954), about 63,600 seriously injured and
240,0°0 shghtly injured. Following a major review of road safety policy
completed in 1987, the Government is seeking to reduce road casualties by
one ir y t e end of the century. To achieve this, resources are to be
concentrated initially on measures which are demonstrably cost-effective in
erms of casualty reduction, with priority being given to reducing casualties
among vulnerable road-users (pedestrians, cyclists and motor cyclists), particu¬
larly m urban areas, where some 70 per cent of road accidents occur. The other
principal areas for achieving lower casualties are improvements in highway
design and measures to combat drinking and driving. Road safety research has
een expcinded by the creation of a behavioural studies unit at the Transport
and Road Research Laboratoiy. The report of an independent review of road
traffic iaw was published in April 1988 and its wide range of recommendations-
intended to make the law simpler, more effective and more acceptable—is being
considered by the Government.
A number of factors, such as developments in vehicle safety standards and
improvements in infrastructure (including motorways, bypasses and pedes-
trianisation of city centres), have contributed to the long-term decline in
casualty rates. The most significant recent reduction in casualties has come
from the compulsoiy wearing of seat belts for front-seat passengers of cars and
light vans. This reduction has been estimated at a minimum of 200 deaths and
7,000 serious injuries a year. Regulations now require rear seat belts or child
restraints to be fitted to new cars. The standard of conduct for road users is set
out in the Highway Code.
Comprehensive regulations govern the design of vehicles, their use on the
roads, and the maintenance and testing of their mechanical condition. Under a
national type approval’ scheme in Great Britain, all new cars must be of a type
that has been certified as meeting the required standards, and there is a similar
scheme for new goods vehicles. Private cars and light vans which are three or
more years old must be tested annually at private garages authorised as test
stations. (In Northern Ireland private cars five or more years old are tested at
official vehicle inspection centres.) Heavy goods vehicles are subject to annual
tests carried out at special testing stations.
Minimum ages are laid down for driving: 16 for riders of mopeds and disabled
drivers of specially adapted vehicles; 17 for drivers of cars and other passenger
vehicles with nine or fewer seats (including that of the driver), motor cycles and
goods vehicles not over 3-5 tonnes gross laden weight; 18 for goods vehicles over
3-5 but not over 7-5 tonnes; and 21 for passenger vehicles with over nine seats
and goods vehicles over 7-5 tonnes. All drivers of motor vehicles, except new
residents holding certain non-British licences, are required to pass the driving
test before being granted a full licence to drive. Provisional licence holders must
display L plates on their vehicle. Those learning to drive a car must be
accompanied while driving by a qualified driver, while learner motor cyclists are
322
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Traffic in
Towns
ROAD
HAULAGE
restricted to riding machines up to 125 cc with a limited power output. There
are national speed limits of 60 mph (97 km/h) on single carriageway roads and
70 mph (113 km/h) on dual carriageway roads (including motorways), unless a
lower limit is indicated. In built-up areas there is a general limit of 30 mph
(48 km/h).
Under the Transport Act 1981, breath testing has become the main means of
determining a driver's alcohol level; the statutory limit of breath alcohol
concentration for drivers is 35 microgrammes of alcohol in 100 millilitres of
breath.
The Government’s plans to make motor cycling safer by improving training
and testing arrangements were issued in February 1988. Measures proposed
include the introduction of a compulsory one-day training course for all new
riders of motor cycles and mopeds, with successful completion being a
requirement before a provisional licence is issued.
Traffic management schemes have been introduced in most urban areas to
minimise congestion, create a better environment and improve road safety. They
may include computerised traffic control systems, one-way systems, bus priority
measures, parking controls and pedestrian and cyclist facilities. Many towns
have shopping precincts which are specially designed for pedestrians and from
which motor vehicles are excluded for all or part of the day. In most town centres
on-street parking is controlled and waiting limits apply. City centres often have
zones where payment is required for on-street parking. In parts of central
London wheel clamps are used to immobilise illegally parked vehicles.
Urban traffic control systems, with traffic signals controlled by a central
computer, are in operation in many urban areas in Britain. Systems developed
by the Department of Transport and British firms have achieved international
repute and are the most commonly used in the world. A recent enhancement of
these systems, which continuously measures and responds to the flow of traffic,
is being introduced into the majority of urban traffic control schemes.
Road haulage traffic by heavy goods vehicles amounted to 108,585 million
tonne-km in 1987. There has been a move towards larger and more efficient
vehicles carrying heavier loads—about 76 per cent of the traffic, in terms of
tonne-km, is carried in vehicles of over 25 tonnes gross laden weight. Much of
the traffic is moved over short distances, with 76 per cent of the tonnage being
carried on hauls of 100 km (62 miles) or less, although the growth in road
haulage has been concentrated on long-distance traffic. Public haulage (private
road hauliers carrying other firms' goods) accounts for 71 per cent of freight
carried in Great Britain in terms of tonne-km.
The Government has introduced a number of measures to alleviate the
environmental problems caused by lorries. Safeguards on the design of lorries
include restrictions on their dimensions, while measures have been taken to
improve the enforcement of lorry weights and safety. More bypasses are being
built to keep lorries away from residential areas. Work has virtually been
completed on a collaborative programme, involving vehicle and engine manufac¬
turers, to reduce the noise from heavy lorries to less than half the 1981 level and
produce a quiet heavy vehicle for the 1990s. To encourage the use of railways
and inland waterways for the carriage of freight, grants of up to 60 per cent are
available towards the cost of construction or modernisation of privately owned
facilities where there are significant environmental benefits from the removal of
heavy goods vehicle traffic from the roads.
Structure of
the Industry
Road haulage is predominantly an industry of small, privately owned
businesses. Many of the 130,000 holders of an operator’s licence in 1987 had
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
323
Licensing and
Other Controls
International
Road Haulage
PASSENGER
SERVICES
Structure
only one vehicle and the average size of a vehicle fleet is only about three. The
iggest operators in Great Britain are Transport Development Group, the
National Freight Consortium, United Transport International and P and O
European Transport Systems.
ose operating goods vehicles over 3-5 tonnes gross weight (with certain
special exemptions) require an operator’s licence. Licences are divided into
restricted hcences for firms carrying their own goods and standard licences,
ubdivided into national only’ and ‘international’, for hauliers operating for hire
or re war (In Northern Ireland operators carrying their own goods do not
require a licence.) Proof of professional competence, financial standing and good
repute is needed to obtain a standard licence. Regulations lay down limits on the
hours worked by drivers of goods vehicles and minimum rest periods,
ac ographs (which automatically record speed and distance covered, driving
ime and stopping periods) must be fitted and used in most goods vehicles over
3-5 tonnes gross weight in Great Britain.
nternational road haulage has grown rapidly and about 28 million tonnes a year
are carried in road vehicles to and from the continent of Europe and the Irish
Republic. Over 1 million road goods vehicles were conveyed by feriy to the
continent in 1987, of which nearly half were unaccompanied trailers. The
average length of haul for British registered vehicles is some 1,100 km (680
miles) in each direction, compared with 75 km (47 miles) for internal road
aulage. International road haulage is governed mainly by bilateral agreements
w ich are in force with 27 other countries. Many place no restriction on the
number of British lorries entering the country concerned, although some
agreements only allow an annual quota. The European Community (which also
has a quota of permits allowing haulage anywhere within the Community) has
now agreed to full liberalisation of international road haulage within the
Community, and to its implementation by 1992.
There has been a long-term decline in the use of local bus services, mainly
because of the growth in ownership of private cars. In 1986-87 buses or coaches
carried some 5,300 million passengers on local services in Great Britain, 22 per
cent fewer than in 1977. However, the Transport Act 1985 contains a number of
measures which are stimulating competition in local bus services and increas¬
ing private sector participation in the industry.
These measures follow the reforms enacted in the Transport Act 1980, which
removed restrictions on operating long-distance express coach services and
excursions, allowing free competition between operators. This had a noticeable
effect on long-distance express coach services, bringing about reductions in
fares, the provision of more services and an increase of 40 per cent in the
number of passengers carried.
Major changes in the structure of the passenger transport industry are being
implemented as a result of the Transport Act 1985. Privatisation of the National
Bus Company (which was the largest single bus and coach operator in Britain,
operating through some 70 subsidiaries in England and Wales) was completed
in April 1988. Each subsidiary was sold separately, with a preference for a
buy-out by the local management or employees. Legislation is planned to
privatise the Scottish Bus Group (the largest operator of bus services in
Scotland); it operates the main bus services outside the major cities and has
over 3,000 buses.
The 1985 Act also contains measures to encourage competition in services
formerly run directly by municipal authorities and by passenger transport
324
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Deregulation of
Bus Services
Taxis
executives in Greater Manchester, Merseyside, South Yorkshire, Tyne and Wear,
West Midlands and West Yorkshire in England and in Strathclyde in Scotland.
Passenger transport executives and local authorities which ran municipal bus
undertakings have set up public transport companies, operating under the
Companies Acts, to which their bus undertakings have been transferred.
London Regional Transport (LRT) is a nationalised industry, established
under the London Regional Transport Act 1984, with its board members
appointed by the Secretary of State for Transport. Within LRT the main wholly
owned operating subsidiaries are London Underground Ltd, London Buses Ltd
and Docklands Light Railway Ltd. It is intended to restructure London Buses to
form small local companies during 1989. Financial support is provided by
central government with a contribution from London’s ratepayers. LRT is
required to involve the private sector in the provision of services where this is
more efficient, and has been set targets for reductions in operating costs and
revenue support.
In Northern Ireland almost all road passenger services are provided by
subsidiaries of the publicly owned Northern Ireland Transport Holding Com¬
pany. Citybus Ltd operates services in the city of Belfast and Ulsterbus Ltd
operates most of the services in the rest of Northern Ireland. These companies
have some 300 and 965 vehicles respectively.
As well as the major bus operators, there are also a large number of small
privately owned undertakings, often operating fewer than five vehicles.
Although double-deck buses are the main type of vehicle used for urban road
passenger transport in Britain, with some 24,500 in operation, there has been a
substantial increase in the use of minibuses in recent years. Nearly 400 areas
are served by a total of some 5,200 minibuses. In addition, there are some
40,000 other single-deck buses and coaches. Blackpool and Llandudno have
Britain's only remaining tramway systems.
Local bus services in Great Britain (except in London) were deregulated in 1986
by the Transport Act 1985. Bus operators are now able to run services wherever
they see a commercial opportunity, and local authorities can subsidise the
provision of additional socially necessary services after competitive tendering.
All services, whether commercial or subsidised, have to be registered with the
appropriate traffic commissioner (one for each of the nine traffic areas of Great
Britain) six weeks before the commencement of the service. Similar notice is
required when a service is varied or cancelled.
Two grants were introduced by the 1985 Act to encourage services in rural
areas: a rural innovation grant, administered in England by the Development
Commission and in Scotland and Wales by the appropriate Secretary of State;
and a transitional grant, payable on a sliding scale for four years to bus
operators.
There are about 45,000 licensed taxis in Great Britain, mainly in urban areas:
London has some 15,000. In London and a number of other cities taxis must be
purpose-built to conform to very strict requirements and drivers must have
passed a test of their knowledge of the area. Hire cars with drivers may be
booked only through the operator and not hired on the street; in most areas
outside London hire cars are licensed.
The Transport Act 1985 provides for new arrangements for the operation of
taxis and hire cars, with the intention of increasing their role in public
transport. Restrictions by local authorities on granting taxi licences have been
relaxed so that a licence can be refused only if a local authority is satisfied that
there is no unfulfilled demand for taxis in its area. Taxi operators are able to run
regular local services and can tender in competition with bus operators for
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
325
RAILWAYS
Operations
Passenger
Services
services subsidised by local authorities. In addition, they may apply for a
restricted bus operator's licence, allowing them to run one or two minibuses
without having to obtain a full bus operator’s licence.
Railways were pioneered in Britain, and the Stockton and Darlington Railway,
opened in 1825, was the first passenger public railway in the world to be worked
by steam power. Under the Transport Act 1947 the four large railway companies
m Great Britain were brought under public ownership, and in 1962 the British
Railways Board was set up to manage railway affairs and subsidiaiy activities. In
^Ireland the Northern Ireland Railways Company Ltd, a subsidiaiy of
e Northern Ireland Transport Holding Company, operates the railway service
on some 320 km (200 miles) of track.
!n I987 88 the Board's turnover, including financial support and income from
other activities but excluding internal transactions, was £3,384 million, of
which £1,604 million was derived from rail passenger services and £555 million
from rail freight services. British Rail received £804 million in grants towards its
operations as compensation for the public service obligation to operate parts of
the rail passenger system which would not otherwise cover their costs. The
grant payable to British Rail has been gradually reduced since 1983 New
objectives announced by the Secretary of State for Transport in 1986 involved
targets for the quality of service provided and for a reduction in government
support for passenger services, and commercial targets for the non-subsidised
parts of the railway.
At the end of March 1988 the Board employed some 154,700 people. Statistics
of British Rail's operations are given in Table 37.
The passenger network (see map, p 326) comprises a fast inter-city network,
linking the main centres of Great Britain; local stopping services; and commuter
services in and around the large conurbations, especially London and south-east
England. British Rail runs over 700 Intercity expresses each weekday, serving
about 90 business and leisure centres. Journey times on inter-city routes have
been reduced substantially as more track has been made suitable for high-speed
operations and as a result of faster trains, notably the Intercity 125s, operated
by diesel trains, travelling at maximum sustained speeds of 125 mph (201
km/h). Intercity 125 trains provide over half of Intercity train mileage and are
the world’s fastest diesel trains. They operate from London to the west of
England and south Wales; to the East Midlands; to Yorkshire, north-east
England and eastern Scotland; and on cross-country services through the West
Midlands, linking south-west England or south Wales with north-west England
or north-east England and Edinburgh.
About 25 per cent of route-mileage is electrified including British Rail’s
busiest InterCity route, linking London, the West Midlands, the North West and
Glasgow. A number of electrification schemes are in progress. The most
significant is a scheme costing £306 million at 1984 prices to electrify the
east-coast main line between London and Edinburgh (including the line from
Doncaster to Leeds), involving electrification of some 636 km (395 miles).
Commuter services operated by electric trains are already in operation between
King’s Cross and Peterborough, and electric services from King’s Cross to
Doncaster and Leeds will start in October 1988. Electric services will be
extended to Newcastle upon Tyne and Edinburgh by 1991.
British Rail is undertaking substantial investment in replacing the fleet of
diesel multiple-unit trains by two new types of vehicle with greater reliability and
low maintenance costs: the lightweight ‘Pacer’ and the medium-weight ‘Sprin¬
ter’ diesel multiple units. Many of the older electric multiple units used for
Inverness
srdeen
Dundee
Edinburgh
Berwick
Londonderry
.Carlisle
Middlesbrough
•arlington
(Scarborough
iHarrogate
seeds pr
Blackpool
Bradfon
jGrimsby
Liverpool1
Holyhead
Shrewsl
Ipswich
Harwich
Margate
^•Dover
Folkestone
Cardiff j
Bristol
Taunton.
lamptoi
Eastbourne
Brighton
ExeterC^ V
Newton AbbotWeymouth
Bournemouth
Portsmouth
Main Railway Passenger Routes
Orkney
Islands
Shetland
Islands
0 20 40 60 80100120 km
I—I—I I I I I
i i i i i
0 20 40 60 80 miles
Electrified Intercity
and Express routes
Other Intercity
and Express routes
Other routes
Newcastle upon Tyne
Milford Haven
PSKssPl
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
327
Freight
Other
Activities
Table 37: Railway Operations
1980
Passenger journeys (million) 760
Passenger-km (million) 30,300
Freight train traffic (million tonnes) 153
Trainload and wagonload traffic
(million net tonne-km) 17,640
Assets (at end of period):
Locomotives 3,379
High Speed Train power units 142
Other coaching vehicles 21,074
Freight vehicles3 119,507
Passenger stations 2,366
Freight depots 409
Route open for traffic (km) 17,645
1983 1986-87 1987-88
695
29,531
145
17,144
2,850
197
16.963
54,510
2,363
263
16.964
689
31,105
138
16,565
2,441
197
15,336
33,649
2,405
125
16,670
727
33,141
145
17,466
2,270
197
14,648
28,884
2,426
115
16,633
Source: British Railways Board.
In addition a number oi privately owned wagons and locomotives are operated on the railway network for
aUhTend of March 1988 SOme 14,000 wag°ns and four locomotives were authorised for working on the network
commuting services in London and south-east England are being replaced by
new, more efficient rolling stock. British Rail plans to invest about £1,000
million in Network South East in the five years from 1988-89 including the
development of a new rail link between London and Stansted airport. In May
1988 British Rail started a new Thameslink' service, using a reopened tunnel in
central London to allow through running of trains between north and south of
the Thames.
The most important freight commodities handled are coal, coke, iron and steel,
building materials and petroleum. Over 90 per cent of rail freight traffic is of
bulk commodities, most of it in trainloads.
Greater efficiency is being obtained with the introduction of new types of
wagon with larger capacities and capable of higher speeds, and of more powerful
locomotives. A new locomotive, due to enter service in 1989, will be able to haul
loads of up to 4,000 tonnes at speeds of up to 100 km/h (60 mph). A network of
some 130 daily scheduled ‘Speedlink’ high-speed freight services has been
established between the major industrial centres. Other developments, such as
the concentration of freight traffic at fewer but better-equipped terminals and a
computer-based total operations processing system, which monitors all con¬
signments and freight train and wagon movements in Great Britain, have
contributed to a significant increase in productivity and competitiveness.
In order to concentrate its resources on running the main railway business,
British Rail has sold a number of its subsidiaiy businesses and plans to sell its
engineering subsidiary, British Rail Engineering Ltd, later in 1988 and its
station catering business, Travellers Fare Ltd (which is responsible for 300
catering units at 134 stations). It is also planning to seek offers for the Vale of
Rheidol narrow-gauge steam railway, the last steam railway owned by British
Rail and a tourist attraction in mid-Wales.
Since 1980 British Rail has sold property worth about £700 million and has
attracted substantial private sector funds for commercial schemes in connection
with railway and station improvements. British Rail has adopted a policy of
328
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Other Urban
Railways
Private
Railways
Channel
Tunnel
competitive tendering for railway equipment and rolling stock. It is also
reviewing the costs of infrastructure (particularly civil engineering) and has
identified some facilities for possible privatisation.
British Rail’s other subsidiary businesses are British Rail Maintenance Ltd,
which is responsible for maintenance and light repair of British Rail stock;
Freightliners, responsible for container services; and Transmark, which pro¬
vides consultancy services overseas on railway and associated operations.
Some 798 million passenger journeys were made on London Underground trains
in 1987—88. Trains operate on 408 km (254 miles) of railway, of which about
167 km (104 miles) are underground, and serve 273 stations, with some 473
trains operating in the peak periods. Substantial investment is in progress,
particularly on station modernisation and ticketing facilities. The Docklands
Light Railway, a £77 million project for a 12-km (7-5-mile) route with 16
stations, financed by London Regional Transport and the London Docklands
Development Corporation, began operating in 1987. Construction of a £150
million westward extension to the City of London began in March 1988, and
there are also plans for an eastward extension.
Other public rail services in Great Britain are the Glasgow Underground and
the Tyne and Wear Metro, a 56-km (35-mile) light rapid transit system with over
40 stations. New light rapid transit systems are under consideration in a
number of cities including Birmingham and Manchester.
There are over 70 small privately owned passenger-carrying railways in Great
Britain, mostly operated on a voluntary basis and providing limited services for
tourists and railway enthusiasts. The main aim of most of these railways, such
as the Severn Valley Railway, is the preservation of steam traction.
Construction work has begun on the Channel Tunnel project, involving the
provision of twin single-track rail tunnels with a vehicle shuttle service for cars,
coaches and heavy goods vehicles. The project, being undertaken by the Channel
Tunnel Group/France Manche (now known jointly as Eurotunnel) is estimated to
cost some £2,700 million at 1986 prices and will be the largest civil engineering
project in Europe to be financed and constructed by the private sector. It is
expected to bring substantial benefits to industry and to travellers through the
quicker carriage of both passengers and freight.
The 50-km (31-mile) link will carry through rail services and a drive-on,
drive-off vehicle shuttle service using specially designed shuttle trains. Journey
time for the shuttle trains between the two terminals, Folkestone and Coquelles,
near Calais in France, will be some 35 minutes, with trains travelling at a
maximum speed of 160 km/h (100 mph). The terminal at Folkestone will cover
140 hectares (350 acres) and will contain a rail loop for the shuttle trains to run
into the tracks beside the platforms. Road improvements in Kent are planned
which will ensure good access to the tunnel terminal. Through rail passenger
and freight services, due to start in 1993, will be operated by British Rail and its
continental partners. In 1987 agreement was reached on the payments to be
made to Eurotunnel by British Rail and by Societe Nationale des Chemins de Fer
Frangais for the use of the tunnel. British Rail envisages investment of nearly
£550 million in new passenger and freight rolling stock, track and signalling
improvements, a new international passenger terminal at Waterloo (London),
freight facilities and a train maintenance depot. Various measures, such as
landscaping and noise suppression, are being taken to ensure that the
environmental damage caused by construction is minimised.
The Channel Link Treaty with France, signed in 1986, contains provisions to
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
329
INLAND
WATERWAYS
Port Traffic
safeguard the public interest of both countries in matters such as safety and the
environment, deals with matters of national jurisdiction, provides arrange¬
ments for arbitration in the event of disputes over interpretation of the Treaty
between the governments and the concessionaires, sets out the private sector
nature of the scheme, and provides for compensation to the promoter in the
event of political interference or cancellation by the Government. A concession
agreement between Britain, France and the Channel Tunnel Group/France
Manche was also signed in 1986. It gives the concessionaires the right to build
and operate the tunnel for a period of 55 years, after which ownership would
revert to the governments. The Channel Tunnel Act 1987 authorised construc¬
tion, in accordance with the Treaty, and allowed the ratification of the Treaty
and the coming into operation of the concession agreement, both in July 1987.
The inland waterways of Great Britain are popular for recreation, make a
valuable contribution to the environment and play an important part in land
drainage and water supply. They are also used to a limited extent for
reight-carrying. An official survey of inland waterway freight traffic reported
that in 1986, 69 million tonnes of freight were carried on inland waterways and
estuaries, covering some 2,500 million tonne-km (1-4 per cent of freight traffic
by tonne-km in Great Britain). About 45 per cent (in tonne-km) was carried in
south-east England, mainly on the River Thames. The publicly owned British
Waterways Board is responsible for some 3,200 km (2,000 miles) of waterways
in Great Britain which are maintained primarily for leisure use, with freight in
some areas. About 550 km (340 miles) are maintained as commercial waterways
for private sector traffic. In 1987—88 the Board's turnover amounted to £20-6
million and it received a government grant of £43-2 million to maintain its
waterways to statutory standards since costs substantially exceeded income
generated by leisure, estates and freight activities.
Ports
There are over 300 ports in Great Britain, but many are small harbours of only
local significance and do not handle cargo regularly. Most port authorities
operate with statutory powers under private Acts of Parliament. They are of
three broad types: trusts, local authorities and statutory companies.
Major ports controlled by trusts include Clyde, Dover, Forth, London. Medway,
Milford Haven, and Tees and Hartlepool. Local authorities control many small
ports but also the much larger ports of Bristol, Portsmouth, and the oil ports in
Orkney and Shetland.
Associated British Ports, established under the Transport Act 1981 as a
statutory corporation, wholly owned by Associated British Ports Holdings PLC (a
private sector company), owns and operates 19 ports including Southampton,
Grimsby and Immingham, Hull, Newport, Cardiff and Swansea. Other ports
owned by companies include Felixstowe, Liverpool and Manchester.
In 1987 traffic through the ports of Great Britain amounted to 457 million
tonnes comprising 150 million tonnes of exports, 153 million tonnes of imports
and 154 million tonnes of domestic traffic (which included offshore traffic,
landings of sea-dredged aggregates and material shipped for dumping at sea).
About 58 per cent of the traffic was in fuels, mainly petroleum and petroleum
products. Some 76 per cent of the 14-8 million tonnes of traffic (11-3 million
tonnes of imports and 3-5 million tonnes of exports) which entered or left
Northern Ireland by sea in 1987 represented traffic with the rest of Britain.
Britain’s main ports, in terms of total tonnage handled, are given in Table 38.
330
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Development
Table 38: Traffic through the Principal Ports of Great Britain3
million tonnes
1965 1975 1980 1985 1986 1987
Sullom Voe
London
Tees and Hartlepool
Milford Haven
Grimsby and Immingham
Forth
Southampton
Orkney
Felixstowe
Medway
Dover
Liverpool
— 28-5
64-6 50-3 54-2
12 1 20-2 39-4
24-8 44-9 39-3
8-3 22 0 22-2
6-1 8-4 28-8
24-4 25-3 23-9
0-4 15-4
4-1 5-4
22-3 21-7 17-2
1-4 3-7 6-7
31-7 23-4 12-3
59 0 57-2 500
51-6 53-6 48-9
30-6 30-7 33-9
32-5 290 32-7
29-1 32 0 32-2
29-1 28-8 300
25-2 25-7 27-2
161 15-8 171
101 10-8 131
10-4 10-4 11-6
9-3 9-9 10-6
10-4 10-7 10-2
Source: Department of Transport.
a Belfast and Larne are the main ports in Northern Ireland and handled 7-8 million tonnes and 3-7 million tonnes
respectively in 1987.
Offshore oil developments have had a substantial effect on port traffic by greatly
increasing the flow through certain North Sea ports, such as Tees and
Hartlepool and the Forth ports, creating oil ports at Flotta in Orkney and Sullom
Voe in Shetland, and reducing oil traffic at many traditional oil-importing
terminals. Two other significant changes have affected the distribution of traffic
among British ports in the last 20 years. First, ports on the south and east
coasts have increasingly gained traffic at the expense of those on the west coast
as the emphasis of Britain’s trade has switched towards the continent of
Europe. Secondly, traditional major general ports, such as London, Liverpool
and Manchester, have lost business to ports like Dover and Felixstowe in the
changing patterns of shipping which have accompanied the world-wide switch
from conventional handling methods to container and roll-on modes. While
non-fuel traffic has been growing only slowly, container and roll-on traffic has
quadrupled since 1970 to 65 million tonnes in 1987 and now accounts for about
70 per cent of non-bulk traffic. The leading ports for container traffic are
Felixstowe, London and Southampton, and those for roll-on traffic are Dover
(Britain’s leading seaport in terms of the value of trade handled), Felixstowe,
Grimsby and Immingham, and Harwich.
Many ports have modernised facilities and improved productivity by changing
port layout, introducing new handling equipment and reducing manning levels.
Most major new developments have been at east- and south-coast ports. For
example, at Felixstowe a £42 million container terminal, completed in 1986,
raised the port’s container-handling capacity by about 50 per cent, while extra
capacity for ferry services has recently been provided at a number of ports
including Dartford, Dover, Hull, Portsmouth and Ramsgate.
Purpose-built terminals for oil from the British sector of the North Sea have
been built at Hound Point on the Forth, on the Tees, at Flotta and at Sullom Voe
(one of the largest oil terminals in the world). Three of the four jetties at Sullom
Voe can accommodate oil tankers of up to 350,000 deadweight tonnes. A £54
million terminal at Braefoot Bay in the Firth of Forth handles tankers carrying
natural gas liquids brought by pipeline from the plant at Mossmorran (Fife).
Supply bases for offshore vessels have been built at a number of ports, notably
Aberdeen, Great Yarmouth and Heysham.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
331
Services
Cargo Services
Passenger
Services
Shipping
In common with the fleets of other developed countries, the British fleet has
een adversely affected by the world recession in shipping and increasing
international competition. It has declined substantially from a peak of 53-4
million deadweight tonnes1 (33-7 million gross tonnage) in 1975 to 11-7 million
deadweight tonnes (8-5 million gross tonnage) in 1987. A large tonnage of ships,
particularly of tankers, has been scrapped or sold, while a number of shipowners
have transferred their fleets to overseas registries, although some of these
registries (such as Bermuda and the Isle of Man) are part of the British registrv
system. ^ J
In July 1987 over 10-8 million deadweight tonnes of trading vessels of 100
gross tonnes and over were both owned and registered in Britain: 584 vessels
totalling 5-4 million tonnes being usually employed as dry bulk cargo, liner or
cellular container ships: and a further 262 vessels of nearly 5 -5 million tonnes as
oil, chemical or gas carriers. The merchant fleet figure of 11-7 million
deadweight tonnes also includes non-trading vessels, such as fishing vessels,
tugs and dredgers, and shipping registered in Britain but owned in other
Commonwealth countries. British cargo liner tonnage is dominated by a
relatively small number of large private sector groups and container consortia.
The representative body for the majority of shipowners is the General Council of
British Shipping, although certain sectors have their own associations.
About 94 per cent by weight (77 per cent by value) of Britain’s overseas trade is
carried by sea, while the proportion of passengers travelling to or from Britain by
sea is more than one-third, compared with about one-half in the early 1960s.
In 1987 British seaborne trade amounted to 298 million tonnes (valued at
£133,266 million) or 1 million million tonne-km (676,000 million tonne-miles).
Ships registered in Britain carried 22 per cent by weight, 16 per cent in terms of
tonne-mileage and 37 per cent by value. Tanker cargoes accounted for over half
this trade by weight, but only 10 per cent by value, and foodstuffs and
manufactured goods accounted for four-fifths by value.
Many of the deep-sea liner services from Britain are operated by container
ships. There are many roll-on, roll-off services, accommodating passengers and
their cars and, in some cases, commercial vehicles, between Britain and the
continent of Europe and several freight-only roll-on, roll-off services to the Irish
Republic, the continent of Europe, and to some more distant countries.
British shipping companies operating liner services have associated with each
other and with the companies of other countries operating on the same routes in
a series of ‘conferences’ designed to secure standardisation and stability of
rates, and to maintain frequency and regularity of services. Conferences serve all
the major trades to and from Britain. In 1985 Britain acceded to the United
Nations Convention for Liner Conferences, a code of conduct governing relations
among shipping companies that are members of conferences.
Almost all of the 26-1 million passengers who arrived at or departed from British
ports in 1987 travelled to or from the continent of Europe or the Irish Republic.
Remaining long-distance passenger ships are used for cruising and in 1987
some 64,000 passengers embarked on pleasure cruises from British ports.
Traffic from the southern and south-eastern ports accounts for a substantial
proportion of traffic to the continent of Europe. The main British operators are
1 Deadweight tonnage denotes the maximum load which a vessel can carry before submerging the
load-line. Gross tonnage indicates the total capacity of the enclosed space on a ship.
332
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Merchant
Shipping
Legislation
Safety at
Sea
Sealink UK Ltd and P and O. Hovercraft carry about 15 per cent of the traffic on
the short sea crossings to France and services are provided by Hoverspeed Ltd
(owned by Sealink), which operates five hovercraft on routes between Dover and
Boulogne, and Dover and Calais.
Passenger and freight ferry services are also operated to many of the offshore
islands, such as the Isle of Wight, the Orkney and Shetland islands, and the
islands off the west coast of Scotland.
The Government’s policy is one of minimum intervention and the encourage¬
ment of free and fair competition. However, under the Merchant Shipping Acts
there are regulations, administered by the Department of Transport, for marine
safety and welfare, and for preventing and cleaning up pollution from ships. The
Acts also contain certain reserve powers for protecting shipping and trading
interests from measures adopted or proposed by overseas governments.
The Merchant Shipping Act 1988 contains provisions to improve standards of
marine safety, update the law on ship registration and ensure that Britain's
strategic maritime requirements are met. Among the measures to improve the
safety of roll-on, roll-off ferries, following the sinking of the Herald of Free
Enterprise in 1987 with the loss of 189 lives, are a new duty on shipowners to
ensure the safe operation of their vessels, while other provisions have tightened
the duties of masters and their crews. Regulations to improve maritime safety
have also been implemented in 1988; these have included provision for the
introduction of boarding cards for the control of passenger numbers on roll-on,
roll-off ferries, and the requirement for vehicle deck doors to be closed before a
roll-on, roll-off ferry leaves its berth. Britain has put forward a number of
measures to improve the safety of passenger ferries, for consideration within the
International Maritime Organisation and by other European countries.
The first stage of a European Community shipping policy involved agreement
by the Community’s transport ministers in 1986 on four regulations. These will
liberalise the Community’s international trade, establish a competition regime
for shipping, and enable the Community to take action to combat protectionism
from other countries and to counter unfair pricing practices.
The Coastguard Service, administered by the Department of Transport, is
responsible for co-ordinating civil maritime search and rescue operations
around the coastline of Britain. In a maritime emergency the Coastguard calls
on and co-ordinates the appropriate facilities, such as lifeboats of the Royal
National Lifeboat Institution (a voluntary body), and Ministry of Defence
aircraft, helicopters and ships, as well as merchant shipping, commercial
aircraft and ferries. The Coastguard has three long-range civil helicopters for
search and rescue work, which are based at Sumburgh (Shetland), Stornoway
(Lewis) and Lee-on-the-Solent (Hampshire). In 1987 the Coastguard Service
co-ordinated action in 5,563 incidents (including cliff rescues) in which 8,867
people were assisted.
The lighthouse authorities (for England and Wales the Corporation of Trinity
House, for Scotland the Northern Lighthouse Board and for Ireland the
Commissioners of Irish Lights) control about 370 lighthouses, many minor
lights and buoys, and a number of lightships, some of which are being replaced
by unattended sea marks. The administration of pilotage has been reorganised
under the Pilotage Act 1987 so that responsibility for pilotage now rests with
harbour authorities.
Compliance with traffic separation schemes around the shores of Britain is
mandatory for all vessels of countries party to the Convention on the
International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea 1972. The most
important scheme affecting British waters is in the Dover Strait, the world's
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
333
Role of the
Government
Civil Aviation
Authority
Air Traffic
busiest seaway. Britain and France jointly operate the Channel Navigation
Information Service, which provides navigational information and also moni¬
tors the movement of vessels in the strait.
Civil Aviation
Britain s substantial civil air transport industry is continuing to develop to meet
the increasing demand for air travel, particularly international travel. Airlines
are re-equipping their fleets with the most modern aircraft and many airports
are being substantially modernised and expanded.
The Secretary of State for Transport is responsible for international matters
(including negotiation of air service agreements with more than 100 other
countries, the licensing and control of public transport operations into Britain
by overseas operators and British participation in the activities of international
aviation bodies), airports policy, amenity matters (such as aircraft noise),
aviation security policy and investigation of accidents.
The Government s civil aviation policy aims to encourage a sound and
competitive multi-airline industry in Britain, to promote competition in
international and internal services, and to maintain high standards of safety. It
has liberalised airline services within Britain, and in its negotiations with other
countries on bilateral air service agreements it is proposing the adoption of more
liberal measures. New agreements with a number of other members of the
European Community have already resulted in greater competition, leading to
increased traffic and lower fares. The Government has taken the lead in
encouraging airline competition within the Community, as a first step towards
meeting the Community’s objective that by 1992 air transport should be part of
a single internal market. Measures agreed by the Community took effect in
January 1988 and give airlines greater freedom in setting fares and on the
number and capacity of services provided.
The Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) is an independent statutory body, respon¬
sible for the economic, technical and operational regulation of the industry. It is
also responsible for air traffic control at certain British airports and, jointly with
the Ministry of Defence, for the provision by the National Air Traffic Services of
air navigation services. Members of the CAA board are appointed by the
Secretary of State for Transport.
Under the Civil Aviation Act 1982 the CAA’s primary objectives are to ensure
that British airlines provide air services to satisfy all substantial categories of
public demand at the lowest charges consistent with a high standard of safety
and an economic return for efficient operators, and to further the reasonable
interests of air transport users. Its other duties are to ensure that British
airlines compete effectively on international routes, to secure the most effective
use of airports in Britain, and to have regard to the need to minimise the adverse
effects of civil aviation on the environment; under the Airports Act 1986, it has
various responsibilities for economic regulation of airport companies.
Total capacity offered on all services by British airlines amounted to 15,853
million available-tonne-km in 1987: 11,430 million tonne-km on scheduled
services and 4,423 million tonne-km on non-scheduled services. The airlines
carry 28-5 million passengers a year on scheduled services and 23-5 million on
charter flights. In 1987 a total of some 66-6 million passengers travelled by air
(international terminal passengers) to or from Britain, 15-9 per cent more than
in 1986.
In 1987 the value of Britain’s overseas trade carried by air was some £30,374
334
Structure
of the
Airline
Industry
British Airways
Other Airlines
Helicopters
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
million and the proportions carried by air amounted to approximately 19-9 per
cent of the value of exports and 15-3 per cent of imports. Air freight is important ;
for the carriage of goods with a high value-to-weight ratio, especially where
speed of movement is essential. Precious stones, live animals, medicinal and
pharmaceutical products, clothing, leather and skins, and scientific instru- 1
ments are major categories where a relatively high proportion of exports is sent
by air.
Major changes in the structure of the airline industry have occurred. With the
sale by the Government of its shares in British Airways in 1987, the civil airline
industry is entirely in the private sector. Early in 1988 British Airways acquired
control of British Caledonian Group Pic, the holding company for a group of
which British Caledonian Airways (the second largest British scheduled airline)
was the principal subsidiaiy. The merger, which was fully implemented in April
1988, took place after the proposed acquisition had been investigated by the
Monopolies and Mergers Commission, which concluded that it would not be
expected to operate against the public interest. British Airways gave various
undertakings to the Commission as well as to the European Commission,
including the return of British Caledonian licences to operate domestic routes
and a number of European routes (although British Airways retained the right
to reapply for these licences). The effect is to reduce considerably any possible
harmful effects on competition. During 1988 the CAA has considered applica¬
tions for licences for a number of these routes, some of which have been
reallocated to other airlines. The CAA is also monitoring the implementation of
the merger and will report to the Secretary of State for Transport in December
1988.
British Airways Pic is one of the world's leading airlines. In terms of
international scheduled services it is the largest in the world. During 1987-88
British Airways' turnover was £3,756 million (including £3,523 million from
airline operations) and the British Airways group carried over 25 million
passengers on scheduled and charter flights.
Following the merger with British Caledonian, the British Airways scheduled
route network serves some 165 destinations in 80 countries. During summer
1988 it operated an average of 180 flights a day from its main operating base at
London’s Heathrow airport and more than 135 flights from other bases in
Britain, at Gatwick and major regional centres such as Manchester, Glasgow
and Birmingham. Scheduled Concorde supersonic services are operated from
London (Heathrow) to New York, Washington and Miami, crossing the Atlantic
in about half the time taken by subsonic aircraft. In mid-1988 British Airways
had a fleet of more than 200 aircraft comprising 7 Concordes, 40 Boeing 747s, 8
McDonnell-Douglas DC 10s, 17 Lockheed TriStars, 32 Boeing 757s, 4 Airbus
A320s, 44 Boeing 737s, 39 BAG One-Elevens and 11 HS 748s. Orders had been
placed for 50 aircraft: 17 Boeing 747-400s, 11 Boeing 767s, 5 Boeing 757s, 6
Airbus A320s, 3 McDonnell-Douglas MD1 Is and 8 British Aerospace Advanced
Turboprops.
About 450 aircraft are operated by other airlines. Other operators of scheduled
passenger services include Dan Air Services, British Midland, Air UK, Air
Europe and Virgin Atlantic. Britannia Airways, Dan Air Services, Monarch
Airlines, Orion Airways and Cal Air International are the leading airlines
operating charter passenger services.
Helicopters are engaged on a variety of work, but are mainly employed on the
large-scale operations connected with the development of Britain's offshore oil
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
335
Safety
Air Traffic
Control and
Navigation
Services
Airports
Ownership and
Control
and gas resources. Light aircraft and helicopters are also involved in other
activities, such as charter operations, search and rescue services, crop¬
spraying, and aerial survey and photography. The two main helicopter operators
in Britain are Bristow Helicopters and British International Helicopters, with 62
and 29 helicopters respectively.
The CAA is responsible for air safety, both airworthiness and operational safety.
Its Operations Division deals with the preparation and application of safety
requirements concerning airline and private aviation operations, flight crew
licensing and training, aerodromes, and fire and rescue services. The Airworthi¬
ness Division is responsible for the airworthiness standards of aircraft
registered in Britain, the licensing of aircraft maintenance engineers and the
approval of work schedules to which British transport aircraft are maintained.
Every company operating aircraft used for public transport must possess an
Air Operator’s Certificate, which is granted by the CAA when it is satisfied that
the operator is competent to secure the safe operation of its aircraft. The CAA’s
flight operations inspectors (who are experienced airline pilots) check that
satisfactory operating standards are maintained.
Each member of the flight crew of a British registered aircraft must hold the
appropriate official licence issued by the CAA. Except for pilots with acceptable
military or other qualifying experience, all applicants for a first professional
pilot’s licence must have undertaken a full-time course of ground and flying
instruction which has been approved by the CAA.
Responsibility for civil and military air traffic control over Britain and the
surrounding seas rests with the National Air Traffic Services (NATS). At 19 civil
aerodromes, including most of the major British airports, the NATS provides the
navigation services necessary for the operation of aircraft taking off and landing,
and integrates them into the flow of traffic within British airspace. In the five
years to mid-1988 investment of about £125 million was made on re-equipping
the air traffic control network including providing new navigation aids and
landing systems, and in the period 1987—92 about £250 million is being
invested in modernisation including further improvements in radar and a new
central computer.
Of the 137 licensed civil aerodromes in Britain, about one-fifth each handles
more than 100,000 passengers a year. Eleven handle over 1 million passengers a
year and these are shown in Table 39. In 1987 Britain’s civil airports handled a
total of 87-5 million passengers (86 million terminal passengers and 1-5 million
in transit), and 976,000 tonnes of freight. Heathrow airport is the world’s
busiest airport for international travel and is Britain’s most important airport
for passengers and air freight, handling 35-1 million passengers (including
transit passengers) and 574,000 tonnes of freight in 1987. Gatwick is the
world’s second busiest international airport.
Seven airports—Heathrow, Gatwick and Stansted in south-east England, and
Glasgow, Edinburgh, Prestwick and Aberdeen in Scotland—are owned and
managed by BAA pic, the successor company to the statutory British Airports
Authority. Together they handle about 72 per cent of air passengers and 83 per
cent of air cargo traffic in Britain. The Government’s shares in BAA pic were sold
in 1987.
Many of the other public airports are controlled by local authorities, and the
Airports Act 1986 also provides for the larger airports—those with a turnover
exceeding £ 1 million in at least two of the previous three years—to be formed
into companies. By mid-1988, 15 major local authority airports were operating
336
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Development
Table 39: Passenger Traffic at Britain’s Main Airports
million passengers
1977 1982 1985 1986 1987
34-7
19-4
8-6
3-4
2-6
2-6
21
1-8
1-5
1-3
1-3
Source: Civil Aviation Authority.
Note: Statistics relate to terminal passengers only and exclude those in transit.
London (Heathrow) 23-4
London (Gatwick) 6-6
Manchester 2-8
Glasgow 1-8
Birmingham 1 • 1
Luton 1-9
Belfast (Aldergrove) 10
Edinburgh 1 0
Aberdeen 0-9
Newcastle upon Tyne 0-6
East Midlands 0-5
26-4 31-3 31-3
11-2 14-9 16-3
50 6 1 7-5
2-4 2-7 3 1
1-6 1-6 21
1-8 1-6 20
1-4 1-6 1-9
1-2 1-6 1-6
1-6 1-7 1-5
10 10 1-2
0-9 0-9 11
as companies under the Companies Act 1985. The Government is encouraging
the introduction of private capital into the new companies.
Under the Airports Act 1986 the CAA has responsibility for the economic
regulation of major airport companies including the BAA pic airports and the
larger local authority airports. These powers enable the CAA to take appropriate
steps to remedy practices considered to be against the public interest, in
particular any abuse of an airport's monopoly position.
All airports used for public transport and training flights must be licensed by
the CAA. Stringent requirements, such as the provision of adequate fire¬
fighting, medical and rescue services, suitable physical characteristics and
visual aids, must be satisfied before a licence is granted. Strict aviation security
measures are in force.
The Government’s policy is to promote a strong and competitive British airline
industry by providing airport capacity where it is needed and by making effective
use of existing resources, especially at Heathrow, Gatwick and Stansted. It is
also encouraging the maximum use of regional airports.
A fourth major terminal at Heathrow, opened in 1986, raised the airport’s
capacity from 30 million to 38 million passengers a year. With the opening of the
first phase of its second terminal in March 1988, Gatwick’s capacity is some 21
million passengers a year, rising to 25 million a year when the second phase is
completed in the early 1990s. Following a public inquiry, planning permission
was granted in 1985 for the expansion of Stansted airport to an eventual
capacity of 15 million passengers a year; the first phase, which would provide
capacity of some 7 million to 8 million passengers a year, should be completed in
1991. London City airport, a £30 million airport designed for short take-off and
landing aircraft and primarily catering for business travellers, was opened in
1987 and is one of only a few airports in the world located in an inner city area.
Facilities have also been improved at regional airports, with major terminal or
runway improvements undertaken at Manchester, Birmingham, Leeds/Bradford
and Newcastle upon Tyne airports. The Government is ready to assist in
developing further opportunities for new routes and services; it is encouraging
the development of Manchester as a ‘regional hub' airport and the airport’s
expansion will include a second terminal.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
337
BRITISH
TELECOM
Communications
The telecommunications services sector is one of the most rapidly growing of the
economy. The British Telecommunications Act 1981 separated the Post Office
into two corporations, one for postal and banking services and the other for
telecommunications (British Telecommunications, trading as British Telecom)
and provided for a limited relaxation of the statutoiy monopoly in telecom¬
munications. The Telecommunications Act 1984 strengthened competition in a
number of ways. It removed British Telecom s exclusive privilege of running
public telecommunications systems and instituted new arrangements requiring
those running telecommunications systems (including British Telecom) to be
licensed by the Secretary of State for Trade and Industiy. This authority may be
delegated to the Director General of Telecommunications. Under the terms of its
licence, British Telecom is required to provide a universal telecommunications
service throughout the country to meet all reasonable demands, and to provide
services in rural areas and certain essential services, such as public emergency
services, public call box services and maritime emergency services. Mercury
Communications Ltd was licensed as the competing national fixed-link operator
to provide telecommunications services progressively throughout Britain.
In 1987 new licensing arrangements for value added and data services offered
by service providers over the public telecommunications networks took effect
with the introduction of a class licence which opened up the provision of data
services to full competition. It contains provisions on fair trading and on Open
Systems Interconnection (to facilitate the interworking of the computer
products of different manufacturers) in furtherance of the Government’s
commitment to provide for the adoption of the latter in Britain. These provisions
apply only to large operators, thus enabling small companies to enter the market
with the minimum of regulation necessary to protect privacy and confiden¬
tiality. A new branch systems general licence was issued in 1987, allowing
additional flexibility in the configuration of private networks.
In 1988 the Government announced its intention to license up to a further six
operators (in addition to British Telecom and Mercury) to provide specialised
services to third parties by satellite. The additional operators will be authorised
to run their own earth stations to transmit signals via satellite to multiple
reception points within Britain. Licensees will be able to transmit any type of
message—visual, voice, data or text.
The Office of Telecommunications (OFTEL), a non-ministerial government
department established under the Telecommunications Act 1984, is the
independent regulatory body for the telecommunications industry. It is headed
by the Director General of Telecommunications, whose functions are to ensure
that licensees comply with the conditions of their licences; to promote effective
competition in the telecommunications industry; to provide advice to the
Secretary of State for Trade and Industiy on telecommunications matters; and
to investigate complaints about services. The Director General also has a duty to
promote the interests of consumers in respect of prices, quality and variety in
telecommunications services.
Under the 1984 Act British Telecom was reconstituted as a public limited
company and a majority of the ordinary voting shares were sold to private
investors in 1984. It has over 1 -3 million registered shareholders and over 80 per
cent of its 225,000 employees are also shareholders.
British Telecom serves some 18 million residential and 4-3 million business
telephone customers. It operates one of the world's largest public telecom¬
munications networks, with nearly 23 million telephone exchange lines, some
115,000 telex connections, 80,000 public payphones, and a wide range of
338
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Network
Modernisation
General
Services
specialised voice, data, text and visual services. The inland telephone and telex
networks are fully automatic. International services are also highly developed,
and international direct dialling is available from any telephone line in Britain to
185 countries, representing 93 per cent of the world's telephones. Automatic
telex service is available to over 200 countries.
In 1987-88 the company made a pre-tax profit of £2,292 million on a turnover
of £10,185 million. Expenditure on capital equipment and other assets totalled
£2,387 million, of which £525 million went on modernising exchanges with
digital equipment. About £195 million was spent on research and development.
British Telecom is investing over £2,000 million a year in the modernisation and
expansion of its network to meet the increasing demand for basic telephone
services and for more specialised services. The company has about 370,000 km
(230,000 miles) of optical fibre laid in its network in Britain, representing a
higher proportion than any other world operator. There are more than 1,400
digital exchanges in service and half of its customers are served by modern local
exchanges of various types. The combination of digital exchange switching and
digital transmission techniques, using optical fibre cable and microwave radio
links, is substantially improving the quality of telephone service for residential
and business customers, as well as making possible a wider range of services
through the company’s main network.
British Telecom provides numerous facilities and services including a free
facility for emergency calls to the police, fire, ambulance, coastguard, lifeboat
and air-sea rescue services; a free directory inquiries service; and various other
chargeable operator-connected services, such as transfer charge and alarm calls.
The operator-handled Freefone service and automatic ‘LinkLine’ facilities enable
callers to contact organisations anywhere in Britain, either free or at local call
rates.
British Telecom provides a number of customer-dialled recorded telephone
information services, known as Guidelines, including Timeline (formerly known
as the Speaking Clock). The company also provides value added recorded
services in various centres at higher call charges, and makes its network
facilities available for similar premium services provided by other organisations.
In January 1988 it opened its £70 million optical fibre flexible access system, for
intensive voice and data traffic, to serve the financial organisations of the City of
London.
Under a public payphone service modernisation programme, costing some
£160 million, all public payphones have been equipped with push-button
equipment. A number of cashless call developments are being carried out
including the Phonecard service, using prepaid encoded cards, which was
initially introduced in main railway stations, airports and other heavily used
sites, but has been extended to many other parts of Britain. Some 28,000
Phonecard payphones are planned. There are about 320,000 rented payphones
on premises to which the public has access and these are also being upgraded
with modern push-button equipment.
Prestel, British Telecom’s public viewdata service, was the first of its kind to
enable a wide variety of computer-stored information to be called up on a special
television receiver via the telephone. By early 1988 there were some 80,000
terminals attached to Prestel, 55 per cent in businesses and 45 per cent in
homes. Through its ‘Gateway’ links with other databases, a wide range of other
services, such as home shopping and banking services and holiday booking and
reservation facilities, is available; and its first link with a cable television
network has been opened.
There has been rapid growth in British Telecom's mobile communications
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
339
International
Services
MERCURY
services including Cellnet, the cellular radio network which it jointly owns (see
p 340). Its radiopaging service, with 400,000 customers, is the largest of its
kind in the world.
British Telecom International is the company's division handling international
networks and services. It is the second largest shareholder in the International
Telecommunications Satellite Organisation (of which 114 countries are
members) and in the International Maritime Satellite Organisation, with
interests in a number of other consortia.
Two digital international telephone exchanges are in service in London and
two more are on order. The world's first international undersea optical fibre
cable, between Britain and Belgium, began operating in 1986 and by 1990
Britain will be connected to a global network of high-capacity undersea optical
fibre cables. The first transatlantic optical fibre cable (TAT 8) is due to enter
service later in 1988, and a further high-capacity transatlantic optical fibre cable
(TAT 9), carrying 75,000 simultaneous calls, should be in operation by 1991.
TAT 9 will have twin branches to Britain and France from the main cable and
will be the first to incorporate an undersea junction.
Companies sending computer data world-wide from Britain can use the
international Packet Switch Service to link into over 100 networks in more than
70 countries.
High-speed international satellite links to and from Britain are being
expanded. The main business systems terminal at British Telecom
International s London Teleport earth station in Docklands became operational
at the end of 1985 and SatStream’ private circuit digital links, using small-dish
satellite earth stations, cover North America and Western Europe. An ‘Interna¬
tional KiloStream' service, offering digital private circuits for voice, text and
visual services, is available to the United States, Australia and most major
business centres in Asia and the rest of Europe.
Extensive direct-dial maritime satellite services are available for vessels
world-wide, and limited in-flight operator-controlled telephone call facilities
have been introduced via Portishead Radio Station near Bristol. An automatic
service via satellite for aircraft passengers on transatlantic routes will come into
operation in 1989 using specially equipped British Airways aircraft.
Digital transmission techniques have been introduced for services to the
United States, Japan, Hong Kong and Australia via the Madley earth station
near Hereford. The service to Japan includes the world’s first wholly digital
intercontinental public telephone service, giving faster connections and clearer
speech.
British Telecom's overseas consultancy service, Telconsult, is engaged on a
large number of projects in up to 60 countries.
Mercury Communications Ltd, a wholly owned subsidiary of Cable and Wireless
pic, operates under licence as the competing telecommunications carrier in
Britain, enabling the company to offer a wide range of services, both nationally
and internationally. Its wholly digital trunk network of some 10,000 fibre-km
(6,200 miles), centred on Birmingham and linking over 75 towns and cities
including Edinburgh, Glasgow and Cardiff, has been completed. Microwave
extensions are in place to the south coast of England and to Dundee and
Aberdeen. National and international switched telephone services for business
customers began in 1986, and services for small businesses and residential
customers expanded throughout 1987—88. Mercury also provides an extensive
range of enhanced services including national and international telex and
packet data services, electronic messaging, nationwide radiopaging and voice
message services. Mercury’s ‘Centrex- service, the first in Europe, provides
340
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
BROADBAND
CABLE
SYSTEMS
OTHER
PUBLIC
TELECOMMUNI¬
CATIONS
OPERATORS
CABLE AND
WIRELESS
THE POST
OFFICE
business customers with all the advanced facilities (such as inward direct
dialling and call forwarding) available on a modern switchboard from equipment
located at Mercury's public exchanges, so that customers do not have to
purchase their own system. In July 1988 it introduced its first public call box
service, in London.
International services are provided by two satellite communications centres in
London's Docklands and Oxfordshire, serving North America, Europe, the
Middle East, the Far East and Australia. Mercury has been developing new
optical fibre submarine cable links, and agreements have been reached with the
Netherlands and France for cables which will provide Mercury with its main
transmission links with Europe when they enter service in 1989. The first
private transatlantic optical fibre cable (PTAT 1) will also enter service by 1989,
and will form a link in the ‘global digital highway’ planned by Cable and Wireless.
By mid-1988, 13 companies had been licensed to run local broadband cable
systems. At present they mainly provide television programmes, but some will
also provide interactive services, including voice telephony services (which will
have to be provided in co-operation with British Telecom or Mercury).
To encourage the expansion of mobile radio telecommunications services, the
Government licensed Racal Vodafone Ltd (part of the Racal Electronics Group)
and Telecom Securicor Cellular Radio Ltd (a joint venture between British
Telecom and Securicor) to run competing national cellular radio telephone
systems. Vodafone and Cellnet started in 1985 and are now available to over 90
per cent of the population of Britain. The companies have invested over £250
million in establishing their networks and are undertaking further investment
to provide increased capacity for cellular radio telephone users, estimated at
more than 340,000 in mid-1988.
Britain has also developed a prototype for a digital cellular telephone system
that can operate anywhere in Europe and is expected to be introduced in 1991.
In the non-cellular sector, parts of the radio spectrum have been reallocated
for use by two national and a number of regional private mobile radio operators.
A number of other frequencies have been released for use by seven national
wide-area radiopaging operators.
Cable and Wireless pic provides or manages a wide range of telecommunications
activities, mostly overseas in 46 countries. Its main business is the provision
and operation of public telecommunications services of 36 countries and
territories under franchises granted by the governments concerned, while it also
provides and manages telecommunications services and facilities for public and
private sector customers, and undertakes consultancy work. It owns, operates
or has been a consultant on over 40 satellite earth stations, and owns a fleet of
nine cableships for laying and maintaining submarine telecommunications
cables.
The Post Office, founded in 1635, pioneered postal services and was the first to
issue adhesive postage stamps as proof of advance payment for mail. The Royal
Mail provides deliveries to 23-5 million addresses and handles 51 million letters
and parcels each working day (over 12,500 million items a year). Mail is collected
from over 100,000 posting boxes, as well as from post offices and large postal
users. The Post Office has a monopoly on the conveyance of letters, but under
the British Telecommunications Act 1981 the Secretary of State for Trade and
Industry has the power to suspend the monopoly in certain areas or for certain
categories of mail and to license others to provide competing services. The
Secretary of State has relaxed the monopoly on letters subject to a minimum fee
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
341
Specialist
Services
of £1, and has issued general licences enabling mail to be transferred between
document exchanges and allowing charitable organisations to carry Christmas
and New Year cards.
All the 80 offices equipped with mechanical handling equipment are in
operation and are gradually taking over the work of hundreds of sorting offices
handling letters manually. Each address in Britain has a postcode and the
British system is the most sophisticated in the world, allowing mechanised
sorting down to part of a street on a postman’s round and, in some cases, to an
individual address. There are 31 large parcel centres, each serving a group of
counties, which have taken over the work of 1,200 offices which handled parcels
manually. Some £30 million is being invested in a premium parcel service,
offering 48-hour delivery, for businesses in Britain.
As well as postal and Girobank services, post offices handle a wide range of
transactions. In much of its counter service the Post Office acts as agent for
government departments and local authorities. The Post Office is introducing
new technology into its counter services to reduce costs and raise productivity,
while providing an improved range of services to customers. There are nearly
21,000 post offices, of which some 1,500 are operated directly by the Post Office
and the remainder on an agency basis by sub-postmasters.
The Post Office provides a range of specialist services. ‘Datapost’, a door-to-door
delivery service, has overnight links throughout Britain and provides an
international service to 100 countries. ‘Datapost Sameday’ provides a rapid
delivery within or between more than 100 cities and towns in Britain and
between London and Amsterdam, Paris and Dublin. ‘Intelpost’, the world’s first
international public facsimile transmission service sending letters and other
documents electronically, provides high-speed mail links between more than
100 post offices in Britain as well as to and from 32 other countries. The
Philatelic Bureau in Edinburgh handles about one-third of the Post Office’s
philatelic business, much of it involving sales to overseas collectors or dealers.
The British Postal Consultancy Service offers advice and assistance on all
aspects of postal business to overseas postal administrations, and nearly 40
countries have used its services since 1965.
16 Employment
TRENDS IN
THE LABOUR
MARKET
Pattern of
Employment
Unemploy¬
ment
In common with other major industrial countries, Britain has experienced high
levels of unemployment in the 1980s. Although the economic improvements
took some time to be reflected in lower unemployment, since mid-1986
unemployment has declined substantially. This decline has been accompanied
by considerable growth in employment, which has risen since 1983, represent¬
ing the longest period of continuous employment growth for nearly 30 years. The
Government has taken a number of steps to improve the operation of the labour
market with the aim of creating the most suitable economic climate in which
business can flourish and create more jobs. These include increasing the
flexibility of the labour market, removing burdens on employers and making
training more relevant to the economy’s needs.
The total workforce in June 1987 was 28 million, of whom 21-8 million (11-9
million men and 9-9 million women) were classed as employees in employment
(see Table 40). Between March 1983 and March 1988 the workforce in
employment rose by 21 million, representing an increase greater than in any
other member state of the European Community. In the year to March 1988 the
workforce in employment grew by over 600,000, the biggest annual increase for
over 40 years. Major trends have included the growth in the proportion of the
workforce accounted for by women, as more married women have sought work,
especially in part-time employment; and a substantial increase in self-
employment. Between 1979 and 1987 the number of self-employed people is
estimated to have risen by 50 per cent to 2-9 million, representing 101 per cent
of the workforce.
There have been substantia] changes in the nature and location of employment,
with a marked shift, as in other industrialised countries, from manufacturing to
service industries. Between 1955 and 1987 the proportion of employees in
employment engaged in service industries rose from 45 per cent to 68 per cent as
higher living standards and technological developments stimulated the growth
of many service industries. During the period 1979 to 1987 the number of
employees in service industries rose by 1-3 million (9 per cent) to 14-8 million
(see Table 41). Employment in most service industries, with some exceptions,
such as transport, has grown considerably. The largest rise in this period was in
the banking, finance and insurance sector (by 41 per cent to 2-3 million), while
other sectors with significant increases included hotels and catering (18 per
cent), and wholesale distribution and repairs (9 per cent). Manufacturing
industry accounted for 40 per cent of employees in employment in 1955, but by
1987 the proportion had fallen to 24 per cent. Between 1979 and 1987
employment in manufacturing fell by 29 per cent to 51 million, although there
were indications early in 1988 that the rate of decline had slowed significantly.
Nearly all manufacturing industries have experienced a decline in employment
as markets for manufactured goods have changed and as new technology has
brought greater efficiency.
Britain, like most other industrialised countries, has had relatively high levels of
unemployment during the 1980s, the highest levels mainly being in areas with
344
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
EMPLOYMENT
STRATEGY
the greatest dependence on traditional manufacturing industries, inner cities
and many council housing estates. Unemployment reached its peak in 1986
when, on a seasonally adjusted basis (excluding school-leavers), it totalled over
3-2 million in June, 11-6 per cent of the workforce. Subsequently it has declined
significantly and by August 1988 it had fallen to 2-3 million, 8 per cent of the
workforce. Unemployment has fallen in all regions, with recent reductions being
greatest in some of the regions with above-average unemployment (such as the
West Midlands and the North West). There was a fall in long-term unemployment
(those unemployed for a year or more) of 290,000 in the year to July 1988 when
the number (948,000) was under 1 million for the first time for over five years.
Table 40: Manpower in Britain 1977—87
thousands (as at June), seasonally adjusted
1977 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987
Employees in
employment3 22,619
Self-employed 1,907
Unemployed4* 1,251
Armed forces 327
Work-related
government
training
programmes0 —
Workforced 26,210
21,394 21,052 21,219
2,170 2,221 2,496
2,626 2,866 2,999
324 322 326
— 16 175
26,609 26,632 27,299
21,495 21,572 21,800
2,610 2,627 2,861
3,114 3,180 2,880
326 322 319
176 226 311
27,820 28,064 28,283
Sources: Department of Employment and Northern Ireland Department of Economic Development.
a Part-time workers are counted as full units.
b Figures are adjusted for discontinuities and exclude school-leavers.
c Not seasonally adjusted.
d Comprises employees in employment, the self-employed, the armed forces, participants in work-related
government training programmes and the unemployed (including school-leavers).
The Government's employment strategy is to maintain an economic, financial
and industrial climate in which businesses can operate successfully and create
jobs. It is taking action to improve the labour market by encouraging better
training, removing regulatory barriers which hinder recruitment by firms, and
providing an extensive range of employment and training measures for those
most affected by unemployment (particularly the long-term unemployed and the
young) to help them into productive work.
It has adopted a number of objectives in connection with helping people who
have been unemployed for six months or more and other unemployed people
who experience difficulties in entering the labour market (such as people with
disabilities and those from ethnic minorities). Help includes an offer of training,
a place in a Jobclub or, through the Enterprise Allowance Scheme (see p 346),
help in setting up in self-employment. The wide range of existing training
opportunities, administered by an executive agency of the Department of
Employment, have been brought together in a single unified programme,
Employment Training (see p 348), which will give the highest priority to those
aged 18 to 24 who have been unemployed for between six months and a year and
to those aged 18 to 50 who have been unemployed for two years or more.
Expenditure on the Government’s employment and training measures in
1988-89 will be some £3,200 million and over 1 million opportunities will be
available.
EMPLOYMENT
345
EMPLOYMENT
SERVICES
Table 41: Employees in Employment3
Industry or service
(1980 Standard Industrial
Classification)
Thousands (as at June)
      Per cent
1979 1982 1986 1987 (1987)
Primary sector 1,102
Agriculture, forestry and fishing 380
722
Energy and water supply
Manufacturing b
Construction
Services
Wholesale distribution
and repairs
Retail distribution
Hotels and catering
Transport
Postal services and
communications
Banking, finance and insurance
Public administration
Education
Health
Other services
7,253
1,239
1,138
2,176
943
1,056
423
1,647
2,002
1,660
1,233
1,303
1,038
358
680
5,863
1,067
868
329
539
5,236
991
1,140
2,026
973
943
437
1,798
1,881
1,598
1,304
1,348
1,207
2,110
1,085
903
437
2,202
1,987
1,656
1,305
1,592
818
322
497
5,145
1,009
13,581 13,448 14,486 14,838
1,235
2,118
1,111
899
446
2,328
2,034
1,704
1,312
1,652
3- 8
1- 5
2- 3
23-6
4- 6
680
5- 7
9-7
5-1
4-1
20
10-7
9-3
7-8
60
7-6
Total
23,173 21,414 21,581 21,810 1000
Sources: Department of Employment and Northern Ireland Department of Economic Development.
a Figures are not seasonally adjusted.
b In June 1987 employment in the main sectors of manufacturing industry included 750,000 in office machineiy,
electrical engineering and instruments; 712,000 in mechanical engineering: 561,000 in food, drink and tobacco;
559,000 in textiles, leather, footwear and clothing; 507,000 in timber, wooden furniture, rubber and plastics;
489,000 in paper products, printing and publishing; 345,000 in chemicals and man-made fibres; and 241,000 in
motor vehicles and parts.
Note: Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
In Great Britain responsibility for employment policy and for the payment of
unemployment benefit rests with the Department of Employment. Its new
unified Employment Service was established in 1987, bringing together the
Department’s network of unemployment benefit offices and the former Man¬
power Services Commission’s network of about 1,000 local jobcentres. It has
three main priorities: to help back into work those unemployed for over six
months and other unemployed people requiring such help (especially those with
disabilities or other disadvantages); to make accurate and prompt benefit
payments to unemployed claimants, while ensuring that benefit is paid only to
those entitled: and to improve its capacity to deliver services through promoting
the integration of jobcentres and unemployment benefit services. Facilities for
job-seekers are being improved to make them more accessible; initiatives
include the location of jobcentre displays in libraries and local community
centres, and mobile jobcentre units in rural areas. New technology is also being
developed to provide job-seekers with direct access through computer terminals
to information on training and employment. In the year to March 1988, 2-7
million vacancies were notified and 1-9 million people placed in employment.
In September 1988 the Government announced the sale by private tender to
Pergamon Professional and Financial Services PLC of its Professional and
346
Restart
Programme
Enterprise
Allowance
Scheme
Jobclubs
Incentives
to Work
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Executive Recruitment (PER), which has a network of 32 offices with some 250
employees. This will place PER on the same footing as other commercial
agencies in its field of helping employers looking for professional and managerial
staff and assisting people seeking employment at this level.
Under the Restart programme each benefit claimant unemployed for six months
or more is invited to an interview at a jobcentre to discuss problems which have
hindered his or her search for employment and to assess personal employment
needs. Interviewees are encouraged to consider a range of opportunities, with
the aim of agreeing a course of action to help them back into work. Between
April 1987 and March 1988 over 2-2 million people were interviewed, with some
being placed in jobs and others in training programmes and other opportuni¬
ties. For those needing extra help, this might include a Restart course, a
one-week course designed to rebuild confidence and motivation and to assist
with job-hunting techniques.
The Government has introduced a number of measures to improve the
performance of the Restart programme. First, from April 1988 anyone who is
unemployed for six months or more will be invited to a Restart interview every
six months. Secondly, from April 1988 all those invited will receive a detailed
questionnaire (to be completed before the interview) about their qualifications
and experience, the type of job in which they are interested and the help
requested. This will enhance the effectiveness of the interview and confirm that
claimants are available for work. Thirdly, a number of initiatives are being tested
to ensure that contact is maintained with unemployed people. One example is
the use of outreach officers to work with local organisations to help people on
housing estates and in inner city areas, where there is often a concentration of
those people most at a disadvantage in searching for jobs.
The Enterprise Allowance Scheme helps unemployed people wishing to start
their own business but who would be deterred by the prospect of losing benefit
once they began. Entrants, who must have access to at least £1,000 to invest in
the business, receive an allowance of £40 a week for a year while they start the
business. Over 350,000 people have benefited from the scheme since 1982.
Places for some 110,000 new entrants a year are available from April 1988,
compared with some 60,000 in 1985-86. Surveys have shown that, of those
receiving the allowance for a year, 65 per cent remain in business two years after
the allowance has ceased. Furthermore, for every 100 businesses still trading,
114 additional jobs have been created.
‘Jobclubs’, introduced in 1985, are a further way in which unemployed people
are being helped to obtain work. Participants, who have normally been
unemployed for six months or more, receive coaching and expert advice on
job-seeking techniques and free facilities (such as stationery, stamps and the
use of telephones and typewriters) to enable them to undertake an intensive
search for a job. Over 1,200 Jobclubs were in operation in mid-1988. Over half
are located in jobcentres and the remainder are run by a range of private sector
organisations, voluntary bodies and local enterprise agencies. Of the 106,000
people who used a Jobclub in 1987-88, 54 per cent left to take up a job and 14
per cent to take up training or another job-related opportunity.
The Government has taken action to improve incentives to work (such as raising
tax allowances and reducing the standard rate of income tax to 25 per cent),
while improving benefits for people in work. Reforms in the social security
system, implemented in April 1988, are designed to ensure that people are better
off in work than when unemployed.
EMPLOYMENT
347
he Jobstart Allowance of £20 a week is available for up to six months to
eligible long-term unemployed applicants who accept a full-time job with gross
pay of less than £80 a week. Its purpose is to encourage long-term unemployed
people, particularly those on high levels of benefit, to take jobs which they might
not have otherwise considered. By the end of March 1988 some 12,700
applications had been accepted and 2,900 people were then receiving the
Northern
Ireland
Services for
People with
Disabilities
Careers
Service
TRAINING
SERVICES
In Northern Ireland the Department of Economic Development’s Employment
Service, through its network of 28 jobmarkets’, provides a guidance and
placement service for all age groups, offering a range of services for employers
and employees, as in Great Britain. Its facilities include Jobclubs and Restart
courses. A computerised vacancy information system was introduced in
jobmarkets in 1988. Assistance for the long-term unemployed is provided
through the Action for Community Employment Scheme and Enterprise Ulster,
which together provided an average of some 7,600 jobs throughout 1987-88 at a
cost of some £36 million.
The Employment Service provides a resettlement service to people with
disabilities. Disablement Resettlement Officers give practical help in job
placement to individuals with disabilities, as well as advising on rehabilitation
and training courses and on the comprehensive range of special schemes
available. The Disabled Persons (Employment) Act 1944 requires employers who
employ 20 or more people to include 3 per cent registered disabled people within
their workforce. The Disablement Advisory Service gives employers advice and
guidance on making full use of the skills and abilities of disabled workers, by
adopting appropriate employment practices. As part of the ‘Fit for Work’
campaign to improve the employment prospects of disabled people, there is a
scheme of annual awards for firms which excel in carrying out constructive
policies on the employment of people with disabilities. Sheltered employment for
the severely disabled is provided in Great Britain by Remploy Ltd and in
Northern Ireland by Ulster Sheltered Employment Ltd, both non-profit-
distributing companies, and by some local authorities and voluntary bodies.
Under the Employment and Training Act 1973 local education authorities must
provide a careers service for people attending educational institutions other
than universities (which normally have their own careers service) and an
employment service for those leaving them. The careers services in Wales and
Scotland are the responsibility of the respective Secretary of State. In Northern
Ireland it is an integral part of the Department of Economic Development.
Over half of the occupational training in Britain is carried out and funded by
employers. Statutory industrial training boards operate in seven industries to
ensure adequate training by raising a levy from employers and disbursing
grants for approved training. The majority of boards may exempt employers
whose training is satisfactory from payment of most of the levy. In other
industries, non-statutory training organisations, membership of which is
voluntary, take responsibility for the development and encouragement of
training.
Responsibility for implementation of the Government’s training programmes
lies with an executive agency of the Department of Employment. The agency was
created in September 1988, taking over these responsibilities from the Training
Commission (formerly the Manpower Services Commission) and the Govern¬
ment has announced its intention to introduce legislation to abolish the
Commission. The agency’s strategy is based on three objectives: better
348
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Employment
Training
Other Adult
Training
arrangements for skill training to agreed standards; improving the vocational
education and training of all young people; and opening up more opportunities
for adults to train.
Employment Training, a new unified programme, began operating in Septem¬
ber 1988. It combined a number of programmes, the largest of which was the
Community Programme (which provided up to a year’s employment for
long-term unemployed adults). Employment Training represents Britain’s
largest-ever training programme. It has an annual budget of some £1,400
million and is able to provide training for about 600,000 people a year.
The programme is intended for anyone unemployed for over six months and
aims to provide a broad range of training, from very basic skills to skills needed
in high-technology industries; to encourage employers to increase their
involvement in adult training; and to encourage people to take a much greater
interest in their own development. Training is a mixture of directed and
practical training on projects and with an employer. All trainees are entitled to a
minimum of 40 per cent of directed training. Trainees start with a ‘training
agent’, who carries out an initial assessment to identify training needs and draw
up a personal action plan, and then move on to a ‘training manager’, who is
responsible for implementing the action plan. Trainees are able to progress from
one form of training to another, with the aim that no-one should leave the
programme without a period of employer-based training. At least 170,000 places
are being provided for project-based training, and voluntary organisations and
other bodies (which had an important role in the Community Programme) are
expected to continue to make a major contribution, although projects may be
adapted to provide practical training.
Entry to the programme is through a variety of routes including a Restart
interview or by application at a jobcentre. The emphasis of the programme is on
quality training. Accordingly, training agents and managers are required to gain
approved status as a demonstration of the quality of the training provided.
Trainees receive an allowance giving a premium over their benefit entitlement,
and may also receive help with expenses. As trainees approach the end of their
period on the programme, managers will take steps to find trainees a job or
further training if needed.
The Department of Employment is also responsible for a number of other adult
training programmes with the objective of meeting national and local demands
for skills. Training is being more closely directed towards the skills needed by
employers.
Training for Enterprise offers short, practical courses in basic business
management skills to those who want to become self-employed or are running
small businesses. In 1987—88 some 172,000 people participated in the scheme.
It is being expanded, reflecting the importance attached by the Government to
support for small businesses.
The Department also provides support to encourage employers’ training
efforts to help to improve the skills of the workforce and to develop more and
better training. A programme of local training grants and consultancy grants
provides help for employers to identify training needs, retrain existing em¬
ployees or train new recruits. The National Priority Skills Scheme is run through
industrial training organisations to help to tackle key skill needs.
The Skills Training Agency (with a network of 60 skillcentres) provides a wide
range of training services to employers, designed to equip selected employees
with new or improved skills of direct and immediate benefit to their companies.
This training, specially tailored to the employer’s needs, is carried out either at a
skillcentre or on the company’s own premises, using the Agency’s Mobile
EMPLOYMENT
349
Development
of Youth
Training
Vocational
Qualifications
Training Service. The Agency also provides training for overseas clients, either
training students in Britain or sending instructors abroad.
Increased use and understanding of open learning methods and materials are
being promoted through the Open Learning Programme, which will run until
the end of March 1989. It seeks to demonstrate the effectiveness of open and
flexible learning systems. The availability of open learning opportunities has
been extended with the establishment of the Open College, which began
operating in 1987. The College is an independent company which was set up to
promote the widespread acquisition of skills using open learning.
The Department of Employment also has a network of 27 Employment
Rehabilitation Centres, which provide courses, for those with disabilities,
designed to improve physical capacity, restore confidence and guide partici¬
pants towards the type of work or training that would be most likely to lead to a
permanent job.
In July 1988 a national career development loan scheme, which provides
reduced interest loans to assist individuals in obtaining vocational training, was
inaugurated by the Government.
The Youth Training Scheme, introduced in Great Britain in 1983, was expanded
in 1986 so that it now offers two years of training for 16-year-old school-leavers
(including at least 20 weeks off-the-job training) and one year for 17-year-old
school-leavers, with a minimum of seven weeks off-the-job training. The scheme
is primarily employer-based and is open to both employed and unemployed
young people. From September 1988 all those aged 16 or 17 who are not in
employment or full-time education are guaranteed a place on the scheme. All
trainees have the opportunity to obtain a vocational qualification or credit
towards such a qualification, and receive a certificate recording their training
experience and any qualifications. Broadly based training is provided in the first
year, with more specific training thereafter. In 1987-88 some 328,000 people
entered the programme and about 375,000 people are in training at any one
time, up to 150,000 more than under the original programme. Government
funding has risen from £874 million in 1986-87 to £1,006 million in 1987-88
and is planned to rise to £1,189 million by 1989-90.
In Northern Ireland the Youth Training Programme (YTP), launched in 1982
and administered jointly by the Northern Ireland Department of Economic
Development and the Department of Education, caters for the vocational,
education and training needs of those aged 16 or 17. It offers a two-year
programme to 16-year-old school-leavers, with the first year involving off-the-job
training, further education and work experience. The second year is spent in
employment with training (under the ‘YTP Workscheme’) or in more specialised,
project-based full-time training; 17-year-old school-leavers may participate for
one year in either the YTP Workscheme or a full-time training scheme. In
1988-89 the YTP will provide some 10,500 full-time training places, while
provision is also made for up to 6,000 entrants on the YTP Workscheme.
The Technical and Vocational Education Initiative, administered in Great
Britain by the Department of Employment in co-operation with local education
authorities, is intended to stimulate the provision of technical and vocational
education for 14- to 18-year-olds. Projects provide an integrated course of
full-time education leading to nationally recognised qualifications. Most educa¬
tion authorities are operating or have applied to run such schemes, and by
autumn 1988 all education authorities will be involved, and nearly half will have
started to extend the initiative to all their secondary schools and colleges. By
1992 some 5,000 schools and colleges are expected to be participating.
Following the report of a review group, a major reform of the system of vocational
qualifications is being implemented. A new national framework, to be called the
350
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
CONDITIONS OF
EMPLOYMENT
Immigrant
Workers
Equal
Opportunities
National Vocational Qualification, will be fully operational in England, Wales
and Northern Ireland by 1991. A National Council for Vocational Qualifications
has been set up and will be responsible for developing and monitoring the
framework and accrediting qualifications of bodies offering awards within it.
Scotland is not involved in the system at present, as its framework has already
been reformed, through its ‘16+ Action Plan’.
Employment protection legislation provides a number of safeguards for em¬
ployees. For example, most employees are entitled to receive from their
employers written information on their terms and conditions of employment,
while minimum periods of notice when employment is to be terminated are laid
down for both employers and employees. Employees with a minimum period of
service of two years are entitled to lump-sum redundancy payments if their jobs
cease to exist (for example, because of technological improvements or a fall in
demand) and their employers cannot offer suitable alternative work, the cost
being partly met from a fund subscribed to by both sides of industry. Protection
against unfair dismissal is provided by machinery under which an employee
who has been in continuous employment, normally for two years or more, may
complain against an employer for unfair dismissal, and, if successful, obtain
reinstatement, re-engagement or compensation. Other rights for employees
include limited payment when work is not available for reasons other than as a
result of a strike, lock-out or other industrial action, and maternity rights for
female employees. However, the Government is keeping under review the
legislation affecting terms and conditions of employment. Its aim is to ensure
that the obligations placed on employers do not involve significant costs which
discourage recruitment.
Legislation forbids any employment of children under 13 years of age, and
employment in any industrial undertaking of children who have not reached the
statutory minimum school-leaving age, with some exceptions for family
undertakings.
In general, people coming to Britain for employment need a work permit issued
by the Department of Employment. Among other conditions, work permits are
issued only for work requiring a recognised professional qualification, or a high
degree of skill or experience, where the Department is satisfied that the worker
is necessary and there is no suitable worker in Britain or in other European
Community countries to fill the post. In general, the age limits for permits in
most categories are 23 to 54 years. People coming for certain kinds of specialist
employment (for example, ministers of religion and representatives of the
overseas media) and the self-employed do not require work permits but may
require entry clearance issued by a British Consulate or High Commission.
Permits are also issued under the Training and Work Experience Scheme for
nationals of countries outside the European Community who are undertaking
limited periods of training or work experience leading to the acquisition of a
particular skill or qualification and to young people from outside the European
Community to undertake short periods of employment to broaden their work
experience and, if appropriate, to improve their knowledge of English.
European Community workers entering another member state have the same
rights as nationals of that state as regards facilities of the national employment
services, pay and conditions, trade union rights, vocational training facilities,
access to housing, and social security and industrial injury benefits.
The Race Relations Act 1976 makes it unlawful to discriminate on grounds of
colour, race, nationality (including citizenship) or ethnic or national origin, in
employment, training and related matters. The Department of Employment
EMPLOYMENT
351
Earnings
operates a Race Relations Employment Advisory Service with advisers based in
the main areas where there are large ethnic minority communities. Its general
aim is to promote equal opportunity in employment and its advisers offer help
and guidance to employers and unions on a wide range of issues which arise in
the employment of a multiracial workforce. In Northern Ireland there is no
legislation on race relations, but the Fair Employment (Northern Ireland) Act
1976 made unlawful discrimination in employment on grounds of religious
belie! or political opinion. It also established the Fair Employment Agency to
work lor the elimination of such discrimination and to promote equality of
opportunity. In May 1988 the Government announced proposals for legislation
to strengthen the law against religious discrimination and to promote equality
of job opportunity.
The Sex Discrimination Act 1975 makes it unlawful to discriminate in
employment, training and related matters in Great Britain on the grounds of sex
or against married people. The employment provisions were amended by the Sex
Discrimination Act 1986 to bring legislation into line with a European
Community directive on equal treatment. The Equal Pay Act 1970, as amended
in 1984, requires that a woman doing the same or broadly similar work as a
man, or work which has an equal value, should receive equal pay and conditions
of employment. Similar legislation on equal pay and sex discrimination applies
in Northern Ireland.
Practical advice to employers and others on the best arrangements for
implementing equal opportunities policies in Great Britain is given in codes of
practice from the Commission for Racial Equality for policies to eliminate racial
discrimination and from the Equal Opportunities Commission to eliminate
discrimination on grounds of sex; in Northern Ireland a guide to effective
practice is issued by the Department of Economic Development.
Pay rates are often determined by national collective bargaining (see p 356),
normally on an annual basis. However, the Government’s view is that pay
determination should increasingly be conducted at local level and should depend
primarily on performance, merit, company profitability and local supply and
demand for labour. In 1987 the Government announced that it would introduce
a new income tax relief for employees receiving profit-related pay under
registered schemes; by June 1988, 729 schemes had been registered with the
Inland Revenue, covering 103,800 employees.
Basic rates of pay vary widely, and in private industry rates paid locally often
exceed the rates specified in national agreements. Higher rates are usually paid
for overtime and shift work, and weekly earnings may be further increased by
incentive bonus schemes. According to the latest available information from the
Department of Employment’s New Earnings Survey, the average weekly earnings
(including overtime payments) in April 1987 of full-time employees on adult
rates were £189-90 (£224 for men and £148-10 for women). Earnings were
higher for non-manual employees (£217-40) than for manual employees
(£173-50). Some 50 per cent of manual employees and 19 per cent of
non-manual employees received overtime payments. Women’s earnings are
markedly lower than those of men, partly because on average they work shorter
hours, with less overtime paid at premium rates, and partly because they tend to
be concentrated in the less well-paid jobs.
Remuneration in commercial, technical and professional careers is normally
by annual salary paid monthly, often on a scale carrying annual increments.
Most of the senior posts in business, the professions and the Civil Service
command salaries in the range of £20,000 to £35,000 a year gross before tax.
The posts with salaries above £35,000 a year include those of Cabinet ministers,
top-ranking judicial appointments, the highest positions in government
352
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Hours of Work
Holidays with
Pay
Employee Share
Schemes
Other Benefits
TRADE
UNIONS
departments and the largest municipal authorities, editors of daily newspapers,
leading members of professions and the higher managerial posts in banking and
other financial services and in industry. A number of company directors have
salaries exceeding £100,000 a year and some other people, such as leading pop
musicians and other star entertainers, may receive similar amounts through
fees, royalties or fixed contracts.
The basic working week in Great Britain is in the range 37-5 to 40 hours for
manual work and 35 to 38 for non-manual work; a five-day week is usually
worked. Actual hours worked differ from basic hours; in April 1987 for full-time
employees the average was 41-9 for men compared with 37-5 for women. Men
and women in non-manual occupations generally work less overtime than
manual employees.
Legislation limits the permissible hours of work for young people in most
occupations and for adults in a few occupations. The Sex Discrimination Act
1986 repealed restrictions on women, who are now able to work the same hours
as men.
There are no general statutory entitlements to holidays, and holiday entitle¬
ments are frequently determined by collective agreements. These generally
provide for at least four weeks’ paid holiday a year, and nearly all manual
employees covered by national collective agreements have entitlements of four
weeks or more, with over 20 per cent having five weeks or more. Non-manual
workers tend to have longer holidays than manual workers. Holiday entitle¬
ments may also be dependent upon length of service.
Some firms operate profit-sharing and share-saving schemes, and the Govern¬
ment has taken a number of measures to encourage the development of
employee share ownership schemes. The number of schemes open to all
employees in a company has risen from less than 30 in 1979 to over 1,400 in
1988, and over 1-5 million employees have benefited under them.
Additional benefits exist in varying degrees. About half of employees in
employment are covered by pension schemes provided by their employers. Many
employees are also covered by occupational sick pay schemes which are
additional or complementary to the state schemes, and by schemes to provide
private medical treatment. A smaller number are covered by schemes for
redundancy payments above the statutory minimum. Such benefits are more
usual among clerical and professional employees receiving a standard salary
than among manual workers. The provision of low-priced meals at the place of
employment is usual in large undertakings and quite common in smaller ones.
Many offices and shops which are unable to provide canteen facilities for their
staff have adopted luncheon voucher schemes. Among the other executive fringe
benefits sometimes available are company cars, life assurance, free medical
insurance, telephone allowances and low-interest loans.
Trade unions have members in virtually every occupation and represent nearly
half the working population. As well as negotiating pay and other terms and
conditions of employment with employers, they provide certain benefits and
services—for example, educational facilities, legal advice and benefit payments
during industrial disputes—which vary from union to union. Trade unions vary
widely in the composition of their membership, and may be organised either by
occupation (for example, they may recruit clerks or fitters wherever employed) or
by industry, while some are based on a combination of both.
At the end of 1986 the total membership of British trade unions was about
EMPLOYMENT
353
Trades Union
Congress
10-6 million, of whom 80 per cent were in the 24 unions with over 100 000
members. During the 1980s there has been a decline in trade unionism,
r:mln!y refleCting the movement in the economy away from manufacturing
(which has a relatively high level of union membership). The number of unions
as a so fallen as there has been an increase in mergers, and a number of small
unions and of long-established craft unions have been absorbed by larger
unions. At the end of 1987 there were 367 trade unions on the list maintained
, t !Catl°n °ffiCer Under the Trade Union and Labour Relations Act
1974 To be eligible for entry on the list a trade union must show that it consists
w o y or mainly of workers and that its principal purposes include the
regulation of relations between workers and employers, or between workers and
employers associations. Certain rights and privileges are reserved for indepen¬
dent trade unions.
Among the largest unions are the Transport and General Workers Union (1-4
million members in 1986), the Amalgamated Engineering Union (858,000) and
the General, Municipal, Boilermakers and Allied Trades Union (814,000); of the
non-manual workers’ unions, the largest are the National and Local Government
Officers Association (750,000 members) and the National Union of Public
Employees (658,000).
The central organisation of most unions consists of a national executive
council, usually elected by a secret ballot of the individual members of the union
and responsible to the annual conference of delegates from local branches.
Between conferences, councils are the highest authority of unions, and cariy
out policy decisions made by the conference delegates. Most unions also have
regional and district organisations. At the level of the individual member there
are local branches, covering one or more workplaces. The organising of members
in individual places of work, and the negotiation of local pay agreements with
management at the workplace, may be done by full-time district officials of the
union, or, in many cases, by workplace representatives, often called ‘shop
stewards , who are chosen by their fellow members in the place of work to
represent them. Where two or more unions have members in the same
workplace, representatives' or shop stewards’ committees may be formed to
discuss matters of common concern.
A number of trade unions are affiliated to the Labour Party and some sponsor
Members of Parliament. Any trade union wishing to use money for ‘political
objects (usually for party political purposes) must set up a separate fund,
subject to special rules, one of which must allow any member who objects to
contributing to the fund to opt out. Some 5-6 million members contribute to a
political fund and at the end of 1987, 49 unions had rules permitting such a
fund.
In Britain the national centre of the trade union movement is the Trades Union
Congress (TUG), which was founded in 1868. The TUC’s objects are to promote
the interests of its affiliated organisations and to improve the economic and
social conditions of working people. Its affiliated membership comprises 82
trade unions which together represent 8-8 million people, or about 83 per cent of
all trade unionists in Britain, and it exercises power through influence rather
than through sanctions. The TUG deals with all general questions which
concern trade unions, both nationally and internationally, and provides a forum
in which affiliated unions can collectively determine policy. It is consulted by the
Secretary of State for Employment before the appointment of employee
representatives on the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service and
certain other official bodies with an interest in employment matters. There are
eight TUG regional councils for England, and a Wales Trades Union Council.
The annual Congress convenes in September to discuss matters of concern to
354
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Scotland and
Northern
Ireland
Legal
Framework
trade unionists. A General Council represents it between Congresses and is
responsible for carrying out Congress decisions, watching economic and social
developments, providing educational and advisory services to unions, and
presenting to the Government the trade union viewpoint on economic, social
and industrial issues. The TUG is also empowered to mediate in inter-union
disputes in certain circumstances, and uses its authority to try to resolve such
difficulties. The TUC, as well as many individual unions, conducts extensive
educational services for members, mainly concerned with industrial subjects,
trade unionism, and the principles and practice of industrial relations.
The TUC plays an active part in international trade union activity, through its
affiliation to the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions and the
European Trade Union Confederation. It also nominates the British workers’
delegation to the annual International Labour Conference.
Trade unions in Scotland also have their own national central body, the Scottish
Trades Union Congress, which in many respects is similar in constitution and
function to the TUC. Trade unions in Northern Ireland are represented by the
Northern Ireland Committee of the Irish Congress of Trade Unions (ICTU). Most
trade unionists in Northern Ireland are members of organisations affiliated to
the ICTU, while the majority also belong to unions based in Great Britain which
are also affiliated to the TUC. The Northern Ireland Committee of the ICTU has
no political affiliations and enjoys a high degree of autonomy.
The beginnings of the present law on industrial relations were established a
century ago, when trade union members were freed from liability to charges of
criminal conspiracy. At the beginning of the present century unions were given
a wide degree of immunity from legal action under the civil law, and the
immunities of those organising industrial action were also strengthened.
Peaceful picketing during strikes was also made legal.
The Employment Acts 1980, 1982 and 1988 were designed to obtain a better
balance between rights and responsibilities in industrial relations and trade
union affairs. In Northern Ireland there is a broadly similar but separate system
of industrial relations legislation.
Under the 1980 Act, the Government makes funds available to encourage the
wider use of secret union ballots and has produced codes of practice about
picketing and the ‘closed shop' (an agreement between an employer and one or
more unions that union membership is a condition of employment). The Act
limited lawful picketing to the picket's own place of work and restricted the
scope for secondary action such as sympathetic strikes. It provided greater
protection for individuals working in a closed shop.
The 1982 Act increased compensation for employees unfairly dismissed for
non-membership or membership of a union and introduced compensation
(from government funds) for certain employees dismissed between 1974 and
1980 because of non-membership of a union in a closed shop. Terms in
commercial contracts specifying the use of union labour only were made
unenforceable and discrimination on the basis of union membership in the
awarding of contracts was made unlawful. Industrial action which seeks to
persuade employers to discriminate in this way or to interfere with the supply of
goods or services on grounds of union membership is unlawful. The Act also
ended the position which gave trade unions almost complete immunity from all
civil actions by bringing their position into line with that of their individual
officials and members. This means that trade unions now have immunity only
for action taken in furtherance or contemplation of a lawful trade dispute. There
were also changes to the definition of a trade dispute upon which immunity for
civil actions depends. Disputes between employer and employees (that is, most
EMPLOYMENT
355
Employment
Act 1988
EMPLOYERS’
ORGANI¬
SATIONS
dosirml action) continue to qualify as lawful trade disputes, but disputes
which have become unlawful are those where there is no disagreement between
an employer and his or her employees, or those which have little to do with the
n°™a!rSU?eTCTt °f a trade disPute (such ^ terms and conditions of work).
The Trade Union Act 1984 requires that all voting members of the principal
executive committee of a union should be elected by a secret and direct ballot of
members at least once every five years, and requires unions to compile and
maintain a register of members' names and addresses. It also removes legal
immumty from trade unions which call a strike or take other industrial action
without first holding a secret ballot of members concerned and securing a
majonty vote for this action. In addition, the Act requires trade unions with
pohhcal funds to ballot their members at regular intervals to decide whether the
lunds should be retained. Unless members had been balloted in the previous ten
e«ade^Uni0rS With political funds were required to hold a ballot in
1985 86 and all of the 38 unions involved voted to retain their funds.
Provisions in the Employment Act 1988 give trade union members important
new statutory rights. A union member has the right to restrain his or her trade
union from inducing the member and others to take industrial action unless the
action is supported by a properly held secret ballot. Union members also have
the right not to be disciplined unjustifiably by their union, for example, if they
choose to go to work or cross a picket line rather than take industrial action. The
remaining special statutoiy support for closed shops is removed; there is no
immunny for industrial action to enforce closed shop practices of any kind and
dismissal for non-union membership will always be unfair. Provisions to further
improve the internal democracy of unions require the use of postal ballots under
independent scrutiny for the election of all general secretaries, presidents and
members of principal executive committees, and for ballots on political funds.
The Act provides lor a Commissioner who can assist union members taking
court proceedings against their union where such proceedings are necessary to
enforce certain statutory rights.
Many employers in Britain are members of employers' organisations, some of
which are wholly concerned with labour matters although others are also
concerned with commercial matters or trade associations. The primary aims of
such organisations are to help to establish suitable terms and conditions of
employment, including a sound wage structure and proper standards of safety,
health and welfare; to promote good relations with employees and the efficient
use of manpower; and to provide means of settling any disputes which may
arise. Combined employers’ organisations and trade associations may also
represent members points of view as manufacturers or traders to the
Government on commercial matters.
Employers organisations are usually organised on an industry basis rather
than a product basis, for example, the Engineering Employers’ Federation. A few
are purely local in character or deal with a section of an industry or, for example,
with small businesses; most are national and are concerned with the whole
of an industry. In some of the main industries there are local or regional
organisations combined into national federations, while in others, within which
different firms are engaged in making different principal products, there is a
complex structure with national and regional federations for parts of an
industry as well as for the industry as a whole. In December 1987, 332
employers’ associations were known to the Certification Officer. Those which
are national organisations negotiate the national collective agreements for their
industry with the trade unions concerned; most of these national organisations
belong to the Confederation of British Industry.
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
356
Confederation
of British
Industry
INDUSTRIAL
RELATIONS
Collective
Bargaining
and Joint
Consultation
Advisory,
Conciliation
and
Arbitration
Service
The Confederation of British Industry (CBI) is the largest central employers’
organisation in Britain, representing directly or indirectly some 250,000
businesses which together employ about half the working population. It aims
primarily to ensure that Government, national and international institutions
and the public understand the needs, intentions and problems of business.
Membership ranges from the smallest to the largest companies, private sector
and nationalised, and covers a broad spectrum which includes manufacturing,
agriculture, construction, distribution, mining, finance, retailing and insur¬
ance. Most national employers’ organisations, trade associations and
some chambers of commerce are members. Policy is determined by a council
of 400 members, and there is a permanent staff of 325, while there are 13
regional offices and an office in Brussels. The CBI is the British member of the
Union of Industries of the European Community. The CBI nominates the
employers’ representatives on a number of bodies including the National
Economic Development Council, the Health and Safety Commission and the
Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service.
The structure of industrial relations in Britain has been established mainly on a
voluntary basis. The system is based chiefly on the organisation of employees
and employers into trade unions and employers’ associations, and on freely
conducted negotiations at all levels.
Because of the publicity they receive, strikes are commonly thought to occur
much more frequently in Britain than in other countries. Comparisons show,
however, that Britain’s record on industrial disputes is better than those of a
number of other major industrialised countries. In 1986 some 1-9 million
working days were lost in Britain through industrial stoppages, the lowest since
1963. Although the number of days lost rose in 1987 to 3-5 million, this
represented the lowest total, apart from 1986, for over ten years. In the last three
years the number of disputes has been at the lowest level since 1940.
In most industries terms and conditions of employment and procedures for the
conduct of industrial relations are settled by negotiation and agreement between
employers or employers' associations and trade unions. Agreements may be
industry-wide, as is generally the case in the public sector, but are often
supplemented by local agreements in companies or factories (plant bargaining),
and bargaining and consultation are increasingly being conducted at plant level.
In some industries, companies and factories, negotiations are conducted by
meetings held when necessary, while in others, joint negotiating councils or
committees have been established on a permanent basis. The scope of the
various bodies (from national joint industrial councils for whole industries to
works councils and committees in individual workplaces) varies widely, and can
cover such additional matters as production plans, investment, training,
education, welfare and safety. Normally these arrangements for collective
bargaining suffice to settle all questions which are raised, but there is often
provision for matters not so settled to be referred for settlement to independent
conciliation or arbitration. The Employment Protection Act 1975 as amended by
the Employment Act 1980 makes provision for information needed for collective
bargaining purposes to be disclosed by employers to trade unions, subject to
certain safeguards.
The Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service (ACAS) is an independent
statutory body with the general duty of promoting the improvement of industrial
relations, and in particular of encouraging collective bargaining and the
development and (where necessary) reform of collective bargaining machinery.
ACAS is controlled by a council consisting of a full-time chairman and nine
EMPLOYMENT
357
Central
Arbitration
Committee
Office of
Manpower
Economics
Wages
Councils
HEALTH AND
SAFETY AT
WORK
part-time members experienced in industrial relations, of whom three are
nominated after consultation with the CBI, three after consultation with the
UC, and three are independent. The Service conciliates in industrial disputes
in both the public and private sectors. ACAS assistance was sought in about
1,300 disputes in 1987. In addition, there were 145 further requests for ACAS to
provide arbitration, which it may do either by appointing single arbitrators or
boards of arbitration or by referring cases to the Central Arbitration Committee
(see below). Although ACAS has prime responsibility for helping to resolve
disputes, and has also set up major committees of inquiry, the Secretaiy of State
for Employment retains powers to appoint a court of inquiry or committee of
investigation into a dispute, but these are rarely used.
The Service gives advice on all aspects of industrial relations and employment
policies to employers, managers, trade unions, employee representatives and
individuals, and it handled over 300,000 inquiries in 1987. Specialist staff
made over 8,000 advisory visits. ACAS also carries particular responsibility for
attempting conciliation on complaints of infringement of individual employee
rights (such as individual complaints of unfair dismissal; complaints under the
Equal Pay Act 1970, including claims for equal pay for work of equal value; and
complaints on employment matters under the Sex Discrimination Acts 1975
and 1986 and the Race Relations Act 1976). There were over 40,000 such cases
in 1987. Its Work Research Unit promotes, jointly through trade unions and
employers, the improvement of work structures and the quality of working life.
In Northern Ireland the Labour Relations Agency, an independent statutory
body, provides services similar to those provided by ACAS in Great Britain.
The Central Arbitration Committee is an independent standing arbitration
body. It provides boards of arbitration for the settlement of trade disputes
referred to it with the consent of the parties concerned and adjudicates on
claims made under the disclosure of information provisions of the Employment
Protection Act 1975.
The Office of Manpower Economics is an independent non-statutory organisa¬
tion responsible for servicing independent review bodies which advise on the
pay of various public-sector groups. These are the Top Salaries Review Body,
the Armed Forces’ Pay Review Body, the Doctors' and Dentists’ Review Body, and
the Review Body for Nurses and other National Health Service professions. The
Office also provides services for the Pharmacists’ Review Panel, the Police
Negotiating Board and the Civil Service Arbitration Tribunal. It is responsible
for research into pay and associated matters as requested by the Government.
Wages councils fix statutory minimum pay for over 2 million workers aged 21
and over, primarily in service industries such as retailing, catering and
hairdressing. There are 26 councils in Great Britain, each consisting of equal
numbers of representatives of employers and employees in the relevant industry
and up to five independent members. The Wages Act 1986 empowers each
council to fix a minimum hourly rate, an overtime rate and a limit on the
amount an employer can charge for accommodation provided. In Northern
Ireland nine wages councils fix statutory minimum pay for some 30,000
workers.
Employers have a duty at civil and criminal law to take reasonable care of their
employees, and others affected by their work activities, and to provide a safe
system of working, while employees have a duty of care towards each other and
also to take care of their own safety. The principal legislation is the Health
and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974. Its purpose is to secure the health, safety and
358
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
welfare of people at work and to provide for the protection of the public whose
health and safety might be affected by work activities. The Act places general
duties on everyone concerned with work activities, including employers, the
self-employed, employees, manufacturers and suppliers.
The 1974 Act is superimposed on earlier health and safety legislation, such as
the Mines and Quarries Act 1954, the Factories Act 1961 and the Offices, Shops
and Railway Premises Act 1963 and the various regulations made under them.
The earlier legislation imposes specific obligations and standards on, for
example, occupiers of particular types of premises or employers engaged in
particular activities, and covers such matters as the fencing of machinery,
precautions against the exposure of people to toxic dusts and gases, precautions
against fire, dangerous substances and special risks, the safe condition of
premises, and cleanliness, lighting, temperature and ventilation.
Some of the earlier legislation was replaced immediately by the 1974 Act, but
the remainder continues in force pending its progressive replacement by
regulations and codes of practice. Regulations made under the Act govern the
establishment of first-aid facilities, the control of work with lead and the control
of major accident hazards in industry, each set being supported by either an
approved code of practice or other guidance material. Others are in the course of
development, for example, on the control of hazardous substances.
A basic principle underlying the 1974 Act is that employers, in consultation
with their employees, should have the responsibility of working out health and
safety arrangements, within the broad obligations of the law, to suit their own
workplaces. Employers with five or more employees must draw up a written
policy for safety and health, and must inform their employees of the policy and of
the arrangements for its implementation. In workplaces where negotiations take
place with a trade union, the union may appoint safety representatives to be the
employees’ official channel for representation and consultation over safety
matters.
The Health
and Safety
Commission
The Health
and Safety
Executive
The Health and Safety Commission, established by the 1974 Act and account¬
able to Parliament through the Secretary of State for Employment, has
responsibility for developing policies, including guidance, codes of practice, or
proposals for regulations. In the case of proposals for changes in legislation, the
Commission consults the people who will be affected by them and makes
recommendations to the Secretary of State concerned. The Commission has an
independent chairman, three members appointed after consultation with the
CBI, three after consultation with the TUC, and two after consultation with local
authority associations. The Commission has seven subject advisory committees
(on toxic substances, on dangerous substances, on dangerous pathogens, on
genetic manipulation, on the safety of nuclear installations, on the safe
transport of radioactive materials and on medical matters), and 11 industry
advisory committees, for agriculture, ceramics, construction, education, foun¬
dries, health services, oil, paper and board, printing, railways and rubber.
The 1974 Act also set up the Health and Safety Executive, which includes
government inspectorates covering a range of work activities: the Factory
Inspectorate (which also deals with a large number of activities outside factories
such as hospitals and educational establishments) and inspectorates for mines
and quarries, agriculture, nuclear installations and explosives. It also includes
the Medical Division, the Technology Division and the Research and Laboratory
Services Division. The inspectors, who have powers of entry and enforcement,
seek compliance with health and safety legislation in individual workplaces and
give advice. The Medical Division, through the Employment Medical Advisory
Service, provides a nationwide service of advice on the medical aspects of
EMPLOYMENT
359
employment problems to employers, employees, trade unions, doctors and
others.
The Technology Division provides technical advice on industrial health and
safety matters. The Research and Laboratory Services Division provides
scientific and medical support and testing services, and carries out research
both in its own laboratories and through universities and other institutions on
a contract basis, often jointly funded by industry. Areas of study include
explosion risks, fires, protective equipment, methods for monitoring airborne
contaminants, occupational medicine and hygiene, and the safety of engineer¬
ing systems.
In some premises, mostly offices, shops, warehouses, restaurants and hotels,
health and safety legislation is enforced by inspectors appointed by local
authorities, working under guidance from the Health and Safety Commission.
Some other official bodies work under agency agreement with the Health and
Safety Commission, for example, the Railway Inspectorate (concerned with
worker safety on railways) and the Department of Energy (concerned with health
and safety in the oil industry).
Northern Ireland In Northern Ireland the Health and Safety Agency, roughly corresponding to the
Health and Safety Commission, and an Employment Medical Advisory Service
were set up by the Health and Safety at Work (NI) Order 1978. The Northern
Ireland Department of Economic Development, through its Health and Safety
Inspectorate, is responsible for ensuring compliance with health and safety
legislation, which is broadly similar to that for Great Britain.
17 Public Finance
PLANNING
PUBLIC
FINANCE
The Planning
Cycle
Public finance is concerned with taxation, expenditure and borrowing by central
and local government and the financing of public corporations. Central
government raises money from individuals and companies by direct and indirect
taxation and from National Insurance contributions. It spends money on goods
and services, such as health and defence, and in payments to people, such as
social security and pensions. Local government receives substantial grants from
cen ral government and raises revenue mainly through rates (local property
axes) and the community charge (to be introduced in Scotland in April 1989
and in England and Wales in April 1990). From these resources it provides
services such as education, police and fire services, and refuse collection. The
external finance of the nationalised industries and other public corporations
also has to be included in the Government’s expenditure plans. The diagram (see
p 369) shows the relative importance of the various items of receipts (including
borrowing) and expenditure for general government.
The government department responsible for broad control of public finance
and expenditure is the Treasury. The Bank of England (the central bank) advises
t e Government on financial matters, executes monetary policy and acts as
banker to the Government.
The background to the present Government's planning of public finance is the
medium-term financial strategy, introduced in 1980. The Government’s aim is
to maintain a firm financial framework in order to maintain downward pressure
on inflation with the ultimate goal of price stability and to ensure the
continuation of the conditions for sustainable growth. With commitments also
to reduce taxation and curb the role of the State, the Government has therefore
sought to reduce public expenditure as a proportion of national output as well
General government expenditure (excluding privatisation proceeds) as a propor¬
tion of gross domestic product fell from over 46 per cent in the early 1980s to
some 42 per cent in 1987-88. The Financial Statement and Budget Report
1988-89 implies a continued steady decline, to 40 per cent by 1990-91.
Table 42 shows the public expenditure planning totals and projections for the
public sector borrowing requirement to 1991-92.
Each year the Government conducts a review of its expenditure plans for the
forthcoming three years (the ‘public expenditure survey’) and publishes the
resulting totals, together with any changes in National Insurance, in the
Autumn Statement in November. Details of these plans are published each
January. Since 1988 the Autumn Statement has been expanded to include some
of the key material previously contained in the annual public expenditure White
Paper. Details of departments' spending plans are now published as separate
booklets. The Government is proposing that these should in future be published
at the same time as the Supply Estimates, that is on or shortly before Budget
day. The switch to publishing departmental reports alongside the Supply
Estimates (see p 364) is expected to be completed after the 1990 public
expenditure survey. The new system should improve the basis for parliamentaiy
scrutiny of expenditure by linking detailed departmental expenditure plans
more closely to the Supply Estimates.
362
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
PUBLIC
EXPENDITURE
Table 42: Projections of the Public Sector Borrowing Requirement
£ thousand million
1988-89 1989-90 1990-91 1991-92
General government expenditure 183 193 202 210
Public expenditure planning total 157 167 176 184
General government receipts 185 195 205 214
of which : taxes 141 150 158 165
National Insurance
and other contributions 32 34 36 38
Fiscal adjustments3 — 3 4 5
Market and overseas borrowing
of public corporations —1 -1 —1 -1
Public sector borrowing requirement
Per cent of gross domestic product -0.75
Source: Financial Statement and Budget Report 1988—89.
a These imply lower taxes or higher expenditure than assumed in the figures for general government expenditure
and receipts.
The Government's updating of the medium-term financial strategy and
consequent plans for the public finances over the following year, including any
tax changes, are set out in the Financial Statement and Budget Report,
published with the Budget around the end of the financial year (31 March).
Details are announced subsequently in the Finance Bill, which is presented to
Parliament shortly after the Budget and becomes law during the summer.
The public expenditure planning total for 1988—89 has been set at £156,800
million. Of this, £114,200 million is allocated to central government, £42,600
million to local authorities and £1,400 million to nationalised industries and
other public corporations. The reserve (see p 363) accounts for £3,500 million.
Proceeds from privatisation, projected at £5,000 million, count as negative
public expenditure and are therefore deducted from the planning total.
Central government spending is largely voted by Parliament through the
annual Supply Estimates (see p 364). The rest consists mainly of those social
security payments which are made out of the National Insurance Fund. The
largest departmental programmes are those on social security payments (32 per
cent of the 1988—89 planning total), health and personal social services (16
per cent), defence (12 per cent), and education and science (14 per cent). See
Table 43.
About half of local authority spending is financed by grants from central
government. The rest is met from rates (to be replaced by the community
charge), surpluses on trading, rents and borrowing. Education accounts for
over one-third of local authority spending, with law and order, housing and
other environmental services, personal social services and transport accounting
for most of the remainder.
The 1988—89 planning total included £1,400 million for spending by public
corporations, of which £700 million was attributable to nationalised industries’
external finance.
Of planned expenditure in 1988—89, cash payments to the personal sector—
for example, pensions and other social security benefits—comprise over
one-third; pay (other than that included in departmental running costs) and
PUBLIC FINANCE
363
Reserve
Cash Limits
purchases of assets, goods and services each about one-quarter; and departmen¬
tal running costs a little under one-tenth. The breakdown of each department’s
spending varies. Capital spending in 1988-89 by central and local government
is planned to be £17,600 million and that by nationalised industries and other
public corporations £5,900 million.
Planned expenditure includes an unallocated reserve to cover all additions to
epartmental spending during the year, whether arising from policy changes
new initiatives or revisions to the estimated costs of demand-led programmes’
For 1988-89 the reserve is £3,500 million. The reserve has been set at higher
levels for each of the next two years but some will normally be allocated to
departments as spending plans are made firmer.
Table 43: Planned Expenditure by Central Government Departments and
Local Authorities 1988-89
£ million
Central
government
Defence
Foreign and Commonwealth Office
European Community
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food
Trade and Industry
Energy
Employment
Transport
Environment—housing
Environment—other environmental
services
Home Office and legal departments
Education and Science
Arts and Libraries
Health and Social Security—health
and personal social services
Health and Social Security—social
security
Scotland
Wales
Northern Ireland
Chancellor's departments
Other departments
Totals
19,208
2,126
800
1,993
1,383
512
4,111
1,457
1,320
441
2,090
2,939
417
17,549
44,452
3,694
1,665
3,995
2,468
1,607
114,225
Local
authorities
200
91
131
2,649
1,687
3,372
4,935
15,032
497
3,124
4,007
4,409
1,683
826
42,642
Source: The Government's Expenditure Plans 1988-89 to 1990-91 (the public expenditure White Paper).
Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
Note; Expenditures on certain services (such as education) are made under the programmes for Scotland, Wales
and Northern Ireland in addition to other departmental programmes.
Some 40 per cent of public expenditure is subject to control by cash limits
(external financing limits in the case of nationalised industries). Another 40 per
cent consists of demand-led services (for example, social security benefits) on
which, once policy and rates of payment have been determined, expenditure in
364
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Estimates
Examination
and Audit
of Public
Expenditure
Comptroller and
Auditor General
Public
Accounts
Committee
the short run depends on the number of eligible recipients. The remaining 20
per cent is current expenditure of local authorities, which central government
does not directly control; however, the major part of the contribution by central
government to such expenditure, rate support or revenue grant, is subject to
cash limits.
Once fixed, cash limits are not usually revised during the course of the year
unless a decision is taken to alter the level of provision for the service concerned.
There is, however, a limited facility for carrying forward underspending on the
capital components of cash limits. If any overspending of cash limits occurs, a
corresponding deduction is normally made from the limits for the following year.
The annual public expenditure survey conducted by the Treasury provides the
basis for the Estimates which each government department submits to the
Treasury in December, giving details of its cash requirements for the financial
year beginning in the following April. After approval by the Treasury, these
Supply Estimates are presented to Parliament in March, usually at the same
time as the Budget (see p 365). Parliament approves them in July as part of the
Annual Appropriation Act, expenditure between 1 April and this date being
covered by Votes on Account approved before the start of the financial year.
Supplementary Estimates may also be presented to Parliament during the
course of the year. If any Supply Estimate is overspent, the Public Accounts
Committee (see below) will investigate fully before Parliament is asked to approve
any Excess Vote to balance the account. In each parliamentary session, up to
three ‘Estimates days' are available for debates on the Supply Estimates,
following scrutiny by select committees of the House of Commons.
For 1988—89 the Supply Estimates provided for total expenditure of £108,300
million, of which three-quarters was to be direct spending by central govern¬
ment and the remainder mainly grants to local authorities. Some items of
central government expenditure—for example, the salaries and pensions of
judges—are paid directly out of the Consolidated Fund (see p 365) as standing
services and are not subject to annual approval by Parliament.
Examination of public expenditure is carried out by select committees of the
House of Commons, which study in detail the activities of particular government
departments and require the attendance of ministers and officials for cross-
examination. The audit of the Government’s spending which follows up the
control inherent in parliamentary approval of the Estimates is exercised
through the functions of the Comptroller and Auditor General and the Public
Accounts Committee.
The Comptroller and Auditor General, an officer of the House of Commons
appointed by the Crown, has two distinct functions. As Comptroller General, he
has the duty to ensure that all revenue and other public money payable to the
Consolidated Fund and the National Loans Fund (see p 365) is duly paid and
that all payments out of these funds are authorised by statute. As Auditor
General, his duties are to certify the accounts of all government departments
and those of a wide range of other public sector bodies; to examine revenue
accounts and inventories; and to report the results of his examinations to
Parliament. He also has wide statutory powers to carry out, and report to
Parliament on, examinations of economy, efficiency and effectiveness in the use
of resources by those bodies he audits or to which he has right of access.
The Public Accounts Committee considers the appropriation and other accounts
of government departments and the Comptroller and Auditor General’s reports
on them and on the economy, efficiency and effectiveness of departments’ use of
PUBLIC FINANCE
365
Central
Government
Financial
Funds
THE BUDGET
TAX
REVENUE
their resources. The Committee takes evidence from the official heads of
departments and relevant public sector bodies and submits to Parliament
reports which carry considerable weight, and its recommendations are taken
very seriously by the departments and organisations that it examines. The
Government's formal reply to the reports is presented to Parliament by the
Treasury in the form of Treasury minutes and the reports and minutes are
usually debated annually in the House of Commons.
The Government's sterling expenditure is largely met out of the Consolidated
Fund, an account at the Bank of England into which tax receipts and other
revenues are paid. This is also known as the Exchequer. Any excess of
expenditure over receipts is met by the National Loans Fund, which is another
official sterling account at the Bank of England and is the repository for funds
borrowed by the Government. The National Insurance Fund, into which
contributions are paid by all employers and employed people, is used mainly to
pay for social security benefits; a small proportion of National Insurance
contributions is paid direct to the Consolidated Fund in order to help finance
the National Health Service.
The Budget—usually in March or April—sets out the Government’s proposals for
changes in taxation and is the main occasion for an annual review of economic
policy. The proposals are announced to the House of Commons by the
Chancellor of the Exchequer in the Budget statement and are published in the
Financial Statement and Budget Report. This report also contains a review of
recent developments in the economy, together with an economic forecast—one
of two which the Government is required to publish each year (the other being
contained in the Autumn Statement)—and sets out the fiscal and monetary
framework within which economic policy operates. This is the medium-term
financial strategy (see p 361).
The Budget statement is followed by the moving of a set of Budget resolutions
in which the proposals are embodied. These resolutions are the foundation of
the Finance Bill, in which the proposals are set out for detailed consideration by
Parliament, becoming law as the Finance Act, usually in the following July.
Some of the resolutions give temporary effect, under the Provisional Collection of
Taxes Act 1968, to certain of the tax proposals in the Budget, thus enabling the
Government to collect certain taxes provisionally, at the levels provided by the
Budget proposals, pending enactment of the Finance Bill.
The bulk of the tax proposals are concerned with changes in the rates or
coverage of taxes, the introduction of new taxes or the abolition of existing ones
and changes in the administrative machinery. These changes are made not only
with regard to the revenue required but also with regard to their effect on the
way the economy performs.
For two taxes—income tax and corporation tax—annual Ways and Means
resolutions followed by Finance Act clauses are required to maintain their
existence, since they are annual rather than permanent taxes. Thus, a Budget
and a Finance Act are necessary at or about the beginning of each financial year.
Tax changes can be made at other times of the year, however, either by specific
legislation or by the use of the regulator, which permits limited changes between
Budgets in value added tax (by up to 25 per cent) and the main excise duties (by
up to 10 per cent).
The three principal sources of tax revenue are: taxes on income and profits,
which include income tax and corporation tax; taxes on capital, which include
inheritance tax, capital gains tax and stamp duties; and indirect taxes, which
include customs and excise duties, value added tax (VAT), rates and the
366
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Taxes on
Income and
Profits
Income Tax
community charge (which are set and collected by local authorities to help meet
their expenditure), and licence duties (for example, on motor vehicles).
Table 44 shows the revenue of central government from taxation and other
sources in 1987-88 and the forecasts for 1988-89.
Taxes on individual incomes are progressive in that larger incomes bear a
proportionately higher rate of tax. Thresholds and rate bands for income tax,
inheritance tax and capital gains tax are raised automatically each year in line
with the rise in retail prices over the previous calendar year unless the
Government proposes otherwise and Parliament approves. The Inland Revenue
assesses and collects the taxes on income and capital and the stamp duties. HM
Customs and Excise collects the most important taxes on expenditure (the
customs and excise duties and VAT).
Income tax is imposed for the year of assessment beginning on 6 April. For
1988-89 the basic rate of 25 per cent applies to the first £19,300 of taxable
income. A rate of 40 per cent applies to income above this level. These rates apply
to total income including both earned and investment income.
A number of personal allowances and reliefs reduce the amount of a person’s
taxable income compared with gross income. The main allowances are £2,605
for the income of a single person or the earned income of a wife and £4,095 for
the income of a married man. Among the most important of the reliefs is that for
mortgage interest payments on borrowing for house purchase. Relief at the
basic rate is usually given ‘at source’ (that is, repayments which the borrower
makes to the lender are reduced to take account of tax at the basic rate and the
tax refund is then passed directly by the tax authorities to the building society or
bank making the loan rather than to the individual taxpayer). Another relief is
that under the business expansion scheme, whereby certain investors in
trading companies without a stock market quotation (usually small companies)
are able to obtain relief on up to £40,000 invested in any one year.
Assuming only the basic personal allowances, a single person with an income
of £10,000 a year in 1988—89 pays £1,849 in income tax while a married man
with the same income pays £1,476. The amount of tax payable by a single
person varies from, for example, £599 on an annual income of £5,000 to
£24,063 on one of £70,000.
At present, the income of married couples is usually taxed as if it all belonged
to the husband. A couple may, however, choose to have the wife’s earnings
charged separately for tax on condition that the husband receives the single
instead of the married personal allowance. Any joint investment income,
however, is taxed as part of the husband's income. From April 1990 there is to be
a new system of independent taxation for husbands and wives. All taxpayers,
irrespective of sex or marital status, will be entitled to a personal allowance
against income from all sources. Married women will pay their own tax on the
basis of their own income. In addition, there will be a married couple’s
allowance, equal to the difference between the present single and married
allowances. This will go, in the first instance, to the husband so as to prevent a
fall in his total tax allowances. However, if his income is not high enough to use
it in full, he will be able to transfer the unused portion to his wife, to set against
her income.
Most wage and salary earners pay their income tax under a Pay-As-You-Earn
(PAYE) system whereby tax is deducted (and accounted for to the Inland
Revenue) by the employer, thus enabling them to keep as up to date as possible
with their tax payments.
In general, income tax is charged on all income which originates in Britain
(although some forms of income—such as certain social security benefits—are
exempt) and on all income arising abroad of people resident in Britain. Interest
PUBLIC FINANCE
367
on certain British government securities belonging to people not ordinarily
resident in Britain is exempt. Britain has entered into agreements with many
countries providing for relief from double taxation; where such agreements are
not in force unilateral relief is often allowed. British residents working abroad
for the whole year benefit from 100 per cent tax relief.
Table 44: Consolidated Fund Revenue 1987-88 and 1988-89
1988-89
1987-88
(£ million)
Budget
forecast
(£ million)
Inland Revenue
Income tax
Corporation tax3
Petroleum revenue taxb
Capital gains tax
Development land taxc
Inheritance taxd
Stamp duties
41,402
15,734
2,296
1,379
28
1,078
2,440
42,100
19,800
1,180
1,950
10
1,000
1,950
Percentage
of total
32-8
15-4
0-9
1-5
0-8
1-5
Total Inland Revenue
64,358
68,000
530
Customs and Excise
Value added tax
Oil
Tobacco
Spirits, beer, wine, cider and perry
Betting and gaming
Car tax
Other excise duties
European Community own
resources
Customs duties, etc.
Agricultural levies
Total Customs and Excise
24,249
7,816
4,759
4,281
830
1,063
9
1,486
176
44,675
Vehicle excise duties'*
Gas levy
Interest and dividends
Otherf
2,645
502
1,096
9,693
26,200
8,400
5,000
4,500
890
1,260
20
1,550
120
47,900
2,770
420
680
8,440
20-4
6-6
3-9
3-5
0-7
10
1-2
01
37-4
2-2
0-3
0-5
6-6
Total Consolidated Fund revenue
122,969
128,200
1000
Sources: Financial Statistics and Financial Statement and Budget Report 1988-89.
a Including advance corporation tax:
Net of repayments 4,939 5 350 4-1
Including advance petroleum revenue tax.
r Abolished from March 1985.
d Including estate duty and capital transfer tax.
e Including driving licence receipts.
Including broadcast receiving licences, the 10 per cent of own resources refunded by the European Community
to meet the costs of collection, privatisation proceeds and oil royalties.
Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
368
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Corporation
Tax
Petroleum
Revenue
Tax
Taxes on
Capital
Inheritance
Tax
Capital Gains
Tax
Stamp Duty
Company taxation in Britain is at a lower rate than in most other industrialised
countries. Companies pay corporation tax on their profits remaining after
deduction of certain allowances. A company which distributes profits to its
shareholders is required to make to the Inland Revenue an advance payment of
corporation tax. In general, this payment is set against a company’s liability to
corporation tax on its income and capital gains and the recipient of the
distribution (if resident in Britain) is entitled to a tax credit, which satisfies his
or her liability to income tax at the basic rate.
The main rate of corporation tax is 35 per cent, with a reduced rate of 25 per
cent for small companies (those with profits below £100,000 in a year). Marginal
relief between the main rate and the small companies’ rate is allowed for
companies with profits between £100,000 and £500,000. There is a 4 per cent
annual writing-down allowance for industrial buildings and a 25 per cent
writing-down allowance for machinery and plant.
Petroleum revenue tax (deductible in computing profits for corporation tax) is
charged on profits from the production, as opposed to the refining or other
forms of processing, of oil and gas under licence in Britain and on its
Continental Shelf. The rate of tax is 75 per cent. Each licensee of an oilfield is
charged on the profits from that field after deduction of certain allowances and
reliefs which, among other things, encourage exploration, appraisal and future
field development. The tax is computed at half-yearly intervals and the bulk of it
is collected in monthly instalments.
Inheritance tax applies to transfers of personal wealth made on, or up to seven
years before, the donor’s death. Subject to certain exemptions and reliefs, the
first £110,000 of the cumulative total of chargeable transfers is not liable to tax;
higher amounts are taxed at a single rate of 40 per cent. A tapered system of
relief reduces the tax on transfers made between three and seven years before
the donor’s death. Relief ranges from 20 per cent of the tax payable for transfers
made between three and four years of death to 80 per cent for those made
between six and seven years of death.
Capital gains realised on the disposal of assets are liable to capital gains tax or,
in the case of companies, to corporation tax. Individuals are exempt from tax in
respect of total net gains of up to £5,000 in any one year and most trusts on
gains of up to £2,500. Gains above these limits are added to the individual’s
income or the company’s profits and are taxed at the appropriate rate of income
tax or corporation tax respectively. Only gains arising since March 1982 are
subject to tax and the effects of inflation are allowed for when measuring gains.
The tax on gifts and certain deemed disposals of assets may be deferred until the
assets are sold. Certain assets, including the principal private residence,
chattels worth less than £3,000 (and any chattels with a predictable life of less
than 50 years except those on which the expenditure qualifies for a capital
allowance), private motor cars, and National Savings Certificates and Bonds are
normally exempt. Gains on government securities and certain corporate bonds
are exempt from the tax, as are gains on shares owned under the Personal
Equity Plan (designed to encourage wider share ownership) provided the plan
has been held for at least one calendar year.
Transfers or sales ol property (other than of stocks and shares) above a value of
£30,000 are subject to stamp duty of 1 per cent on the whole of the purchase
price. Transfers or sales of stocks and shares are subject to stamp duty of 0-5 per
cent regardless of the amount. Transfers by gift and transfers to charities are
exempt.
Planned Receipts and Expenditure of General
Government 1988-89
Pence in every pound
Receipts  Expenditure
Income tax
Corporation tax
Capital taxes
Defence
Foreign and
Commonwealth Office
Agriculture, Fisheries
and Food
Trade and Industry
Employment
Transport
Value added tax
Local authority rates
Duties on petrol, alcoholic
drinks and tobacco
Other expenditure taxes
Petroleum revenue tax and
oil royalties
National Insurance and
other contributions
Environment-housing
Environment-other
environmental services
Home Office
Education and Science
Health and Social
Security-health and
personal social services
Health and Social
Security-social
security
Scotland
Wales
Northern Ireland
Interest and dividends
Chancellor’s
departments
Gross trading surpluses
and rent
1
Other departments
2
Reserve
Other items and adjustments 2
General government  -1
borrowing requirement
Gross debt interest
Adjustments (net of
privatisation proceeds)
Total
100 100 Total
Cash totals £183,000 million
Fin*ncial State™ent and Budget Report 1988-89 and The Government’s Expenditure Plans
1988-89 to 1990—91.
370
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Taxes on
Expenditure
Value Added
Tax
Excise Duties
Car Tax
Customs Duties
Value added tax (VAT) is a broadly based tax, chargeable at 15 per cent. It is
collected at each stage in the production and distribution of goods and services
by taxable persons (generally those whose business has a turnover of more than
£22,100 a year). The final tax is borne by the consumer. When a taxable person
purchases taxable goods or services, the supplier charges VAT (the taxable
person’s input tax). When the taxable person supplies taxable goods or services
to customers, then they in turn are charged VAT (the taxable person's output
tax). The difference between the output tax and the input tax is paid to, or
repaid by, Customs and Excise.
There are two methods by which certain goods and services are relieved from
VAT: one is by charging VAT at a zero rate (a taxable person does not charge tax
to a customer but reclaims any input tax paid to suppliers): the other is by
exemption (a taxable person does not charge a customer any output tax and is
not entitled to deduct or reclaim the input tax). Zero-rating applies to exports
and to most food: books, newspapers and periodicals; fuel (except for petrol and
other fuels for road use) and power; construction of new buildings; certain
international services; public transport fares; caravans and houseboats; young
children’s clothing and footwear; drugs and medicines supplied on prescription;
specified aids for handicapped people; and certain supplies by or to charities.
Exemption applies to land (including rents), insurance, postal services, betting,
gaming (other than by gaming machines and lotteries), finance, education,
health, burial and cremation, and supplies by trade unions and professional
bodies to their members.
Hydrocarbon oils used as road fuel bear higher rates of duty than those used for
other purposes. Kerosene, most lubricating oils and other oils used for certain
industrial processes are free of duty. There are duties on spirits, beer, wine,
made-wine, cider and perry, based on alcoholic strength and volume. Spirits
used for scientific, medical, research and industrial processes are generally free
of duty. The cigarette duty is based partly on a charge per 1,000 cigarettes and
partly on a percentage of retail price. Duty on other tobacco products is based on
weight. Duties are charged on off-course betting, pool betting, gaming in
casinos, bingo and gaming machines. The rates vary with the particular form of
gambling; duty is charged either as a percentage of gross or net stakes or, in the
case of gaming machines, as a fixed amount per machine according to the cost
of playing it and its prize level.
The licence duty on a private motor car or light van is £100 a year; for motor
cycles it is £10, £20 or £40 a year according to engine capacity. The licence duty
on goods vehicles is charged on the basis of gross weight and, if over 12 tonnes,
according to the number of axles; the duty is designed to ensure that such
vehicles cover at least their road costs through the tax paid (licence duty and fuel
duty). Taxis and buses are taxed according to seating capacity.
Cars, motor cycles, scooters, mopeds and some motor caravans, whether British
made or imported, are chargeable with car tax at 10 per cent of the wholesale
value (motor caravans are charged at 10 per cent of 60 per cent of the wholesale
value). VAT is charged on the price including car tax.
Customs duties are chargeable in accordance with the Common Customs Tariff
of the European Community (no such duties are chargeable on goods which
qualify as Community goods). Special customs import and export procedures
are operated under the Common Agricultural Policy, and Community levies are
chargeable on a wide range of agricultural products from non-Community
countries. Customs duties and agricultural levies are accountable to the
European Community as ‘own resources’.
PUBLIC FINANCE
371
PUBLIC
SECTOR
BORROWING
Net Public
Sector Debt
Control of public borrowing is a central part of the Government’s medium-term
financial strategy. In 1987-88 the public sector borrowing requirement (PSBR)
was negative, that is, the public sector repaid debt. The repayment or surplus
amounted to some 0-75 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP). For 1988-89
the PSBR has been set at a similar level. Thereafter, a zero PSBR is to be the
norm (see Table 42). The Government seeks to finance fully any borrowing by
sales of public sector debt outside the banking and building society system.
Sales of government stock (known as gilt-edged stock as there is no risk of
default) to the non-bank private and overseas sectors amounted to £7,400
million in 1987-88 and sales of National Savings instruments £2,100 million.
Gilt-edged stock is marketable and is traded on the stock market. Individuals
may also make transactions through post offices in stocks included on the
Department for National Savings’ Stock Register. Pension funds and life
insurance companies have the largest holdings. The Government issues both
conventional and indexed stock (on which principal and interest are linked to
the movement in the retail prices index).
The main range of National Savings products is non-marketable and is
designed to attract personal savings. They are an important additional source of
government funding and are aimed at personal savers who are not attracted to
gilt-edged stock. The chief products are National Savings Certificates, Income
Bonds, Deposit Bonds and National Savings Bank Investment Accounts. In
1987-88 the main contributors to funding were Income Bonds (£1,483 million
net) and the Investment Account (£924 million), and the contribution made by
net accrued interest from National Savings as a whole (that is, interest added
less that paid out) amounted to £966 million in 1987-88.
The other principal debt instruments of central government are Treasury bills
and certificates of tax deposit. Treasury bills are 91-day bills sold at a weekly
auction, certificates of tax deposit may be purchased by individuals or corporate
bodies to be tendered in settlement of a range of taxes and are non-marketable.
The bulk of public corporations borrowing is met by central government
through the National Loans Fund although their temporary borrowing needs are
met largely from the market, usually under Treasury guarantee. That part of
local authority borrowing met by central government is supplied by authorisa¬
tion of Parliament through the Public Works Loan Board from the National
Loans Fund. (The Board remains an independent body even though it is merged
for administrative purposes with the former National Debt Office, forming the
National Investment and Loans Office.) The local authorities also borrow directly
from the market, both short-term and long-term, through a range of instru¬
ments. Some public corporations and local authorities also borrow on occasion,
under special statutory power and with Treasury consent, in foreign currencies.
Public sector borrowing each year represents an addition to the net debt of the
public sector. This debt is the consolidated debt of the public sector less its
holdings of liquid assets. At the end of March 1987 net debt stood at £172,000
million, 43 per cent of GDP. Central government accounted for just over 60 per
cent of net public sector debt, local authorities for 24 per cent and public
corporations for the remaining 15 per cent. At the same date the consolidated
debt of the public sector was £205,000 million and its liquid assets £33,000
million. Central government accounted for 93 per cent of public sector
consolidated debt and for 83 per cent of public sector liquid assets.
18 Banking
and Financial
Institutions
Britain is a major financial centre providing a wide range of specialised services.
Historically the industry was located in the famous ‘Square Mile’ in the City of
London. This remains broadly the case, even though the markets for financial
and related services have grown and diversified greatly. The City’ now refers to a
collection of markets and institutions in and around the Square Mile. This area
has the greatest concentration of banks in the world (responsible for about a
quarter of total international bank lending), the world’s biggest insurance
market (with about one-fifth of the international market) and a stock exchange
with a larger listing of securities than any other exchange, and remains the
principal international centre for transactions in a large number of commodi¬
ties. It also exploits its position between the time zones of the United States and
the Far East.
Banking, finance and insurance accounted for 10-5 per cent of Britain’s total
output in 1986, a share which has risen sharply over the past decade. They
accounted for 3-8 per cent of employment in 1987. The net identified overseas
earnings of British financial institutions in 1987 were £9,400 million.
Development of The increase in the rate of international movements of capital in the 1960s and
Financial 1970s took the form mainly of increased bank lending and foreign exchange
Services trading. London became the international centre of this activity, particularly in
the eurocurrency markets (see p 384), and the number of overseas banks
represented in London is larger than in any other financial centre. In the 1980s,
with increasing international competition in financial services and with
developments in technology, there has also taken place a rapid growth in the
international markets for securities. London again has played an important
role, especially in the market for eurobonds, in a variety of currencies (see
p 384). The International Stock Exchange (see p 382) has reorganised itself,
partly in order to adapt to this situation, and has changed its membership rules
with the result that numerous financial institutions in London, both British
and foreign-based, have formed new alliances with each other.
Supervision To help Britain’s financial services industry to respond to the new competitive
climate, while at the same time maintaining adequate safeguards for the
investing public, the Government has brought in three pieces of legislation
affecting the supervision of the industry: the Financial Services Act 1986, the
Building Societies Act 1986 (see p 378) and the Banking Act 1987 (see p 375).
Under the Financial Services Act a new supervisory framework has been built
up. Investment businesses (those effecting transactions in, managing or giving
advice on investments taking the form of securities of all kinds, financial and
commodity futures, life assurance, options contracts and certain other
instruments—but not wholesale money-market instruments, for which see
374
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
THE BANK
OF ENGLAND
p 383) require authorisation and have to obey rules of conduct based on
principles set out in the legislation. The Secretary of State for Trade and
Industry is empowered to authorise and regulate the carrying on of investment
business. However, the majority of these powers have been transferred to a
designated agency—the Securities and Investments Board (SIB)—on the condi¬
tion that it continues to meet specified criteria. The SIB, in turn, is empowered
to recognise self-regulating organisations (SROs) provided that they offer
investors protection at least equivalent to that provided by the SIB. Both the SIB
and the SROs are practitioner-based bodies. Most investment businesses have
opted to achieve authorisation by obtaining membership of an SRO.
In enacting each of the three pieces of legislation referred to above, the
Government has made provision for improved co-operation between supervisors
in different financial sectors, while seeking to avoid any harm thereby to
efficiency, competitiveness and flexibility within the sectors themselves. The
Bank of England, the Building Societies Commission, the Treasury and the
Department of Trade and Industry have prime responsibility for supervision in
different parts of the financial sector. There are new government powers to
investigate insider dealing, and a department—the Serious Fraud Office—has
been set up to investigate and prosecute cases of serious or complex fraud. The
Government is helping to extend international co-operation in investigating
suspected breaches of rules or requirements in the field of investment business:
agreements about exchange of information were reached with the United States
in 1986 and with Japan in 1987.
Changes within the financial services sector as a whole are expected to erode
traditional distinctions between financial institutions, with single firms provid¬
ing a broader range of services, both in domestic and international markets.
The Bank of England was established in 1694 by Act of Parliament and Royal
Charter as a corporate body: the entire capital stock was acquired by the
Government under the Bank of England Act 1946. The Bank’s main functions
are to execute monetary policy, to act as banker to the Government, to act as a
note-issuing authority and to exercise prudential supervision over and provide
banking facilities for the banking system. As banker to the Government, the
Bank of England is responsible for arranging government borrowing and for
managing the National Debt. It also manages the Exchange Equalisation
Account and maintains the register of holdings of government securities on
behalf of the Treasury. More generally the Bank has a responsibility for
overseeing the soundness of the financial system as a whole.
The Bank of England has the sole right in England and Wales of issuing
banknotes. The note issue is fiduciary, that is to say, it is no longer backed by
gold but by government and other securities. The Scottish and Northern Ireland
banks have limited rights to issue notes; these issues, apart from a small
amount specified by legislation for each bank, must be fully covered by holdings
of Bank of England notes. Responsibility for the provision of coin lies with the
Royal Mint, a government trading fund.
The Government’s medium-term financial strategy provides the framework for
its economic policy. Monetary and fiscal policies are designed to keep a steady
downward pressure on the growth of money GDP (the average measure of gross
domestic product at current prices) over the medium term, so bringing down
inflation. The essential instrument of the Government’s monetary policy is
interest rates. These are influenced by the Bank's operations in the financial
markets (see p 375) on behalf of the Government.
The Bank is able to influence money-market conditions through its dealings
with the discount houses (see p 378), which developed in the nineteenth
century as bill brokers for industrialists. The discount houses hold mainly
BANKING AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
375
DEPOSIT¬
TAKING
INSTITUTIONS
Treasury, local authority and commercial bills and negotiable certificates of
deposit financed by short-term loans from the banks. If on a particular day there
is a shortage of cash in the banking system as a result, for example, of large tax
payments or heavy sales of government securities, the Bank generally relieves
the shortage either by buying bills from the discount houses or by lending
directly to them. This permits the banks to replenish their cash balances at the
Bank by recalling some of their short-term loans to the discount houses. The
Bank conducts its operations in such a way as to keep short-term interest rates
within an unpublished band.
Under the Financial Services Act 1986 (see p 373) the Bank is responsible for
the supervision of the main wholesale markets in London for money, foreign
exchange and gold bullion. (The markets are wholesale in the sense that the
participants are professional operators dealing in large amounts of money.)
Under the Banking Act 1987 deposit-taking organisations require authorisa¬
tion from the Bank of England (unless they are specifically exempted) and are
subject to the Bank of England’s supervision. The Act—whose broad aim is to
strengthen supervisory arrangements—created a Board of Banking Supervision
to advise the Governor and senior staff of the Bank and increased the Bank’s
powers to modify the conduct of banking institutions, to investigate cases of
illegal deposit-taking, to block bank mergers and takeovers on prudential
grounds and to require information to be supplied to it by banks. The Act also
enables information to be shared, in strictly controlled ways, among supervisors
in different financial services, and permits auditors to make reports to the Bank
of England about a bank if the circumstances justify it.
On behalf of the Treasury, the Bank manages the Exchange Equalisation
Account (EEA), which holds Britain's official reserves of gold, foreign exchange,
SDRs (which are claims on the International Monetary Fund) and European
Currency Units (ECUs). Using the resources of the EEA, the Bank may intervene
in the foreign exchange markets to check undue fluctuations in the exchange
value of sterling.
Deposit-taking institutions may be broadly divided into the ‘monetary sector',
which includes the banks and is supervised by the Bank of England, and those
institutions outside the monetary sector, of which the most important are the
building societies and the National Savings Bank. The monetary sector includes
certain banks in the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man.
Another useful distinction is that between ‘retail’ banking and ‘wholesale’
banking. Retail banking is primarily for personal customers and small
businesses. Its main services are cash withdrawal facilities and systems for
transferring funds, notably by cheque. Competition between the banks and the
building societies in the provision of money transmission services has increased
during the last two decades and is expected to increase further (see p 378).
Wholesale business involves the taking of large deposits at higher rates of
interest, the deployment of funds in money-market instruments (see p 383) and
the making of large loans and investments. Nearly all the commercial banks in
Britain engage in some wholesale activities and some, such as the merchant and
overseas banks, centre their business on them. Many of such wholesale dealings
are conducted on the inter-bank market, that is, among the banks themselves.
In April 1988 there were 612 institutions in the monetary sector, comprising
19 retail banks (including the Banking Department of the Bank of England), 34
accepting houses (merchant banks), 184 other British banks, 367 foreign banks
and 8 discount houses.
The Retail
Banks
The major retail banks are those with a significant branch network, which offer
a full range of financial services to both individuals and companies, including
376
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Deposits
and Assets
Branches
and
Accounts
Payment
Systems and
Services
the provision of current and deposit accounts and various kinds of loan
arrangements, together with a full range of money transmission facilities.
The dominant banks in England and Wales are Barclays, Lloyds, Midland,
National Westminster and the TSB Group, which was formed out of the former
Trustee Savings Banks and achieved a successful share flotation in 1986. The
major Scottish banks are Bank of Scotland, Clydesdale and Royal Bank of
Scotland. Other important retail banks are Co-operative Bank, Yorkshire Bank
and Girobank—at present a subsidiary of the Post Office but which is to be
offered for sale to the private sector. Northern Ireland is served by branch
networks of five banks, two British, two Irish and one Australian.
With the growth of the financial services sector since the 1970s, and with a
relaxation of restrictions on competition among financial institutions, the
major banks have increasingly diversified the services they provide. They have
lent more money for house purchases, and have established or acquired
substantial interests in finance houses, leasing and factoring companies,
merchant banks, securities dealers, insurance companies and unit trust
companies.
The banks provide loan facilities to industrial companies and, since the
1970s, have provided more medium- and long-term loans than they did
formerly. They have also become important providers of finance for small firms:
they have supported a loan guarantee scheme under which 70 per cent of the
value of loans to small companies is guaranteed by the Government, and some
banks have set up special subsidiaries to provide equity finance for companies
(see p 382).
Most retail banks also conduct extensive international operations which
account for a substantial proportion of their business. In addition to maintain¬
ing overseas subsidiaries they are very active in the eurocurrency markets (see
p 384).
The total liabilities/assets of the retail banks amounted to £255,000 million at
the end of March 1988. Of the liabilities, 66 per cent was sterling deposits, 17
per cent other currency deposits, and the remainder items in suspense or
transmission, and capital and other funds. The £167,000 million of sterling
deposits was divided approximately equally between sight deposits (which can
be withdrawn on demand) and time deposits. The banks’ main liquid assets
consist of balances at the Bank of England, money at call (mainly loans to
discount houses), their holdings of Treasury and some other bills, and
short-dated British government securities. They also hold a proportion of their
assets as portfolio investments (mainly longer-dated British government securi¬
ties) or trade investments.
At the end of 1987 the retail banks in Great Britain operated through some
13,900 branches and sub-branches. National Westminster had the largest
number (3,101), followed by Barclays (2,767), Lloyds (2,162), Midland (2,127),
TSB (1,574), Royal Bank of Scotland (835) and Bank of Scotland (545). Nearly
two-thirds of all adults in Britain have a current account and over one-third a
deposit account.
The London-based inter-bank clearing systems are administered by three
separate companies operating under an umbrella organisation, the Association
for Payment Clearing Services. The three clearing companies cover bulk paper
clearings (cheques and credit transfers); high-value clearings for same-day
settlement (automated payments and ‘town clearing’); and bulk electronic
clearings (through Bankers Automated Clearing Services, comprising standing
orders and direct debits). Membership of each of these clearing companies is
BANKING AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
377
open to any bank or financial institution that meets certain published criteria,
including a minimum volume of transactions in that clearing. Two large
building societies joined the bulk electronic clearings in mid-1987 and one
joined the bulk paper clearings in 1988. Criteria were eased in June 1988, to
allow more building societies to join.
In addition to the money transmission services handled by the three clearing
companies, nearly all the major banks (and increasingly building societies) have
substantial networks of automated teller machines or cash dispensers. In 1988
there were approximately 12,000 of them in Britain. These give customers
access to cash and other services up to 24 hours a day. Trials of a number of
electronic home banking services are being conducted by banks and building
societies.
All the major retail banks offer their customers cheque guarantee cards which
entitle holders to reciprocal encashment facilities up to £50 a day. The same
card will also guarantee transactions with retailers up to the same amount.
Uniform eurocheques supported by a uniform eurocheque card are now
available from all major banks. These standard-format, high-security cheques
may be used to obtain cash or make payments in Britain or overseas. The
cheques are made out in the currency of the country in which they are being
used, with a guarantee limit of approximately £100 per cheque, but without
limit on the number of cheques that may be drawn in respect of a single
transaction.
Credit cards associated with major retail banks are also a popular means of
payment. Access operates within the Mastercard world system and is owned by
four retail banks. Several banks and other institutions issue their own cards
under the VISA world system. There is some competition on interest charges
between different VISA cards.
Debit cards, which allow payments to be deducted directly from the
purchaser s bank account through the clearing system, have been introduced by
Barclays (Connect), Lloyds (VISA payment card), and a joint venture of Midland,
National Westminster and Royal Bank of Scotland (Switch).
Plans are advanced for a single nationwide ‘EFTPOS system (electronic funds
transfer at point of sale) which will enable shoppers to pay for goods by using a
card which would transfer funds instantaneously from their bank accounts via
terminals installed in retail premises. The inaugural scheme involving 2,000
terminals in Leeds, Southampton and Edinburgh is planned for 1989.
Meanwhile a number of banks and building societies are carrying out limited
EFTPOS trials around the country.
Merchant
Banks
Overseas
Banks
Merchant banks have traditionally been concerned primarily with the accepting
(or guaranteeing) of commercial bills and with the sponsoring of capital issues
on behalf of their customers. Today they have a widely diversified and complex
range of activities with important roles in international finance and the
short-term capital markets, the provision of expert advice and financial services
to British industrial companies, especially where mergers, takeovers and other
forms of corporate reorganisation are involved, and in the management of
investment holdings, including trusts, pensions and other funds. A number of
merchant banks have become part of financial conglomerates offering an even
wider range of financial services than hitherto. The four largest retail banks all
have merchant banking subsidiaries. The British branches of some overseas
banks also engage in merchant banking.
Some 370 overseas banks were represented in Britain in April 1988. Of these, 49
were from the United States and 29 from Japan. They provide a comprehensive
banking service in many parts of the world and engage in the financing of trade
378
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
British
Overseas
Banks
The Discount
Houses
Building
Societies
not only between Britain and other countries but also between third countries.
Citibank of the United States is expanding its activities in the retail banking
market in Britain and has joined the high-value clearing system (see p 376).
A number of banking institutions have their head offices in Britain but operate
mainly abroad, often specialising in particular regions such as Latin America or
East Asia through extensive branch networks. The major bank in this sector is
Standard Chartered.
The discount houses are an institution unique to the City of London. They act as
intermediaries between the Bank of England and the rest of the banking sector,
promote an orderly flow of short-term funds between the Government and the
banks, and lend to the Government by guaranteeing to subscribe for the whole
of the weekly offer of Treasury bills (which are three-month instruments). In
return for acting as intermediaries, the discount houses have privileged daily
access to the Bank of England as ‘lender of last resort’. Assets of the discount
houses consist mainly of Treasury and commercial bills, government and local
authority securities and negotiable certificates of deposit denominated in both
sterling and United States dollars. The Bank of England is prepared to consider
applications from other institutions wishing to set up subsidiaries in the
discount market.
Building societies are mutual institutions which raise short-term deposits from
individual savers, who are generally able to withdraw their money on demand or
at short notice, and provide long-term loans at variable rates of interest against
the security of property—usually private dwellings purchased for owner-
occupation.
Building societies have grown very rapidly since 1918, reflecting a continued
rapid growth of owner-occupation. They account for most lending for house
purchase in Britain and are the principal repository for the personal sector’s
liquid assets (although banks' shares have increased in both areas since 1985).
About 64 per cent of all adults have building society accounts. The societies have
expanded the range of services to investors, a variety of saving schemes have
been established, and a growing number of societies provide cheque facilities
and automated cash withdrawal systems.
Competition among the building societies and between building societies and
other financial institutions has increased in the 1980s and the former system of
agreed rates of interest for loans by and deposits with the societies has been
abandoned.
The three largest societies (the Halifax, Abbey National and Nationwide Anglia)
account for 50 per cent of the total assets of the movement and the 20 largest for
some 90 per cent. Mergers between building societies are a continuing trend: in
1987, for example, the Nationwide and Anglia societies merged to form the
Nationwide Anglia. At the end of 1987 there were 137 registered building
societies with assets totalling £160,000 million: about £35,000 million was
advanced in new mortgages in the course of the year.
Legislation in 1986 and 1988 allowed the societies to diversify their services.
As a result, up to 10 per cent of a society’s commercial assets may be used for
purposes other than loans on first mortgage of owner-occupied houses,
including up to 5 per cent in new types of asset such as unsecured loans,
housing, and investments in subsidiaries and associates. Societies may now
offer most services within the general areas of banking, investment services,
insurance, trusteeship, executorship and land services. They may own estate
agencies and life assurance companies, and undertake fund management
BANKING AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
379
National
Savings
Bank
INVESTING
INSTITUTIONS
Insurance
Companies
generally. However, their main business will continue to be the provision of
housing-related services to individuals.
The 1986 Act changed the arrangements for the prudential supervision of
building societies and established a new supervisory commission. It also made
provisions allowing a society to convert into a public limited company, with the
approval of its investors and borrowers. Some of the largest societies are
considering conversion, which would require them to become authorised
institutions under the Banking Act 1987.
The National Savings Bank is run by the Department for National Savings based
in Glasgow and provides a system for depositing and withdrawing savings at
20,000 post offices around the country or by post. There are about 20 million
accounts. In 1988 Ordinary Accounts earned interest at 2-5 or 5 per cent a year
(depending on the balance maintained); the first £70 of annual interest is tax
free. Investment Accounts earn a higher variable rate of interest, which is
taxable. At the end of June 1988 the sum of the two accounts totalled £9,200
million. All interest is paid without deduction of tax at source. The National
Savings Bank does not offer lending facilities. As with other National Savings
instruments, its deposits are employed to finance the Government's public
sector borrowing requirement. The other instruments include tax-free savings
certificates, which either pay fixed rates of interest or a (lower) fixed rate of
interest combined with index-linking; and taxable Income Bonds, Indexed-
Income Bonds and Deposit Bonds, where interest is paid without deduction of
tax at source. At the end of June 1988 the total amount of money invested in
National Savings was £36,800 million.
The investing institutions are those which collect savings and invest them in the
securities market and other long-term assets. The main investing institutions
are insurance companies, pension funds, unit trusts and investment trusts.
The British insurance industry provides a comprehensive and competitive
service domestically and internationally. It has been estimated that it handles
some 20 per cent of general insurance business placed on the international
market. The London market is the world’s leading centre for insurance where, in
addition to the British companies and Lloyd's, a large number of overseas
companies are represented. It is the world centre for the placement of
international reinsurance and, partly as a consequence, many British com¬
panies have formed close relationships with overseas companies. Some British
companies confine their activities to domestic business but most large
companies undertaking general business transact a substantial amount
overseas through branches, agencies or affiliated local companies. Over a half of
the non-life premium income of British insurance companies and Lloyd’s is
derived from overseas. Insurance companies carrying on business in Britain are
supervised by the Department of Trade and Industry under the Insurance
Companies Act 1982. About 830 companies, including some 150 from overseas
and a further 200 which are subsidiaries of overseas companies, are authorised
to carry on one or more classes of insurance business in Britain. The total assets
of these companies were £211,000 million at the end of 1986.
Around 430 companies belong to the Association of British Insurers and these
account for about 95 per cent of the world-wide business of the British
insurance companies’ market.
Long-term insurance is handled by some 280 authorised insurance com¬
panies and is also available through certain friendly societies. Some 96 per cent
of this business is transacted through the members of the Association of British
Insurers. Lloyd’s underwriters also write short-term life business.
380
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Lloyd's
Insurance
Brokers
European
Community
Directives
Pension Funds
Lloyd’s, the origins of which go back to the seventeenth century, is an
incorporated society of private insurers in London. Although its activities were
originally confined to the conduct of marine insurance, a very considerable
world-wide market for the transaction of other classes of insurance business
(such as non-marine, aviation and motor) has been built up. Long-term life and
financial guarantee business is not covered.
Lloyd’s is not a company but a market for insurance administered by the
Council of Lloyd’s, where business is carried out for individual underwriting
members for their own account and risk and in competition with each other and
with insurance companies. At the beginning of 1988 there were 33,500
members of Lloyd’s, known as ‘names’, grouped into 376 syndicates. Each
syndicate is managed by an underwriting agent responsible for appointing a
professional underwriter to accept insurance risks and settle claims at Lloyd’s
on the syndicate members’ behalf. Insurance may only be placed through
accredited Lloyd's brokers who negotiate with Lloyd's syndicates on behalf of the
insured. Only elected underwriting members of Lloyd's, for whom insurance is
transacted with unlimited liability and who have met the most stringent
financial regulations laid down by the Council, are permitted to accept
insurance risks at Lloyd’s; these and other safeguards give security to a Lloyd’s
policy.
Lloyd’s is self-regulating under private Acts of Parliament dating from 1871 to
1982. The Lloyd's Act 1982, which established the Council of Lloyd’s (an elected
legislative body with wide-ranging disciplinary powers), inaugurated a period of
intensive reform of the society, resulting in the introduction of new measures to
protect the interests of Lloyd’s members. Following the report of a government-
appointed committee of inquiry, further measures were introduced by the
Council in 1987 to ensure that Lloyd’s members—particularly those not active in
the market as brokers or with underwriting agencies—should enjoy a level of
protection comparable with that proposed for the general investor under the
Financial Services Act 1986 (see p 373).
Insurance brokers, acting on behalf of the insured, are an essential part of the
Lloyd’s market and a valuable part of the company market. Many brokers
specialise in reinsurance business, acting as intermediaries in the exchange of
contracts between companies, both British and overseas, and often acting as
London representatives of the latter. The Insurance Brokers (Registration) Act
1977 provides for the registration and regulation of insurance brokers by the
Insurance Brokers Registration Council. In July 1988 over 17,000 individuals
were registered with the Council, through 1,606 partnerships or sole trader-
ships and 3,264 limited companies.
In accordance with the Treaty of Rome, insurance and reinsurance in the
European Community are regulated by directives addressed to the governments
of member states and intended to harmonise the legislation of the various
member countries. Directives cover reinsurance, compulsory motor insurance,
freedom of establishment for life and non-life insurers, Community co-
insurance and insurance intermediaries. Britain strongly supports the removal
of unnecessary national regulations and exchange controls that restrict the
creation of a full common market in services, particularly financial services.
Virtually all occupational pension schemes are based on trust funds managed so
as to protect the interests of the members. Pension contributions are invested
either directly in the securities and other investment markets or through
intermediaries such as insurance companies. The market value of assets held
directly by pension funds rose from £2,000 million in 1957 to about £190,000
BANKING AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
381
Investment
and Unit
Trusts
million in 1986 when 15 per cent was in British government securities and 69
per cent in company securities. The pension funds have grown strongly since
1960 to become a dominant force in securities markets. Under government
proposals to encourage the expansion of occupational schemes and personal
pensions, both types of provision for retirement will be subject to investor
protection legislation (see p 373).
Investment and unit trusts enable investors in securities to spread their risks
and obtain the benefit of skilled management. Investment trusts are companies
which observe certain requirements of the International Stock Exchange and
the tax authorities and invest in securities for the benefit of their shareholders.
The total market value of the 200 British investment trusts in March 1988 was
some £15,000 million.
Unit trusts are constituted by trust deed between a management company and
a trustee company which holds the assets. Normally, the managers sell units to
the public and also repurchase them on demand. The sums held must be
invested in securities. The costs of running the trust are met partly by an initial
charge which forms part of the price of a unit and partly by a periodic service
charge which is usually taken out of the trust’s income. Authorisation by the
Department of Trade and Industry is needed before units can be offered to the
public; this is granted only if the trust deed meets the Department’s require¬
ments. Trusts are allowed to hold up to 25 per cent of their assets in shares
traded on the Unlisted Securities Market (see p 383) and certain other secondary
markets; within this total up to 5 per cent may be held in the form of other
unlisted securities. Under the new legislation for the financial services industry
(see p 373), authorised unit trusts will be able to invest in a wider range of assets
in order to allow a greater variety of investment opportunities to be offered to the
public. In April 1988 there were 5 million unit trust holdings with a total value of
some £39,000 million.
SPECIALISED
INSTITUTIONS
The specialised institutions are agencies created to meet the needs of specific
groups of borrowers—mostly industrial and commercial—which were not
adequately covered by other institutions. They are to be found in both the public
and the private sectors. Some of the latter were set up with official support but
with financing from banks and other financial institutions. They may offer loan
finance or equity capital.
The main private sector institutions are described below. Among public sector
agencies are the British Technology Group, the Scottish and Welsh Development
Agencies, the Industrial Development Board in Northern Ireland the Co¬
operative Development Agency and ECGD (the Export Credits Guarantee
Department), Britain's official export credit insurer.
Finance
Houses
Finance houses are major suppliers of hire-purchase finance for the personal
sector and of both loan and leasing finance (see below) to the corporate sector.
Forty-five firms constitute the Finance Houses Association (FHA); at the end of
1987 loan and leasing credit outstanding to the members of the FHA was over
£17,000 million. Many of the finance houses are owned by banks, and most of
them are institutions authorised under the Banking Act.
Leasing
Companies
Leasing companies buy and own plant or equipment required and chosen by
businesses and lease it at an agreed rental. This form of finance grew quickly in
importance in the 1970s, partly because the leasing companies were able to take
advantage of investment incentives to the benefit of customers whose tax
position would otherwise have made them unavailable. In 1987 the 73 members
of the Equipment Leasing Association acquired assets in Britain valued at some
382
Factoring
Companies
Finance
Corporations
FINANCIAL
MARKETS
The
International
Stock
Exchange
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
£6,000 million, which represented about 18 per cent of all investment in plant
and machinery.
Factoring consists of making cash available to a company in exchange for the
sums owing to it. Since the early 1960s factoring has developed as a major
financial service, covering international activities as well as domestic trade. In
1987 member companies of the Association of British Factors handled business
of £7,000 million (representing over 90 per cent of all factoring business in
Britain) and 5,400 companies made use of the Association’s services.
Finance corporations meet the need for medium- and long-term capital when
such funds are not easily or directly available from traditional sources such as
the stock market or the banks. When the capital takes the form of equity finance
for innovative or other high-risk' companies, it is often known as venture
capital.
3i, formerly Investors in Industry, supports investment programmes over the
whole range of industry. During the year ended 31 March 1988 the corporation
invested £537 million. Within the last few years it has become increasingly
prominent in financing management ‘buy-outs’, which involve the purchase of
businesses by their management and other staff from their owners. The shares
in 3i are owned by the Bank of England (15 per cent) and six of the major retail
banks.
There are well over 100 venture and development capital companies which
take equity stakes in small and medium-sized firms. Many of these companies
are subsidiaries of other financial institutions, including banks, insurance
companies and pension funds. The 90 full members of the British Venture
Capital Association invested a total of £1,029 million in British companies in
1987, an increase of 76 per cent on the previous year. (Over one-third of this
sum represented the venture capital element of 3i investment.)
The main organised domestic financial markets are the securities markets, of
which the International Stock Exchange is the most important, and the money
markets. Other important markets in the City of London are the foreign
exchange market, the financial futures market, the eurobond and eurocurrency
markets, the Lloyd’s insurance market (see p 380), and the gold bullion and
commodity markets.
The International Stock Exchange has its main administrative centre in
London. There are also centres in Glasgow, Edinburgh, Liverpool, Manchester,
Birmingham and Dublin.
The Exchange has been changing radically in recent years. Its rules on
membership were altered to allow corporate ownership of member firms; the
system under which dealers charged fixed minimum scales of commission to the
investing public was abolished in favour of negotiated commissions; dealers
were permitted to trade in securities both on their own behalf, as principals, and
on behalf of clients, as agents, these two roles having been kept distinct
formerly; and a screen-based dealing system came into operation, which has
been so successful that the trading floor has been closed (except for dealing in
traded options). These changes were popularly known as ‘Big Bang’.
In addition, the Exchange has responded to the new regulatory regime created
by the Financial Services Act 1986 (see p 373). In November 1986 the
membership of the Stock Exchange voted to merge with the International
Securities Regulatory Organisation—itself newly created in response to the
Act—and in turn to create two new companies: The Securities Association, to
act as an SRO authorising members’ business; and the International Stock
BANKING AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
383
Other
Domestic
Securities
Markets
The Money
Markets
Exchange of the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland, to be the
recognised investment exchange under the Act. A further development in the
supervision of share dealings was a review of the non-statutory City Panel on
Takeovers and Mergers in 1987, which led to a strengthening of its contacts
with other supervisory bodies.
The number and variety of securities (stocks and shares) officially listed on the
International Stock Exchange are greater than in any other market in the world
and its turnover of company securities is roughly equivalent to that of all the
other European exchanges combined. Some 6,700 securities are quoted on the
Exchange; at the end of June 1988 these had a market value of £1,580,000
million. About 5,150 securities of companies were quoted including a number of
leading overseas securities. The market showed itself able to withstand the
sharp fall in share prices in October 1987. Company issues represent over
four-fifths of the securities at market capitalisation, the remainder being
British, Irish Republic and other overseas government and corporation stocks
as well as eurobonds.
A market in traded options, in the shares of a number of prominent British
and overseas companies, enables investors not only to buy options to purchase
or sell shares in future at pre-fixed prices but also to trade in the options
themselves. In May 1984 trading began in a stock index option and in May 1985
a currency options market came into operation.
In recent years the largest market for new issues has been that for British
government securities (known as ‘gilt-edged' stocks), although issues of shares
resulting from the Government’s privatisation programme have been more
popular with the investing public. Trading in gilt-edged stocks in the first six
months of 1988 accounted for about two-thirds of transactions by value
(excluding traded options). New issues are made on the Governments behalf bv
the Bank of England.
The Unlisted Securities Market, which deals generally in the securities of smaller
companies which may not qualify for a full International Stock Exchange listing
was opened in 1980 under the auspices of the Exchange, since when the
number of companies with shares traded has risen from about a dozen to about
400. The Exchange also set up a Third Market’ for securities in small unlisted
companies in 1987. This provides a formal structure for trading in a number of
securities, particularly those of small companies hying to raise risk capital In
the past much of this activity was carried out directly with securities dealers in
the ‘over-the-counter’ market.
The London money markets channel wholesale funds (mainly short-term) from
lenders to borrowers. They consist of a series of integrated groups of financial
institutions conducting negotiations primarily by telephone, telex and auto¬
mated dealing systems, there being no physical market-place. Under the
Financial Services Act 1986 (see p 373) the Bank of England will approve market
participants and will ensure that they adhere to codes of conduct. The discount
houses (see p 378) play an important role as principals, and transactions may
also be negotiated through money broking firms. The main financial instru¬
ments dealt in are bills (issued by the Treasury, local authorities or companies),
certificates of deposit (CDs) and short-term deposits. The bill markets and the
markets on which the discount houses borrow from the rest of the banking
system are often referred to as the ‘traditional’ markets. Newer markets, known
as parallel’ markets, emerged in the 1960s, and include the inter-bank market
f^d^e market in CDs- Since a large proportion of the latter are held by banks
the CD market is effectively an extension of the inter-bank market.
Capital markets have been undergoing continuous transformation since the
384
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Euromarkets
The Foreign
Exchange
Market
Financial
Futures
The London
Gold Market
1960s (see p 373). In the 1980s there has developed a trend towards the
‘securitisation of debt’; that is to say, major borrowers have increasingly raised
funds by issuing securities instead of seeking bank loans. In 1986 large
companies in Britain were permitted to develop a sterling commercial paper
market; this consists essentially of issues of short-term debt, and enables
companies to borrow directly from the money market instead of approaching a
bank as an intermediary.
The eurocurrency market enables banks to deal in deposits and loans
denominated in a currency other than that of the country in which the bank is
situated. Transactions can thus be carried out in eurodollars, eurodeutsch-
marks, euroyen and so on. While Paris is the main centre for the eurosterling
market, London and Tokyo are the main world centres for eurocurrencies.
The eurobond market performs a similar service in transferring funds from
lenders to borrowers but over a longer period by means of bonds issued in
currencies other than that of the issuing country. Transactions in both markets
tend to be in large denominations. The markets developed in the late 1950s
following the restoration of convertibility between the major currencies, partly in
order to avoid incurring the costs of exchange control and other regulations. The
participants in the markets include multinational corporations, nationalised
industries, and central and local governments as well as the international
banking community.
In the 1980s there has been considerable growth in the euro-commercial
paper market. As with the establishment of the sterling commercial paper
market (see above) this represents a further movement towards the securitisa¬
tion of debt.
The market has no physical centre, but consists of telephone links between the
participants, which include banks, other financial institutions and several
firms of foreign exchange brokers which act as intermediaries between the
banks. It provides those engaged in international trade and investment with
foreign currencies for their transactions. The banks are in close contact with
financial centres abroad and are able to quote buying and selling rates for both
spot and forward delivery in a wide range of currencies and maturities. The
forward market enables traders and dealers who, at a given date in the future,
wish to receive or make a specific foreign currency payment, to contract in
advance to sell or buy the foreign currency involved for sterling at a fixed
exchange rate. A Bank of England survey in 1986 showed that average daily
turnover on London’s foreign exchange market was about £60,000 million,
making it the largest such market in the world.
The London International Financial Futures Exchange trades on the floor of the
Royal Exchange building. About 200 banks and other financial institutions are
members of the market, which allows parties that could be affected by
movements in prices, interest rates or exchange rates to reduce their vulnera¬
bility or to speculate on the possibility of making a gain. Financial futures
contracts are legally binding documents for the purchase or sale of a fixed
amount of a financial commodity, at a price agreed in the present, on a specified
future date. They facilitate the transfer of risk from those that do not wish to
bear it to those that are prepared to bear it. The risk of loss—or the possibility of
gain—arises from movements in prices, interest rates or exchange rates. In
June 1988 the average number of contracts traded daily was about 70,000 with
a turnover of some £17,000 million.
Anyone may deal in gold but, in practice, dealings are largely concentrated in the
hands of the five members of the London gold market, who meet twice daily to
BANKING AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
385
Commodity,
Shipping and
Freight
Markets
establish a London fixing price for gold. This price provides a reference point for
world-wide dealings. Although much interest centres upon the fixings, active
dealing takes place throughout the day. London and Zurich are the main world
centres for gold dealings.
Britain remains the principal international centre for transactions in a large
number of commodities, although most of the sales negotiated in London relate
to consignments which never pass through the ports of Britain. The need for
close links with sources of finance and with shipping and insurance services
often determined the location of these markets in the City of London. There are
also futures markets in cocoa, coffee, grains (wheat and barley), rubber, soya
bean meal, sugar, pigmeat, non-ferrous metals (aluminium, copper, lead,
nickel, silver and zinc), potatoes, gas oil (heating oil) and crude petroleum oil.
The markets are collaborating in the development of new arrangements to
safeguard participants.
In ship brokerage, London s Baltic Exchange is responsible for a substantial
proportion of the world's tramp fixtures. A freight futures market is in operation
there. All Britain’s agricultural futures markets are operated from the Baltic
Exchange and physical commodity trading is also carried out there.
19 Overseas Trade
Overseas trade has been of vital importance to the British economy for hundreds
of years, and especially since the mid-nineteenth century, when the rapid
growth of industry, commerce and shipping was accompanied by Britain’s
development as an international trading centre. Today, although small in area
and accounting for only about 1 per cent of the world's population, Britain is the
fifth largest trading nation in the world—and, as a member of the European
Community, part of the world's largest trading area, which accounts for about
one-third of all trade.
Exports of goods and services in 1987 were equivalent to over one-quarter of
gross domestic product. Britain is a major supplier of machinery, vehicles,
aerospace products, electrical and electronic equipment and chemicals, and a
significant oil exporter. It relies upon imports for about one-third of total
consumption of foodstuffs, and for many of the basic materials needed for its
industries. Trade in invisibles is also of great significance to the economy: in
1987 overseas earnings from services were equivalent to over one-third of those
from total visible exports.
VISIBLE
TRADE
In 1987 Britain's exports of goods were valued at about £79,600 million and its
imports of goods at some £89,200 million on a balance of payments basis (see
Table 45). Between 1986 and 1987 exports rose by 5-4 per cent in terms of
volume and by 4 per cent in terms of unit value, leading to an increase in the
total value of exports of 9-6 per cent. Import volume rose by 6-9 per cent, unit
value by 2-6 per cent and total value by 10 per cent.
Table 45: Exports and Imports 1984-87 (balance of payments basis)
Value (£ million)
Exports f.o.b.a
Imports f.o.b.a
Volume index (1985 = 100)
Exports
Imports
Unit value index (1985 = 100)
Exports
Imports
Terms of trade (1985 = 100)b
1984
70,263
74,659
94-7
96-9
950
95-5
99-5
1985
77,988
80,178
1000
1000
1000
1000
1000
1986
72,678
81,141
103-6
107-0
91-8
96-0
95-6
1987
79,622
89,247
109-2
114-4
95-5
98-5
97-0
Source: Monthly Review of External Trade Statistics.
having beenep"dbbyrtdhe seller.' 311 UP t0 ^ Ume 0fplaCln« the g°°ds board the exporting vessel
b ExP°rt unit value index as a percentage of import unit value index.
388
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Commodity
Composition
Britain has traditionally been an exporter of manufactured goods (both
semi-manufactures and finished manufactures) and an importer of food and
basic materials. In 1970 manufactures accounted for as much as 85 per cent of
total exports. The proportion fell sharply in the early 1980s—to around 67 per
cent by the middle of the decade—as fuels increased their share; it has since
risen, to some 76 per cent. The share of finished manufactures in total imports
rose from 25 per cent in 1970 to 49 per cent in 1987. Machinery and transport
equipment account for a little over one-third of exports and a similar proportion
of imports. Export sectors that have declined in relative importance include
textiles and vehicles. Textiles accounted for 5 per cent of total exports in 1970
but only 2 per cent in 1987; the corresponding figures for vehicles were 11 per
cent and 6 per cent. Over the same period, the share of food, beverages and
tobacco in total imports fell from 22 per cent to 10 per cent and that of basic
materials from 15 per cent to 6 per cent.
Since the mid-1970s North Sea oil has made a significant contribution to
Britain’s overseas trade both in terms of exports and in terms of import
substitution. In 1987 exports of fuels in volume terms were over five times their
1975 level; imports were less than two-thirds their 1975 level. Over this period
Table 46; Commodity Composition of Trade 1987£
Exports (f.o.b.)
Imports (c.i.f.)f
£ million per cent £ million per cent
Non-manufactures 16,590 20-8 21,919
Food, beverages and tobacco 5,599 7 0 10,132
Basic materials 2,243 2-8 5,688
Fuels 8,747 11-0 6,099
Manufactures 61,735 77-3 71,217
Semi-manufactures 22,294 27-9 25,177
of which: Chemicals 10,541 13-2 8,347
Textiles 1,834 2-3 3,472
Iron and steel 2,154 2-7 1,869
Non-ferrous metals 1,505 1-9 1,946
Metal manufactures 1,519 1-9 1,854
Other 4,741 5-9 7,689
Finished manufactures 39,441 49-4 46,040
of which: Machinery 20,183 25-3 22,257
Road vehicles 4,877 6 1 8,810
Clothing and footwear 1,627 2 0 4,023
Scientific instruments
and photographic
apparatus 3,326 4-2 3,272
Other 9,428 11-8 7,678
Miscellaneous 1,527 1-9 880
23-3
10-8
61
6-5
75-7
26-8
8- 9
3- 7
20
21
20
8-2
490
23-7
9- 4
4- 3
3-5
8-2
0-9
Total
79,852
1000
94,016
1000
Source: Monthly Review of External Trade Statistics.
a On an overseas trade statistics basis. (This differs from a balance of payments basis because, for imports, it
includes the cost of insurance and freight and, for both exports and imports, includes returned goods.)
b c.i.f. = cost, insurance and freight, that is, including shipping, Insurance and other expenses incurred in the
delivery of goods as far as their place of importation in Britain. Some of these expenses represent earnings by
companies resident in Britain and are more appropriate to the invisibles account.
Note: Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
OVERSEAS TRADE
389
Geographical
Distribution
the share of fuels in total exports changed from 4 per cent to 11 per cent and in
imports from 17 per cent to 6 per cent. North Sea oil production has now passed
its peak of the mid-1980s, when exports of fuels had accounted for over 20 per
cent of total exports.
Since the early 1960s Britain’s imports of semi-manufactures have exceeded
those of basic materials; they are now almost five times as high. This reflects the
increasing tendency for producing countries to carry out the processing of
primary products up to the semi-finished and, on occasions, the finished stage.
The fall in the share of food imports (from around 35 per cent of total imports in
the 1950s to 9 per cent by 1987) is a result both of the increasing extent to which
food demand has been met from domestic agriculture and the decline in the
proportion of total expenditure devoted to food.
Britain’s overseas trade is mainly—and increasingly—with other developed
countries. In 1970 these accounted for 73 per cent of Britain’s exports and a
similar proportion of Britain’s imports; by 1986 the shares were 80 per cent and
86 per cent respectively. In 1972 (the year before Britain joined the European
Community) around one-third of Britain’s trade was with the other 11 countries
which now make up the Community; the proportion is now about one-half, a
figure which can be expected to increase with the completion of the single
European market in 1992 (see p 392). Trade with other Commonwealth
countries has declined in importance.
European Community countries accounted for seven of the top ten export
markets and for six of the ten leading suppliers of goods to Britain in 1987 (see
Table 47). Since 1981 the United States has been Britain’s largest single market
and the Federal Republic of Germany Britain’s largest single supplier; in 1987
the United States accounted for nearly 14 per cent of Britain’s exports while the
Federal Republic of Germany supplied almost 17 per cent of Britain’s imports.
There have been a number of changes in the trends of Britain’s overseas trade in
Geographical Distribution of Trade 1987
DEVELOPED
COUNTRIES
DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES
Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding
Source: Monthly Review of External Trade Statistics.
CENTRALLY
PLANNED ECONOMIES
390
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
INVISIBLE
TRANSACTIONS
recent years. The increase in wealth of the oil-exporting countries during the
1970s led to a sharp increase in their imports from all sources; by the early
1980s they were taking some 12 per cent of Britain's exports. There was then a
fall in the capacity of these countries to absorb imports so that, by 1987, their
share of Britain's exports had fallen to less than 7 per cent. In 1973 the
oil-exporting countries supplied 10 per cent of Britain's imports but, with
Britain achieving self-sufficiency in oil, the proportion had fallen below 2 per
cent by 1987. Japan now accounts for around 6 per cent of Britain's imports,
twice the proportion of ten years previously.
Table 47: Britain’s Main Markets and Suppliers 1987£
Value
(£ million)
Share
(per cent)
Main markets
United States
Federal Republic of Germany
France
Netherlands
Italy
Belgium/Luxembourg
Irish Republic
Sweden
Spain
Saudi Arabia
Main suppliers
Federal Republic of Germany
United States
France
Netherlands
Japan
Italy
Belgium/Luxembourg
Irish Republic
Switzerland
Norway
11,014
9,404
7,782
5,856
4,146
3,858
3,832
2,322
2,164
1,978
15,784
9,136
8,382
7,148
5,463
5,217
4,362
3,488
3,298
3,290
13-8
11-8
9-7
7- 3
5-2
4-8
4- 8
2-9
2-7
2- 5
16-8
9-7
8- 9
7-6
5- 8
5-5
4-6
3- 7
3-5
3-5
Source: Monthly Review of External Trade Statistics.
a On an overseas trade statistics basis. Exports are f.o.b.: imports c.i.f.
Transactions on invisible trade fall into three main groups: services (receipts
and payments arising from services, as distinct from goods, supplied to and
received from overseas residents); interest, profits and dividends (income
arising from outward and inward investment, loans and other capital transac¬
tions); and transfers between Britain and other countries.
Invisible trade is of fundamental importance to Britain’s economy; overseas
earnings from invisibles amounted to £80,000 million in 1987—about one-half
of Britain’s total overseas earnings. Britain’s share of world invisible trade is
some 15 per cent and earnings are second only to those of the United States. In
1987 Britain’s invisibles surplus was the largest in the world. Services have been
in surplus for over 20 years while interest, profits and dividends have rarely been
in deficit; transfers, however, have almost always been in deficit. For invisible
trade as a whole, the deficit of general government is more than offset by the
substantial surplus of the private sector (including public corporations), to give
OVERSEAS TRADE
391
COMMERCIAL
POLICY
an overall surplus. General government transactions are relatively unimportant
in either the services or the interest, profits and dividends accounts but they
form the greater part of the transfers account. In 1987 the private sector had a
surplus of £13,600 million on invisible trade while government had a deficit of
£5,900 million. The British Invisible Exports Council, which is financed almost
entirely by contributions from the private sector, promotes measures to
encourage invisible trade.
Earnings from private sector services rose in value by 9 per cent in 1987 to
reach £27,600 million. Debits, at £20,300 million, were 11 per cent higher. The
surplus was slightly higher than in 1986, a rise in the large surplus on financial
services being partly offset by increases in the deficits on sea transport, civil
aviation and travel.
The surplus on private sector interest, profits and dividends was £6,600
million in 1987. Although slightly lower than in 1986, earnings on portfolio
investment (investment in overseas securities) remained high—at £5,500
million reflecting in part the substantial volume of overseas investment
following the abolition of exchange controls in 1979 and changes in the method
of foreign currency lending by banks located in Britain.
The deficit on private sector transfers in 1987 was £200 million while that on
government transfers was £3,300 million, mainly as a result of contributions
and subscriptions to the European Community and other international
organisations and bilateral aid.
Table 48: Britain’s Invisible Transactions 1987
Total invisible transactions
Credits
Private sector and public corporations
Services
of which: Sea transport
Civil aviation
Travel
Financial and
other services
Interest, profits and dividends
Transfers
General government
Services
Interest, profits and dividends
Transfers
76,298
27,575
3,341
3.270
6,237
14,727
47,157
1,566
3,712
509
932
2.271
80,010
Debits
62,700
20,329
4,465
3,764
7,255
4,845
40,589
1,782
9,652
2,117
1,977
5,558
72,352
Source: United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1988 Edition.
Note: Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
£ million
Balance
13,598
7,246
-1,124
-494
-1,018
9,882
6,568
-216
-5,940
-1,608
-1,045
-3,287
7,658
Britain remains committed to the open multilateral trading system and to the
further liberalisation of world trade. To this end it has taken a leading part in
the activities of such organisations as the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade (GATT), the International Monetary Fund, the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD) and the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, and has given full support to the new round of
multilateral trade negotiations (see p 392). Since joining the European Com¬
munity in 1973, Britain has conducted its external commercial policy through
392
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
General
Agreement on
Tariffs and
Trade
European
Community-
Agreements
the Community, which has legal competence in this area. The Community’s
common customs tariff is, at an average of 7 to 8 per cent, at a similarly low level
to the tariffs of other major industrialised countries.
Britain has consistently sought liberalisation of the Community’s internal
market and has been pressing for action to be taken on the harmonisation of
technical standards, the reduction of frontier formalities and the establishment
of a free market in services. Accordingly, Britain has strongly supported the
programme for the single European market, which is due for completion in
1992.
Tariff and non-tariff barriers to trade have been considerably reduced in the
seven rounds of multilateral trade negotiations completed since 1947 under the
auspices of the GATT, the most recent being the Tokyo Round (1973—79).
Britain participates in these negotiations as a member of the European
Community. In 1982 the GATT devised a programme to liberalise and expand
trade. GATT members also agreed to make determined efforts to ensure that
trade policies and measures were consistent with the principles and rules of the
GATT, and to resist protectionist policies in formulating and implementing
national trade policies. Britain has contributed to the implementation of the
GATT programme: it is particularly concerned that the multilateral approach
should be extended to trade in services, which is of great importance to Britain's
employment and overseas earnings: to the protection of intellectual property
rights; and to rules governing overseas investment. The eighth round of GATT
multilateral trade negotiations (the Uruguay Round) was launched in September
1986. It is scheduled to last for four years and aims to achieve further
liberalisation and expansion of world trade; the negotiations will pay particular
attention to strengthening the GATT, trade in agricultural products, trade in
services, and trade-related aspects of intellectual property rights and overseas
investment.
Britain applies the common customs tariff to all countries neither belonging to,
nor having any special arrangement with, the European Community. There is
duty-free trade between those member states that joined before 1986. Portugal
and Spain joined at the beginning of that year. Their trade with the rest of the
Community is in a transitional stage: tariffs on industrial products will be
phased out by the start of 1993 but those on certain agricultural products will be
dismantled over a longer period.
The Community has reciprocal agreements with the European Free Trade
Association (EFTA) countries (Austria, Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and
Switzerland), which allow for industrial products to be traded free of duty.
Following the Luxembourg Declaration of 1984, the Community and EFTA are
working towards closer economic co-operation.
The Community also has reciprocal preferential trading agreements with
Cyprus, Israel, Malta and Turkey and non-reciprocal agreements with Algeria,
Morocco, Tunisia, Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon, Syria and Yugoslavia and, under the
third Lome Convention, a group of 66 African, Caribbean and Pacific developing
countries. The Lome Convention gives these countries free access (subject to
certain safeguards) to the Community for industrial goods and most agricul¬
tural products.
Tariff preference is also given to developing countries (under the Generalised
Scheme of Preferences), the Faroe Islands and the overseas dependencies and
territories of member states.
The Community also has economic co-operation agreements with a number of
Latin American countries, with China and with the six members of the
Association of South East Asian Nations.
ADVANCES IN HEALTH CARE
An interactive medical
video teaching unit — the
largest systems of its kind
in Europe — has been
developed by Bristol
University Medical School.
The world’s first software-
driven radiotherapy
simulator, manufactured
by Varian-Tem, accurately
locates cancerous cells,
enabling radiotherapists to
mark the precise points to
which radiation should be
directed.
OVERSEAS CONSTRUCTION AND AID
Davy McKee
won contracts
to build three
blast furnaces
for a major new
iron and steel
works at
Kwangyang
Bay, Korea.
A number of
British firms
are involved as
consulting
engineers and
contractors on
the Greater
Cairo
Wastewater
Project.
British aid funded the
construction of a
conveyor belt — the
longest curved conveyor
in the world — for
transporting bauxite
from mine to processing
plant in Orissa, India.
The aim of the
development is to boost
aluminium production.
The light railway in
Gezira Province, Sudan:
the Overseas
Development
Administration
provided funding and
technical assistance
and the Crown Agents
procured equipment for
a rehabilitation project.
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
DNA finger-printing
has been developed
by ICI and is used
in their Cellmark
Diagnostics
laboratory at
Abingdon,
Oxfordshire. The
technique is of
great importance in
the work of
forensic scientists.
Scientists at the
University of Bath
are working on a
linear
synchronous
motor for the
magnetic
levitation train of
the future. The
motor is expected
to use only half
the power of
previous designs.
OVERSEAS TRADE
393
CONTROLS ON
TRADE
Import Controls
Export Controls
GOVERNMENT
SERVICES
Export
Promotion
Services
Britain maintains few restrictions on its international trade. Most goods maybe
imported freely and only a narrow range of goods is subject to any sort of export
control.
In accordance with its international obligations under the GATT and to the
European Community, Britain has progressively removed almost all quantita¬
tive import restrictions imposed on economic grounds. The few remaining
quantitative restrictions mainly affect textile goods (in view of the rapid
contraction of the domestic textile industry) and stem primarily from the
Multi-Fibre Arrangement (MFA), under which there exists a series of agreements
covering international trade in textiles, designed to balance the interests of both
exporting and importing countries. The present MFA is due to expire in 1991. A
small number of quantitative restrictions are also maintained against non-
GATT countries. The Department of Trade and Industry, in accordance with
European Community directives, operates a ban on the import from South
Africa of certain iron and steel products and gold coins. Quantitative restric¬
tions have been removed from imports of goods of Community origin (except for
restraints for a transition period on imports of certain categories of textile
product from Portugal and Spain). However, there are exceptions: the Depart¬
ment of Trade and Industry continues to apply internationally recognised
restrictions on non-economic grounds on imports from all countries of products
such as firearms, ammunition and nuclear materials. Other government
departments apply similar non-economic restrictions on goods such as meat
and poultry, animals, birds, bees, fish and plants and some of their derivatives,
controlled drugs, explosives, certain citizens' band radios and indecent or
obscene articles.
The great majority of British exports are not subject to any government control
or direction except for presentation and declaration to HM Customs and Excise
on export for the purpose of collecting the overseas trade statistics. However,
there are controls governing exports of military equipment and industrial goods
of strategic significance as well as nuclear products, certain metals and metal
scrap, and cocoa and cocoa products. There are also controls, for health
certification purposes, on horses, cattle, swine, sheep, goats, certain meat
exported to another member of the European Community, salmon and trout;
endangered species of animals and plants and some of their derivatives, in
accordance with international agreements; photographic material over 60 years
old and valued at £400 or more per item and other articles over 50 years old
(including works of art) valued at £16,000 or more (£4,000 or more in the case of
British historical portraits); controlled drugs; British spirits (beverages) in
casks of less than 40 litres; and Common Agricultural Policy products.
The Government assists exporters by creating conditions favourable to the
export trade and by providing information and advice about opportunities for
trade in other countries, services designed to help exporters and improve
exporting practices, and credit insurance facilities.
The British Overseas Trade Board (the export arm of the Department of Trade
and Industry DTI) directs Britain’s official export promotion services, which
include the provision of export intelligence, assistance to British exporters in
appointing agents and researching potential markets overseas, help at trade
fairs and other promotional events overseas, and support for firms participating
in trade missions. It mainly comprises representatives of commerce and
industry with personal involvement in exporting, but also includes representa¬
tives of the DTI, ECGD (the Export Credits Guarantee Department), and the
394
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
ECGD
BALANCE OF
PAYMENTS
Capital Flows
Foreign and Commonwealth Office; it operates under the general authority of
the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, who is the president.
Exporters wanting assistance and advice can consult the export section of the
regional offices of the DTI throughout Britain and, through these offices, the
commercial posts of the British Diplomatic Service overseas. The Scottish
Export Office (Industry Department for Scotland), the Welsh Office and the
Industrial Development Board for Northern Ireland (Department of Economic
Development) also act as the equivalent of the DTI's regional offices.
ECGD (the Export Credits Guarantee Department) is Britain’s official export
credit insurer. It provides credit insurance for about one-fifth of the country’s
export trade and insures exporters of both goods and services against
non-payment by overseas buyers. The main risks covered include insolvency or
protracted default of the buyer, governmental action which stops the British
exporter receiving payment, new import restrictions, and war or civil disturb¬
ance in the buyer’s country. Cover may commence from the date of shipment or
from the date of contract (at higher premiums).
This insurance may be supplemented by guarantees of repayment given direct
to banks financing exports sold on credit of two years or more, whether in
sterling or in foreign currencies. Alternatively, for contracts over £1 million,
ECGD will guarantee loans direct to overseas buyers enabling them to pay on
cash terms, or ‘lines of credit’ similarly covering an agreed buying programme of
an overseas country. The banks provide finance against these guarantees.
ECGD is also prepared to support the issue of performance bonds in the
commercial market in respect of cash or near-cash contracts worth over
£250,000. Investment insurance is provided for new British investment
overseas against expropriation, war damage and restrictions on remittances.
Under the Aid and Trade Provision, aid combined with export credits may be
provided to developing countries to support projects which promise opportuni¬
ties to British exporters.
The balance of payments statistics record transactions between residents of
Britain and non-residents. The transactions are classified into two groups:
current account (visibles and invisibles) and transactions in assets and
liabilities. The balance on current account shows whether Britain has had a
surplus of income over expenditure.
Traditionally Britain has had a deficit on visible trade and a surplus on trade
in invisibles and this was again the case in 1987. However, in 1980, 1981 and
1982 visible trade was also in surplus. The surplus on invisibles fell from £8,500
million in 1986 to £7,700 million in 1987. The surplus on services was almost
unchanged and that on interest, profits and dividends increased, with a rise in
earnings from British direct investment overseas, but there was a much larger
rise in the deficit on transfers, the increase being almost wholly accounted for by
the growth in the deficit with European Community institutions.
A description of visible trade and invisible transactions is given on pp 387—91.
Britain’s exchange controls were abolished in 1979 and residents are free to
acquire foreign currency for any purpose including direct and portfolio
investment overseas. Controls on the lending of sterling abroad have also been
removed and non-residents may freely acquire sterling for any purpose. Gold
may be freely bought and sold. The abolition of exchange controls means that
Britain meets its full obligations on capital movements under the OECD Code on
Capital Movements and under European Community directives. The Govern¬
ment welcomes both outward and inward investment. Outward investment
helps to develop markets for British exports, while providing earnings in the
OVERSEAS TRADE
395
Table 49: Britain’s Balance of Payments 1983—87
£ million
1983 1984 1985 1986 1987
Current account
Visible trade balance -1,075 -4,580 -2,346 -8,716 -10,162
Invisible transactions
balance 4,907 6,602 5,683 8,517 7,658
Current balance 3,832 2,022 3,337 -199 -2,504
Financial account
Transactions in assets
and liabilities
British external assets -30,120 -31,953
British external liabilities 25,810 24,289
Balancing item 478 5,642
Source: United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1988 Edition.
form of interest receipts, profits and dividends. Foreign investment in Britain
creates employment directly: introduces new technology, products, manage¬
ment styles and attitudes; and provides an opportunity to increase exports or
substitute imports. Inward investment is particularly encouraged by the DTI’s
Invest in Britain Bureau.
In 1987 direct investment overseas by British residents was £15,400 million
while there was net portfolio disinvestment by British residents of £6,500
million. The inflow of direct and portfolio investment into Britain amounted to
£16,800 million. An analysis of transactions in Britain’s external assets and
liabilities is given in Table 50.
-53,282
44,208
5,737
-95,037
80,837
14,399
-75,094
74,055
3,543
Table 50: Summary of Transactions in External Assets and Liabilities 1985-87a
£ million
1985
4,213
Overseas direct investment in Britain
Overseas portfolio investment
in Britain 7,121
British direct investment overseas -8,653
British portfolio investment overseas -19,440
Borrowing from overseas 32,851
Deposits and lending overseas -22,701
Official reservesb —1,758
Other external liabilities of general
government
Other external assets of general
government
23
-730
Total
-9,074
1986
4,176
8,447
-11,525
-25,243
68,036
-54,869
-2,891
178
-510
-14,200
Source: United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1988 Edition.
, Assets: increase (— )/decrease (+ ); liabilities: increase (+ )/decrease (— )
0 Drawings on ( + (/additions to ( - ).
Note: Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
1987
5,953
10,805
-15,372
6,463
55,774
-53,376
12,012
1,523
-797
1,039
396
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
External Assets
and Liabilities
At the end of 1987 Britain's identified external assets exceeded identified
external liabilities by £89,500 million; only Japan had higher net external
assets. Britain’s private sector net assets were estimated at £79,900 million and
public sector net assets at £9,600 million.1
Direct investment overseas by British residents (investment in branches,
subsidiaries and associated companies) totalled £91,400 million at the end of
1987 and portfolio investment £117,800 million. At the end of 1984 (the latest
year for which data are available) over four-fifths of direct investment was in
developed countries. More than one-third of the total was in the United States
and over one-fifth in the European Community. In terms of industries,
manufacturing accounted for 28 per cent of direct investment holdings. By type
of company, oil companies were responsible for 32 per cent, insurance
companies for 7 per cent and banks for 1 per cent.
Direct investment in Britain by overseas residents amounted to £53,400
million at the end of 1987 and portfolio investment to £52,200 million. At the
end of 1984 investment from developed countries accounted for virtually all of
overseas direct investment in Britain: 51 per cent originated in the United
States and 30 per cent in the European Community; 41 per cent was in
manufacturing. Oil companies were responsible for 34 per cent, insurance
companies for 2 per cent and banks for 8 per cent.
1 The significance of any inventory of Britain's aggregate external assets and liabilities is limited
because a variety of claims and obligations are included that are very dissimilar in kind, in degree
of liquidity and in method of valuation.
20 Promotion
of Science and
Technology
Britain has for centuries encouraged research and innovation, and its record of
achievement in relation to size of population is in many respects unsurpassed.
Recent achievements include the research carried out by Mr Patrick Steptoe and
Dr Robert Edwards which made possible the birth of the world’s first test-tube
baby in Britain in 1978, and work on brain and body scanners (based on
computerised X-ray readings, nuclear magnetic resonance or ultrasonics) and
on monoclonal antibodies (used to diagnose animal diseases and which have the
potential to combat human virus diseases). Other notable contributions in
recent years have been made by Professor Stephen Hawking on black holes
(hypothetical regions of space) and Professor Frederick Sanger on molecular
biology. Nobel prizes for science have been won by 68 British citizens, a number
exceeded only by the United States, and Table 51 lists British citizens who have
won Nobel prizes for science (excluding economic science) since 1970.
Total expenditure in Britain on scientific research and development in 1986
was about £8,800 million, 2-3 per cent of the gross domestic product. About 50
per cent was provided by industrial enterprises, with a significant contribution
also being made by private endowments, trusts and charities. Nationalised and
private sector industries finance their own research programmes, and many run
their own laboratories.
The (jovernment finances about 40 per cent of the total expenditure on
research and development in Britain, of which roughly a quarter is carried out
in government research establishments. Government finance for research and
development also goes to industry and the universities.
According to a government sample survey, expenditure on research and
development in industry in 1986 amounted to £5,673 million, of which £1,309
million came from government funds, £742 million from overseas and the
remaining £3,621 million from the domestic private sector. The main areas of
expenditure included electronics (£1,936 million), chemicals (£1,038 million)
and aerospace (£958 million). Considerable expenditure is directed towards
applied research and the development of new or improved materials, products
and processes. In many areas Britain participates in European and other
international projects.
Government
and Scientific
Research
The main objectives of the Government’s expenditure on research and develop¬
ment are to advance scientific knowledge and develop technology in Britain as
well as to support its own activities. Generally the Government seeks to enhance
the contribution of both public and private research and development expendi¬
ture to improving the efficiency and competitiveness of the British economy.
Priorities in science and technology policy are decided by collective ministerial
consideration under the leadership of the Prime Minister. The Prime Minister is
advised on such matters by her Chief Scientific Adviser, Cabinet Office, and
also, since September 1987, by the Advisory Council on Science and Technology
398
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Table 51: Recent British Winners of Nobel Prizes for Science
Year of
award
Category
Subject
Sir Bernard 1970
Katz
Professor 1971
Dennis Gabor
Professor 1972
Rodney Porter
Physiology or
Medicine (jointly)
Physics
Physiology or
Medicine (jointly)
Professor Brian
Josephson
Professor
Nikolaas
Tinbergen
Professor Sir
Geoffrey
Wilkinson
Sir Martin Ryle
and Professor
Anthony
Hewish
Sir Nevill Mott
The role of neural transmitter
substances
Invention of holography
Discoveries concerning the
chemical structure of
antibodies
Work on superconductivity
(abnormally high conductivity
at low temperatures)
The organisation of individual
Medicine (jointly) and social behaviour patterns
Chemistry (jointly) Work on organometallic
compounds
1973 Physics
1973 Physiology or
1973
1974 Physics
1977 Physics (jointly)
Dr Peter Mitchell 1978 Chemistry
Sir Godfrey 1979
Hounsfield
Dr Frederick 1980
Sanger
Dr Aaron Klug 1982
Sir John Vane 1982
Dr Cesar
Milstein
1984
Physiology or
Medicine (jointly)
Chemistry (jointly)
Chemistry
Physiology or
Medicine (jointly)
Physiology or
Medicine (jointly)
Development of new types of
radio telescopes
Theoretical investigations of
the electronic structure of
magnetic systems
Contributions to the
understanding of biological
energy transfer
Computer-assisted assembly of
X-ray information in three
dimensions
Determination of base
sequences in nucleic acids
Work on the structure of
viruses and genetic material
in cells
Clarification of the pathways of
prostaglandin metabolism in
the body
Production of monoclonal
antibodies
(ACOST), which absorbed the former Advisory Council for Applied Research and
Development (ACARD). The remit of ACOST covers defence as well as civil
research and both academic science and industrial research and development.
ACOST is composed of industrialists and scientists covering all areas of science
and technology and selected for their personal eminence in their field, who are
appointed by the Prime Minister. In addition, there are three ex officio members,
the chairmen of the Department of Trade and Industry’s Technology Require¬
ment Board (TRB), of the Advisory Board for the Research Councils (ABRC) and
of the University Grants Committee. (The University Grants Committee is to be
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
399
Research and
Development
Expenditure
The Ministry
of Defence
The Department
of Trade and
Industry
replaced by the Universities Funding Council sometime in 1989.) ACOST
advises on national priorities in science and technology, on the application of
the results of scientific research, on the co-ordination of government policy for
science and technology, and on Britain s participation in international scientific
projects.
In addition, a new independent Centre for Exploitation of Science and
Technology (CEST) has been set up following an earlier recommendation by
ACARD. The Centre, based at Manchester Science Park, will aim at identifying
exploitable areas of science and is being supported by a consortium of
companies and by the Government.
Responsibility for basic civil science rests with the Secretary of State for
Education and Science, who is advised by the ABRC; that for technology rests
mainly with the Secretaiy of State for Trade and Industry, who is advised by the
TRB. Other departments with a substantial involvement in science and
technology have a Departmental Advisory Body; these bodies work closely with
ACOST. A committee of Departmental Chief Scientists, under the chairmanship
of the Chief Scientific Adviser, is responsible for co-ordination among depart¬
ments. A Science and Technology Assessment Office, responsible to the Chief
Scientific Adviser, evaluates the impact of government-funded research on the
efficiency and competitiveness of the economy.
Total government expenditure on research and development (R & D) in 1988-89
is planned to be some £4,915 million. The largest departmental R & D budget is
that of the Ministry of Defence. The main civil departments involved are the
Department of Education and Science, which supports the research councils
and the universities; the Department of Trade and Industry; the Department of
Energy; and the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and the Department
of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland.
The Ministry of Defence s research programme is undertaken both in the
Ministry s research establishments and as funded research in industry,
universities and other institutions of higher education. In 1988-89 the Ministry
plans to spend some £2,300 million, of which some £400 million will be for
research and £1,900 million for development. An increasing emphasis is placed
on research funded jointly with industry, and initiatives have also been taken to
encourage ‘spin-off from defence technology to the civil market. For example,
Defence Technology Enterprises Ltd was set up in 1985 by private sponsors with
government co-operation to identify and promote civil applications of defence
research. ACARD (now ACOST—see p 397) also began a study of defence R & D
in March 1987. Examples of technological innovations at Ministry of Defence
research establishments include the pioneering work of the Royal Signals and
Radar Establishment on liquid crystal displays, now widely used in the civil
sector, its current development of a new simpler type of ‘supercomputer’ based
on Inmos' transputer chip, and the development of infra-red detectors now
widely used by fire services.
Although most industrial research and development is financed by industry, the
Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) provides support, some £417 million in
1987-88, to stimulate activities which would bring economic benefits but would
not otherwise be undertaken by industry. The main areas of expenditure are
aeronautics and space (some £175 million in 1987-88), while a wide range of
research projects, and technology transfer, awareness, training and advisory
activities, is also undertaken.
A major review of the Department’s support—including support for
innovation has been carried out. The conclusions, which were published in a
400
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The
Department of
Education and
Science
White Paper in January 1988, were that the Department should withdraw its
innovation support from market-related activities. The recommendation was
that the Department should concentrate primarily on the circumstances where
research was necessary before commercial applications could be developed or
where the benefits of the research were likely to be widespread, and on
technology transfer. In practice, this has meant moving away from supporting
product and process development in single companies and giving greater
emphasis in collaborative programmes to longer-term research between com¬
panies and to encouraging collaboration between higher education institutions
and companies. Also, greater emphasis is being given to encouraging and
facilitating the many different aspects of technology transfer.
The LINK scheme, announced by the Government in December 1986, aims at
encouraging collaborative research between the public and private sectors in
areas of science expected to have future industrial applications. The first ten
programmes under the scheme had been announced by September 1988 and
were to come into operation during the year.
The DTI has four research establishments: the National Physical Laboratory,
the National Engineering Laboratory, the Laboratory of the Government
Chemist and the Warren Spring Laboratory. These provide support for
industrial innovation through sponsored research and industrial ‘club’ projects
among others. Plans were announced in June 1988 to privatise the National
Engineering Laboratory, where roughly three-quarters of the work was for the
benefit of industry, and to establish the other three as separate agencies within
the public sector.
The DTI is advised on its support for industrial research and development by a
number of advisory committees, which consist of representatives of both
industry and research organisations.
The DTI maintains close contact with the British Technology Group (BTG), an
independent public corporation which promotes the transfer of technology from
the laboratory to the market-place. The BTG takes responsibility for licensing
inventions, particularly those emanating from universities and other public
sector research organisations; in return it takes a proportion of the licensing
income. It also provides development finance for industrial projects embodying
new technology, for up to 50 per cent of their cost. The loan is repayable through
a levy on sales of resulting products or processes. The BTG is now self-financing
and in 1986—87 earned nearly £11 million, or 73 per cent of its total net income
of £15 million, from its licensing activities.
The Department of Education and Science discharges its responsibilities for
basic and applied civil science mainly through the five research councils, to
which it allocates funds from its science budget (£699 million in 1988—89). The
councils and their allocations are: the Science and Engineering Research
Council (£366 million), the Medical Research Council (£147 million), the
Natural Environment Research Council (£91 million), the Agricultural and Food
Research Council (£58 million) and the Economic and Social Research Council
(£28 million). Science budget grants are also made to the Royal Society and the
Fellowship of Engineering for science policy studies commissioned by the
Advisory Board for the Research Councils and for an allocation in support of
CEST (see p 399). The allocations provide support for research in the form of
grants and contracts to universities, polytechnics, research units and other
establishments of the research councils, postgraduate support and subscrip¬
tions to international scientific organisations. The Department is also responsi¬
ble for some aspects of international scientific relations and helps to co-ordinate
government policy regarding scientific and technical information. Together with
the Scottish Education Department it funds various schemes for training both
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
401
The Advisory
Board for the
Research
Councils
THE RESEARCH
COUNCILS
Science and
Engineering
Research
Council
students and those working in industry in the latest technology. For example,
under the Professional, Industrial and Commercial Updating Programme
(PICKUP), a network of nine New Technology Centres was established in
1987-88; in these, scientists from higher education institutions will train
employees of private companies in recent developments in their fields. The
Department is also encouraging, through a variety of initiatives, the teaching in
schools of scientific and technical subjects, such as computing and craft, design
and technology.
The Department is also the main source of funding for the universities, whose
individual allocations are determined by the University Grants Committee.
Although each university decides upon the division of its resources between
teaching and research, the proportion committed to research is generally
believed to be between 30 and 40 per cent.
The Advisory Board for the Research Councils advises the Secretary of State on
civil science, particularly with regard to the research council system, on the
support of postgraduate students, on the proper balance between national and
international scientific activities, and on the allocation of the science budget
among research councils and other bodies. It also promotes close liaison
between the councils and industrial users of their research. Its members are
drawn from the research councils, government departments, industry and the
academic world.
Each of the four research councils engaged in scientific research is an
autonomous body established under Royal Charter with membership drawn
from the universities, professions, industry and the Government. They con¬
duct research through their own establishments and by supporting selected
research, study and training in universities and other higher education
establishments. They also receive income for research commissioned by
departments under the customer—contractor principle and from the private
sector. Income from commissioned research is particularly important for the
Agricultural and Food Research Council and the Natural Environment Research
Council.
The rights and responsibility for the commercial exploitation of research
carried out with the support of research council grants rest with the institution
receiving the grant, subject to the existence of procedures agreed with the
sponsoring research council. Universities and research institutes may still make
use of the expertise of the British Technology Group (see p 400) to patent and
license their inventions, but are no longer obliged to do so.
The Science and Engineering Research Council (SERC) is responsible for the
support of research work and postgraduate training in pure and applied science
(including engineering) outside the areas of agriculture, medicine and the
environment. SERC is spending about £123 million in 1988-89 on grants to
support research. Within higher education establishments it encourages
collaboration with industry, partly by sponsoring co-ordinated research pro¬
grammes in areas of special concern to industry, such as information
technology and biotechnology. Six such areas were designated and put under
the control of directorates, of which two have been transferred to the private
sector. SERC has initiated plans for four interdisciplinary research centres
based at the universities of Cambridge, Glasgow, Liverpool and Oxford to carry
out planned research programmes in the fields of high-temperature supercon¬
ductivity, engineering design, surface science and molecular sciences respec¬
tively, perhaps also involving researchers from other higher education institu¬
tions.
402
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Engineering
Astronomy
Nuclear
Physics
SERC maintains four research establishments: the Rutherford Appleton
Laboratory (RAL) at Chilton (Oxfordshire), the Daresbury Laboratory at Warring¬
ton (Cheshire), the Royal Greenwich Observatory at Herstmonceux (East
Sussex), which is to be moved to Cambridge in about 1990, and the Royal
Observatory, Edinburgh. The establishments are centres of specialised re¬
search, and are also used for the development and operation of central
experimental facilities beyond the resources of an individual academic institu¬
tion. They provide support for scientists whose research needs access to
facilities run by international research organisations, such as the powerful
particle accelerators at the European Centre for Nuclear Research (CERN) in
Geneva and the high-flux neutron source at the Institut Laue-Langevin at
Grenoble. SERC also provides all or part of Britain's contribution to these and
other international facilities and organisations such as the European Space
Agency (to which funds are channelled through the British National Space
Centre).
Among engineering subjects receiving major support are information tech¬
nology (including systems engineering, systems architecture and the develop¬
ment of solid-state devices), radio communications, the application of compu¬
ters to manufacturing engineering, biotechnology, marine technology, polymer
engineering, materials, particulate technology, separation processes, high¬
speed machinery, medical engineering and civil engineering. The Teaching
Company Scheme, jointly sponsored by SERC, the Economic and Social
Research Council, the Department of Trade and Industry, and the Northern
Ireland Department of Economic Development, is currently supporting some
350 collaborative ventures between academic engineering departments and
industrial companies to improve their manufacturing and management
methods and performance. Computing facilities, including support for both
software and hardware, are currently made available to over 2,000 subscribers
through RAL.
Britain has a leading position in most major branches of astronomy including
radio astronomy, infra-red astronomy, X-ray astronomy and theoretical re¬
search. In optical astronomy SERC is the principal partner in the international
observatory on the island of La Palma in the Canary Islands. This contains four
telescopes, including the 4-2-m William Herschel. Opened in 1987, it is the third
largest single-mirror optical telescope in the world and, with its advanced design
and instrumentation, is capable of detecting fainter and more distant objects
than was previously possible. On Mauna Kea, Hawaii, SERC has a 3-8-m
infra-red telescope, the largest telescope in the world designed specifically to
make infra-red observations, and the 15-m James Clerk Maxwell radio telescope
(built in collaboration with the Netherlands and more recently Canada) for
observing wavelengths of less than a millimetre. Much of the observation will
eventually be carried out under remote control using computer communications
networks such as the Starlink network based at RAL. The world's largest X-ray
telescope (aimed at one object) was built by RAL in collaboration with Leicester
University and launched into space on the Japanese-built Ginga satellite in
February 1987, when it was used to investigate a supernova (the remains of an
exploded star), which was the nearest such phenomenon to the earth for more
than 350 years.
In nuclear physics, RAL co-ordinates and supports Britain’s experimental
particle physics research programme and links university researchers with
overseas centres such as CERN in Geneva and DESY, the electron synchrotron
facility in Hamburg. The Daresbury Laboratory offers a 20-million-volt tandem
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
403
Other
Sciences
Medical
Research
Council
accelerator for research into nuclear structure, which in 1986 was used, with its
TESSAS high-resolution spectrometer, to confirm for the first time a 20-year-old
theory that, if rapidly rotated, certain nuclei adopt a superdeformed' shape.
Support is provided for research in other natural and biological sciences
(including biotechnology), and mathematics. About 50 per cent of research
grant finance in these areas goes to 16 co-ordinated programmes of interdisci¬
plinary strategic research, often carried out in collaboration with industry, in
such areas as low-dimensional structures and protein engineering. The
remainder of research funding is devoted to specific projects. The Daresbury
Laboratory operates a synchrotron radiation facility, considerably upgraded in
1987, which provides high-intensity electromagnetic radiation used in a wide
range of experiments in protein crystallography, surface physics, chemical
structure and materials science. Other central facilities include, at RAL, the
spallation neutron source (called ‘ISIS’), the world's leading pulsed neutron
facility, which is used primarily for condensed matter research using low
neutron scattering techniques; and a high-power laser facility which is used to
study plasmas.
Some examples of scientific research funded by SERC in 1986-87 included
the development of new enzyme electrodes in biochemistry; probabilistic
modelling in the field of statistical science; in optics the demonstration of lasers
operating very close to X-ray wavelengths; and in zoology the successful
application of genetic fingerprinting techniques to the study of wild birds.
The Medical Research Council (MRC) is the main government agency for the
support of biomedical research, both at its own centres and by means of grants
to research workers at higher education institutions and hospitals. Its major
research establishments are the National Institute for Medical Research at Mill
Hill, London, the Clinical Research Centre at Northwick Park Hospital, London,
and the Laboratory of Molecular Biology at Cambridge. The Council also has
more than 50 other research units, located in universities and medical schools
throughout Britain.
The MRC s scientists and doctors have pioneered developments in molecular
biology, therapeutic clinical trials, applied psychology and methods of imaging
the body, such as magnetic resonance and ultrasound. The Council’s larger
research programmes include those into neurological (including Alzheimer’s)
and psychiatric disease, heart and respiratory ailments, infectious diseases
(including AIDS), tropical medicine, and antenatal screening for cystic fibrosis
and muscular dystrophy.
Natural
Environment
Research
Council
The Natural Environment Research Council (NERC) aims to advance scientific
understanding of the relationship between man and his surroundings through
research in the physical and biological sciences at its own institutes, at
grant-aided institutions and in universities and polytechnics. NERC’s three
directorates cover (respectively) terrestrial and freshwater, earth and marine
sciences. They are responsible for the Council's 11 institutes, three grant-aided
associations and four units in universities. The institutes include the British
Antarctic Survey, the British Geological Survey and the Institute of Oceano¬
graphic Sciences Deacon Laboratory in Surrey. The associations include the
Scottish Marine Biological Association.
Examples ol work include GLORIA, a unique side-scan sonar, developed by
geophysicists and now being used to map the ocean floor off the United States;
the North Sea Project to develop a prognostic water quality model; and a study to
discover how carbon dioxide is absorbed by the oceans and buried in the sea
floor sediments, helping to balance the ‘greenhouse effect'.
404
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Agricultural
and Food
Research
Council
UNIVERSITY
RESEARCH
Research commissioned by public authorities and industry in Britain and
overseas accounts for nearly one-third of NERC’s income. Applied projects in
progress overseas include those on biological pest control, regeneration of
tropical hardwoods and drip irrigation techniques for tropical crops. NERC also
offers specialist data services providing information on subjects, including
biology and ecology, from satellite and aircraft surveys and its research vessels,
as well as through its various centres and units in Britain.
The Agricultural and Food Research Council (AFRC) supports research under¬
pinning agriculture, food and the other biologically based industries. The work
is carried out in eight AFRC institutes and in universities, and is co-ordinated
with that of the Scottish Agricultural Research Institutes funded by the Depart¬
ment of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland. The AFRC programme includes
work on plant and animal molecular biology and genetics, and plant and animal
breeding, as well as the environmental aspects of agricultural land use.
Recent technological innovations arising from AFRC-supported research
include a new in vitro technique for culturing calf embryos that will allow
development of embryo transfer on a commercial scale; the regeneration of
grasses from protoplasts (single wall-less plant cells)—an essential step towards
the genetic manipulation of grasses and cereal crops; and the development of
ultrasonic sensors for measuring the fat dean ratio in live farm animals.
Spending by the University Grants Committee attributable to scientific research
in 1986—87 amounted to £580 million, in the form of salaries, equipment and
general running costs.
Scientific research in the universities and other institutions of higher
education is also supported through the research councils, in two ways. First,
between a quarter and a third of postgraduate students in science and
technology receive maintenance awards from the research councils. Secondly,
grants and contracts are given to the universities and other institutions by the
research councils for specified projects, particularly in new or developing areas
of research.
The other main channels of support for scientific research in the universities
are various government departments, the Royal Society, industry and the
independent foundations. Universities are currently being encouraged to direct
their resources into those areas where they have existing research strength or
where they see a prospect of establishing strong groups in new and promising
spheres of science and technology. Increasingly close relationships are being
fostered between the universities, industry and the Government in numerous
joint projects. For example, in June 1987 a new information technology
institute, sponsored jointly by industry and the Cranfield Institute of Techno¬
logy, was opened to link academic and commercial spheres. British universities’
earnings from industry and other outside agencies were £304 million in
1986-87, an increase in real terms of 71 per cent since 1982-83, and are still
rising rapidly. The money comes from research contracts and royalties on the
exploitation of university innovations. Many universities now operate industrial
liaison service units, which are linked together by university directors of
industrial liaison.
Technological breakthroughs in the university sector in the 1980s include
optoelectronic devices for future super-fast optical computers at Heriot-Watt
University, Edinburgh, and techniques for the active cancellation of sound and
other vibrations pioneered at the universities of Cambridge and Essex.
Important research on optical fibres is being carried out at Southampton,
Exeter and Essex universities, on liquid crystal displays at Hull and Manchester,
and on pharmaceutical products and biotechnology at Strathclyde.
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
405
Science
Parks
OTHER
RESEARCH
ORGANISATIONS
Charitable
Foundations
Industrial
Research
Organisations
Professional
Institutions
Science parks provide an environment for both existing and new businesses
using high technology in which they have easy access to the research expertise
of higher education institutions. By February 1988 there were 33 such parks in
operation at or near universities and similar organisations, with a further 13
under construction or planned. One of the first to be established (in 1972), and
still the largest, is the Cambridge Science Park, where 70 companies occupy
most of a 53-hectare (130-acre) site, with room for further companies.
Britain’s science parks now provide accommodation for over 600 companies,
ranging from subsidiaries of large corporations, such as the British Oxygen
Company, Olivetti, British Petroleum and 3M, to a wide variety of new and
recently formed businesses. A recent survey, conducted for the United Kingdom
Science Park Association, showed that companies on parks tended to exhibit
high growth and low failure rates. The main areas in which science park
companies are involved are computing, electronics, instrumentation, robotics,
electrical engineering, chemicals and biotechnology, with the emphasis on
research, design, development, consultancy, testing and training activities
rather than large-scale manufacturing.
Charitable foundations sponsoring research in Britain include the Cancer
Research Campaign, the Chester Beatty Institute for Cancer Research, the Ciba
Foundation, the Imperial Cancer Research Fund, the Institute for Cancer
Research, the Leverhulme Foundation, the Nuffield Foundation, the Wellcome
Trust and the Wolfson Foundation. In 1987 the largest spenders on medical
research were the Wellcome Trust at £32 million and the Imperial Cancer
Research Fund at £26 million.
The Association of Independent Research and Technology Organisations links
together 45 such institutions employing about 8,700 people with a turnover of
about £230 million in 1987. These are limited companies undertaking research
contracts and providing consultancy and training services to 20,000 companies
in particular branches of industry. In addition to payment for this work, many
are supported by membership fees from firms in their sectors and government
grants.
The British Technology Group (see p 400) also finances new technology
projects within the private sector, as do a number of venture capital companies.
For example, in November 1986 Investors in Industry Ltd (now 3i) announced a
£60 million programme, in association with Imperial College, London, to set up
centres of innovation at six British universities.
There are numerous technical institutions and professional associations, many
of which promote their own disciplines or are interested in the education and
professional well-being of their members. The Council of Science and Tech-
nology Institutes has 15 member institutes representing, among others,
engineers, biologists, chemists, mathematicians, metallurgists, physicists and
geologists.
The Engineering Council, established in 1981, actively promotes the study of
all types of engineering in schools and other organisations, in co-operation with
its 180 industrial affiliates, including large private companies and government
departments. Together with 48 professional engineering institutions, the
Council accredits courses in higher education institutions. It also maintains a
register of about 300,000 engineers with varying levels of qualifications. The
Engineering Council advises the Government on a range of academic, industrial
and professional issues.
The national academy of engineering in Britain is the Fellowship of
Engineering, set up in 1976, which promotes the discipline and advises the
406
The Learned
Societies
Royal Society
Other Societies
Zoological
Gardens
Botanical
Gardens
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Government on related policy issues. Its membership consists of distinguished
engineers.
More than 300 learned societies in Britain play an important part in the
promotion of science and technology through meetings, publications and
sponsorship.
The most prestigious of these is the Royal Society, or, more fully, the Royal
Society of London for Improving Natural Knowledge, founded in 1660, which is
equivalent to national academies of science in other countries. It is the oldest
such academy in the world to have enjoyed continuous existence. The Society
has over 1,000 fellows, many of whom serve on the governmental advisory
councils and committees concerned with research. The Society is financed
through a parliamentary grant (£7-9 million for 1988-89) and through funds
from private sources (£4 million in 1987—88).
The Royal Society recognises scientific and technological achievements
through the award of fellowships, medals and endowed lectureships. It
administers over 160 research appointments, mostly at British universities and
research institutes, at all levels from post-doctoral to professorial. A new
scheme, begun in 1983, is currently providing 114 posts in universities for
particularly able young scientists, for whom positions are not currently
available. The Society funds specific research projects and encourages the
dissemination of scientific knowledge by a programme of discussion meetings
and through its publications. In 1986 it established, jointly with the Fellowship
of Engineering (see p 405), a unit to undertake statistical analyses of issues in
science policy. The Society also provides advice on such issues to government
and others.
The international relations of the Royal Society are extensive. As the national
academy of science, it represents Britain in a number of international
non-governmental organisations and is involved in a variety of international
scientific programmes. It has bilateral arrangements with academies and
research councils throughout the world, under which a large number of
exchange visits by scientists and collaborative research projects are supported.
Three other major institutions publicise scientific developments through
lectures and publications for specialists and for schoolchildren. Of these, the
British Association for the Advancement of Science, founded in 1831, is mainly
concerned with science, while the Royal Society of Arts, dating from 1754, deals
with the arts and commerce as well as science. The Royal Institution, founded in
1799, also performs these functions and in addition runs its own research
laboratories.
The Zoological Society of London, an independent scientific body, runs the
world-famous London Zoo, which occupies 14 hectares (36 acres) of Regent's
Park, London. The Society also runs Whipsnade Wild Animal Park near
Dunstable (Bedfordshire), and is responsible for the Institute of Zoology, which
carries out research in conservation and comparative medicine. It also organises
scientific meetings and symposia, publishes scientific journals and maintains
one of the largest zoological libraries in the world. Other well-known zoos
include those at Edinburgh, Bristol, Chester, Dudley, Chessington, Marwell
(near Winchester) and Jersey.
The Royal Botanic Gardens, founded in 1759, cover 121 hectares (300 acres) at
Kew (west London) and a 187-hectare (462-acre) estate at Wakehurst Place,
Ardingly (West Sussex). They contain the largest collections of living and dried
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
407
plants in the world. Research is conducted into all aspects of plant life, includ¬
ing physiology, biochemistry, genetics and the conservation of rare species.
The Royal Botanic Garden at Edinburgh, founded in 1670, is a centre for
research into taxonomy, for the conservation and study of living plants and for
horticultural education.
Scientific
Museums
INTER¬
NATIONAL
SCIENTIFIC
RELATIONS
The British Museum (Natural History) is one of the world’s principal centres for
the general study of natural history, and has a large collection of fossils and
minerals. The Science Museum illustrates the development of pure and applied
science in all countries, but chiefly in Britain. The geology of Britain is probably
known in more exact detail than that of any other country in the world, and
there is an outstanding collection of exhibits in the Geological Museum. These
three museums are in South Kensington, London. Other important collections
include the Museum of Science and Industry in Birmingham, the Museum of the
History of Science at Oxford, and the Royal Scottish Museum, Edinburgh.
Britain is fully involved in the European Community’s programmes for research,
and joins with other member states in the co-ordination of particular national
programmes of interest to the Community. In September 1987 the Community’s
Council of Research Ministers approved a new five-year framework and
development programme of about £3,700 million to help keep the Community in
the forefront of technological development, with particular emphasis on
enhancing the competitiveness of European industry. British firms are partici¬
pating in over half of the projects approved under the European Strategic
Programme for Research and Development in Information Technology (ESPRIT);
the Research into Advanced Communications across Europe (RACE) pro¬
gramme to introduce a pan-European broadband optical fibre network in the
1990s; and the Basic Research in Industrial Technologies for Europe (BRITE)
programme to develop technology within more traditional industries.
British companies are actively involved in over 70 projects under Eureka, the
framework for promoting industiy-led collaboration in high technology, which
also involves non-Community countries in Europe. Britain has played an active
part in the European Community stimulation programme (1985-88). Out of
nearly 300 projects supported since 1985, almost half have involved British
laboratories. A new programme—‘Science 1988-1992’—is being considered by
the European Parliament.
Britain is also a member of the science and technology committees of other
international organisations such as the Organisation for Economic Co¬
operation and Development (OECD) and the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation
(NATO), and various specialised agencies of the United Nations. In addition, it
co-operates with other countries in specific areas of research, notably nuclear
science (see p 402).
Britain has concluded a number of inter-governmental and inter-agency
agreements with other countries for co-operation in science and technology.
Among non-governmental organisations, the five research councils, the Royal
Society and the British Academy were founder members of the European
Science Foundation in 1974. The research councils also maintain a joint office
in Brussels to further European co-operation in research.
Staff in British Embassies and High Commissions promote contacts in
science and technology between Britain and the countries in which they are
accredited. The British Council promotes a better understanding and know¬
ledge ol Britain and its scientific and technological achievements by encourag¬
ing exchanges of specialists; by the provision of specialised information; by
fostering co-operation in research, training and education; and—in the newly
industrialising countries and developing countries—by identifying and manag-
408
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Space
Activities
ing developmental projects in the technological, scientific and educational
sectors. Many British companies are involved in commercial co-operative
research projects with overseas manufacturers.
Britain's involvement in civil space research is co-ordinated by the British
National Space Centre. The Government spent about £120 million on all space
activities in 1987—88, 70 per cent of which went towards the work of the
European Space Agency (ESA). The remainder supported a programme of
research and development in government establishments, universities and
companies. British industry has led the consortia which have developed all of
the communications satellites for ESA and the main user organisations. The
largest ever communications satellite, Olympus, is under development and is
expected to be launched in 1989. Britain is also developing the main microwave
instrument for an earth observation satellite, ERS-1, to be launched in 1990. A
new £20 million Earth Observation Data Centre is being established at
Farnborough (Hampshire) to process and sell ERS data to users.
Britain is contributing £250 million to Columbus, Europe’s contribution to
the space station project (led by the United States) for the 1990s and is seeking a
major role in constructing the Columbus polar-orbiting platform which will be
used mainly for earth observation.
British groups have been selected to participate in almost all of ESA’s science
missions, including the 1986 launch of the British-built Giotto spacecraft,
which investigated Halley’s Comet, and the Infrared Space Observatory. Britain
will contribute £76 million to the Cluster and SOHO missions to be launched in
1995 to study the Sun, the Earth’s magnetosphere and the solar wind.
Participation in ESA missions is complemented by bilateral arrangements for
space research with other countries, notably the United States through its
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), the Soviet Union and
China. British groups have participated in several NASA space science missions,
and are currently developing a payload for NASA's Upper Atmosphere Research
Satellite. Other collaborations include the development of the wide field camera
for the Federal Republic of Germany’s X-ray satellite ROSAT and the X-ray
sensor for the Japanese-built Ginga satellite. There have been exchange visits by
space scientists between Britain and China; and British scientists are taking
part in studies relating to the Soviet mission to Mars and one of its satellites,
Phobos.
To provide a more economical and reliable method of placing spacecraft in low
earth orbit, British Aerospace and Rolls-Royce have proposed a re-usable
horizontal take-off and landing (HOTOL) launch vehicle to operate from
conventional runways. HOTOL could be in service early in the next century as a
satellite launch vehicle and later versions might be developed to transport
passengers to and from space stations.
21 Promotion
of the Arts
Artistic and cultural activity in Britain ranges from the highest standards of
professional performance to the enthusiastic support and participation of
amateurs. London is one of the leading world centres for drama, music, opera
and dance, and festivals held in towns and cities throughout the country attract
much interest. Glasgow, which has developed into an important artistic centre,
has been chosen as European City of Culture for 1990. Many British
playwrights, composers, film-makers, sculptors, painters, writers, actors,
singers, choreographers and dancers enjoy international reputations. Television
and radio play an important role in bringing a wide range of artistic events to a
large audience. At an amateur level, activities which make use of local talent and
resources take many forms: choral, orchestral, operatic, dramatic and other
societies for the arts abound, and increasing numbers of people take an interest
in such crafts as spinning, lace-making and wood-carving. Arts activities
introduced and developed by the ethnic minorities are also flourishing.
Policies The general aim of the Government’s policies for the arts is to encourage public
access to, and enjoyment and appreciation of, artistic activity and the cultural
heritage. This is achieved by assisting the provision and development of the
performing and visual arts; encouraging arts and heritage bodies to increase
their income through better marketing and by attracting contributions from the
private sector; maintaining and enhancing the national museums and galleries;
helping to preserve objects of importance to the national heritage; and
sustaining and developing national collections of literary material, archive and
information stores. The Government is working towards making the arts more
accessible to people outside London. Because it believes in the importance of the
arts to national life, it is maintaining its existing levels of support for arts
activities. At the same time, the Government considers that the private sector
ought to play a larger role in arts funding and it is encouraging the arts to secure
private funding from all available sources, including business sponsorship.
National museums and galleries are encouraged and given an incentive to
increase their resources, for example, through trading activities. An important
concept in its funding policy is the ‘arm’s length principle’ by which government
funds are distributed to arts organisations indirectly, through bodies such as
the Arts Councils and the British Film Institute; this helps safeguard against
political interference in arts activities.
Administration Promotion and patronage of the arts are the concern of both official and
unofficial bodies. The Government and local authorities play an active part, and
a substantial and increasing amount of help also comes from private sources,
including trusts and commercial concerns.
The Minister for the Arts, a Minister of State at the Privy Council Office, is
410
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Finance
responsible for general arts policy and heads the Office of Arts and Libraries
which administers government expenditure on national museums and art
galleries in England, the Arts Council, the British Library and other national
arts and heritage bodies. Responsibility for the upkeep of ancient monuments
and historic buildings is exercised by the Department of the Environment; the
Historic Buildings and Monuments Commission for England (known as English
Heritage) manages 400 ancient monuments and buildings on behalf of the
Secretary of State for the Environment. The regulation of the film industry and
of broadcasting is conducted by the Department of Trade and Industry and the
Home Office, respectively. The Secretaries of State for Wales and Scotland are
responsible for the national museums, galleries and libraries in their countries,
and for other cultural matters. In Northern Ireland the Department of Education
has responsibility for these affairs.
Local authorities support a wide variety of artistic and cultural activities. They
maintain more than 1,000 local museums and art galleries and some 4,000
public libraries. Additionally, they provide grant aid for professional and
voluntary organisations including orchestras and theatre, opera and ballet
companies; and undertake direct promotions through local arts councils. Local
authorities also contribute to the cost of new or converted buildings for the arts.
Arts education in schools, colleges, polytechnics, evening institutes and
community centres is the responsibility of central government education
departments, in partnership with local education authorities and voluntary
bodies.
In 1987 the Government announced its intention to set the arts budget for a
three-year period from April 1988 in order to give recipient arts bodies a base on
which to plan future activities and growth; the three-year settlement applies to
the larger part of the central government arts programme. Planned central
government expenditure through the Office of Arts and Libraries amounts to
£417 million in 1988—89. About one-third of expenditure is devoted to 11
national galleries and museums in England, about a fifth on library and related
services and a third channelled through the Arts Council to support the
performing and visual arts throughout Britain. Grants are also made to bodies
such as the British Film Institute, the Crafts Council, certain other museums,
and to the National Heritage Memorial Fund. The Fund provides assistance to
organisations wishing to acquire, for the public benefit, land, buildings, works
of art and other objects associated with the national heritage. Additional central
government expenditure on arts and libraries in Scotland, Wales and Northern
Ireland amounts to £61 million.
Planned spending on the arts and libraries by local authorities in Britain in
1988—89 is about £564 million. About 85 per cent of current expenditure by the
authorities in England is on the public library service, and the remainder on
local museums and art galleries.
Industrial and commercial concerns offer a vital and growing source of
sponsorship and patronage to a wide range of arts, including exhibitions,
concerts and opera seasons. The Business Sponsorship Incentive Scheme was
launched by the Office of Arts and Libraries in co-operation with the Association
for Business Sponsorship of the Arts in Great Britain in 1984, and in 1988-89 it
has available £3 million to match new sponsorships (a similar scheme was set
up in Northern Ireland in 1987). The value of business sponsorship is currently
some £30 million a year. The Government has announced its intention to
introduce incentive funding' in order to encourage arts organisations to raise
finance from private sources. Further support is encouraged by tax concessions
which allow companies and individuals to obtain tax relief on donations to arts
charities. An experimental Arts Marketing Scheme was introduced in 1987 with
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
411
Arts Councils
Regional Arts
Associations
Community
Arts
Arts of
Ethnic
Minorities
funds of £250,000 aimed at helping organisations find ways of increasing their
audiences and improving their financial returns.
The independent Arts Council of Great Britain, established by Royal Charter in
1946, is the main channel for government aid to the performing and visual arts.
Its principal objects are to develop and improve the knowledge, understanding
and practice of the performing and visual arts, increase their accessibility to the
public, and advise and co-operate with government departments, local authori¬
ties and other organisations. The Council gives financial help and advice to
organisations ranging from the major opera, dance and drama companies,
orchestras and festivals, to small touring theatres and experimental groups. It
encourages such interests as contemporary dance, mime, jazz, literature,
photography and art films, and helps professional creative writers, choreo¬
graphers, composers, artists and photographers through a variety of schemes. It
also promotes art exhibitions and tours of opera, dance and drama companies
and contemporary music groups, and makes available funds for some specialist
training courses in the arts.
Under a development programme for the next decade launched in 1984, the
Council is increasing its funding of the arts in the regions. In the first five years
support for new activities is being concentrated in five main areas of the
arts—art, dance, drama, music and education—focusing on 13 main centres of
population throughout England. Greater emphasis is being placed on obtaining
funds through partnership arrangements with local authorities and other
agencies and from commercial sources. Greater funding and responsibilities are
being given to the regional arts associations (see below).
Organisations in Scotland and Wales receive their subsidies through the
Scottish and Welsh Arts Councils, which are committees of the Arts Council of
Great Britain with a large measure of autonomy. Northern Ireland has an
independent Arts Council with alms and functions similar to those of the Arts
Council of Great Britain.
Regional co-operation in development of the arts is promoted by 15 regional arts
associations in England and Wales, bringing together all those in a region, from
local authorities and private companies to local artists, with an interest in
improving the artistic life of their area. Their aim is to ensure that the arts are
more widely available and that artists receive support at regional as well as
national level. They offer financial assistance to artists and arts organisations,
and advise on, and in some cases promote, activities. The associations are
financed mainly by the Arts Council, with smaller sums from the British Film
Institute, the Crafts Council and local authorities, and these interests are
represented on their governing bodies. Business sponsorship is also an
increasingly important source of regional funds.
The community arts movement has grown rapidly over the last decade, the
primary concern of community artists being their impact on a community and
their relationship with it. Using many techniques and performing in a variety of
places their aim is to make people more aware of their circumstances and to help
them develop their creative powers in order to enrich both their own lives and
that of the community.
There is a wide spread of arts activities undertaken by ethnic minorities which
embrace both the traditional and new forms of artistic expression. In its strategy
for developing the arts over the next decade published in 1984 the Arts Council
identified black and Asian dance and drama as areas that would receive
extra support. The Commonwealth Institute arranges a varied programme of
412
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Arts Centres
Local Arts
Councils
British Council
Broadcasting
Organisations
Festivals
artistic events and festivals, and the Minority Arts Advisory Service is a
national information and resource centre for the arts of the ethnic minority
communities.
More than 300 arts centres in Britain provide opportunities for enjoyment of
and participation in a range of activities in both the performing and visual arts,
with educational projects becoming increasingly important. All are profession¬
ally managed and most are supported by volunteer groups. The centres are
assisted mainly by regional arts associations and local authorities with some
help from the Arts Council and other organisations. Many theatres and art
galleries also provide a focal point for the community by making available
facilities for other arts.
Local arts councils in towns and communities throughout Britain, some of them
founded and supported by local authorities, seek to develop and co-ordinate arts
activities in their localities. Industrial and commercial interests also give
financial help.
The British Council promotes knowledge of British culture and literature
overseas and maintains libraries in many of the 80 or so countries in which it is
represented. The Council initiates or supports overseas tours by British theatre
companies, orchestras, choirs, and opera and dance companies, as well as by
individual actors, musicians and artists. It supports fine arts and other
exhibitions overseas and organises British participation in international
exhibitions and film festivals. In addition, the Council maintains film libraries
in many of the countries in which it works, and encourages professional
interchange in all cultural fields between Britain and other countries.
Both BBC radio and television and the independent television companies
broadcast a wide variety of drama (including adaptations of novels and stage
plays), opera, ballet, and music, and general arts magazine programmes and
documentaries. These have won many international awards at festivals such as
the Prix Italia and Montreux International Television Festivals. Independent
television companies also make grants for arts promotion in their regions.
The BBC has orchestras employing many of Britain’s full-time professional
musicians, and each week it broadcasts nearly 100 hours of classical and other
music (both live and recorded) on its Radio 3 channel. Radios 1 and 2 broad¬
cast popular and light music. The BBC regularly commissions new music, par¬
ticularly by British composers, and sponsors concerts, competitions and
festivals. Each summer it presents and broadcasts the BBC Promenade
Concerts at the Royal Albert Hall.
Considerable interest and enthusiasm is shown for the 400 or so professional
arts festivals that take place in Britain each year. The Edinburgh International
Festival, featuring a wide range of arts, is the largest of its kind in the world.
Other annual festivals held in the Scottish capital include International Folk and
Jazz Festivals and the Film and Television Festival, while the Mayfest takes place
in Glasgow. Some well-known festivals concentrating on music are the Three
Choirs Festival, which has taken place annually for 260 years in Gloucester,
Worcester or Hereford; the Cheltenham Festival, largely devoted to contemporary
British music; and the Aldeburgh and Bath festivals. Among others catering for
a number of art forms are the Royal National Eisteddfod of Wales, the Llangollen
International Musical Eisteddfod, the National Mod in Scotland, and the
festivals in Belfast, Buxton, Malvern, Chichester, Harrogate, Salisbury, Windsor
and York.
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
413
DRAMA
Professional
Theatre
Theatre for
Young People
Britain is one of the world’s foremost countries for theatre, and has a long and
rich dramatic tradition. As well as companies based in London and other major
cities and towns, numerous touring companies visit a large range of theatres,
festivals and other venues throughout Britain including arts and sports centres
and working men’s clubs; 25 such companies receive subsidies from the Arts
Council. Contemporary British playwrights who have received international
recognition include Harold Pinter, Tom Stoppard, Alan Ayckbourn, Caryl
Churchill and David Edgar. The musicals of Andrew Lloyd Webber have enjoyed
considerable success both in Britain and overseas. Among the best-known
directors are Sir Peter Hall, Trevor Nunn, Peter Brook, Richard Eyre, John
Schlesinger and Terry Hands, while the many British performers who enjoy
international reputations include Dame Peggy Ashcroft, Lord Olivier, Sir John
Gielgud, Sir Alec Guinness, Vanessa Redgrave, Ian McKellen, Derek Jacobi,
Jeremy Irons, Glenda Jackson and Diana Rigg. British designers such as John
Bury, Ralph Koltai and Carl Toms are internationally recognised.
Britain has about 300 theatres intended for professional use which can seat
between 200 and 2,300 people. Some are privately owned, but most are owned
either municipally or by non-profit-distributing organisations. Over 30 of these
house resident theatre companies receiving subsidies from the Arts Council.
London is the main focus with a hundred or so West End and suburban
theatres, 15 of which are permanently occupied by subsidised companies. These
include the National Theatre, which stages a wide range of modern and classical
plays in its three auditoria in the South Bank Arts Centre; the Royal
Shakespeare Company, which, while performing in Stratford upon Avon, also
produces plays mainly by Shakespeare and his contemporaries, as well as
modern work, in two auditoria in the City’s Barbican Centre; and the English
Stage Company at the Royal Court Theatre, which produces the work of the
most talented new playwrights. Among new theatre projects is one to recon¬
struct Shakespeare s Globe Playhouse on its original Thames-side site.
Outside London most cities and many large towns have at least one theatre;
some, like the Palace Theatre, Manchester, and the Theatre Royal, Nottingham,
date from the nineteenth century and have been handsomely restored. Others,
like the Crucible Theatre, Sheffield, and the Theatre Royal, Plymouth, have been
built to the latest designs. Universities such as those in Aberystwyth, Exeter and
Southampton have theatres which house professional companies playing to the
general public. Most regional repertory companies mount about eight to ten
productions a year; several have studio theatres in addition to the main
auditorium, where they present new or experimental drama and plays of
specialist interest. Repertory theatres also frequently serve the function of a
social centre and meeting place by offering a wide range of events such as
concerts, poetry recitals and exhibitions, and by providing restaurants, bars
and theatre shops. Successful productions from regional theatre companies
often transfer to London’s West End, while the largest regional theatres receive
visits from the National Theatre or the Royal Shakespeare Company.
A number of companies provide theatre for young audiences. Unicorn Theatre
for Young People and Polka Children’s Theatre, both in London, produce plays
specially written for children, and the Whirligig Theatre tours throughout the
country. The Young Vic Company in London and Contact Theatre Company in
Manchester produce plays for young people. There are numerous Theatre-in-
Education companies which perform in schools for all age ranges and abilities.
Some of these companies operate independently (Theatre Centre, for example!
plays in London and tours further afield), while others are attached to regional
repertory theatres such as the Belgrade in Coventry and the Playhouse in Leeds.
Most regional repertory theatres also mount occasional productions aimed at
414
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Dramatic
Training
Amateur
Theatre
MUSIC, OPERA
AND DANCE
Music
Orchestral and
Choral
younger audiences, and concessionary ticket prices are generally available for
those at school, college or university. There are also a number of puppet
companies.
There has been a marked growth in youth theatres, which now number more
than 500 in England alone; both the National Youth Theatre in London and the
Scottish Youth Theatre in Edinburgh offer early acting opportunities to young
people.
Training for actors and stage managers is provided mainly in drama schools,
among which the best known are the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, the
Central School of Speech and Drama, the London Academy of Music and Drama,
and the Drama Centre (all in London), and the Bristol Old Vic School, the Royal
Scottish Academy of Music and Drama (Glasgow) and the Manchester
Polytechnic School of Drama. Theatre design courses, often based in art schools,
are available for people wanting to train as stage designers. A number of
universities, polytechnics and other colleges offer courses in drama.
There are several thousand amateur dramatic societies throughout Britain.
Their work is encouraged by a number of bodies, such as the British Theatre
Association, the Central Council for Amateur Theatre, the National Drama
Conference, the Scottish Community Drama Association and the Association of
Ulster Drama Festivals. Amateur companies sometimes receive financial sup¬
port from local government, regional arts associations and other bodies.
The widespread interest in classical music in Britain is reflected in the large
audiences at choral and orchestral concerts, at the opera, which is enjoying
increasing popularity, and at performances of dance and chamber music. Rock
and pop music are extremely popular, especially among younger people, while
folk music, jazz, light music and brass band music also have substantial
followings.
Seasons of orchestral and choral concerts are promoted every year in many of the
large towns and cities. The principal concert-halls in central London are the
Royal Festival Hall in the South Bank Centre, next to which are the Queen
Elizabeth Hall and the Purcell Room accommodating smaller-scale perform¬
ances; the Barbican Hall (part of the Barbican Centre for Arts and Conferences);
the Royal Albert Hall; the Wigmore Hall, a recital centre; and St John's, Smithy
Square.
The leading symphony orchestras are the London Philharmonic, the London
Symphony (resident at the Barbican Centre), the Philharmonia, the Royal
Philharmonic, the BBC Symphony, the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic, the Halle
(Manchester), the City of Birmingham Symphony, the Bournemouth Sym¬
phony, and the Ulster and the Scottish National Orchestras. The BBC’s six
orchestras provide broadcast concerts which are often open to the public. There
are also specialised string and chamber orchestras such as the English
Chamber Orchestra, the Academy of St Martin-in-the-Fields, the Academy of
Ancient Music, the Bournemouth Sinfonietta, the Northern Sinfonia (Newcastle
upon Tyne), the Scottish Ensemble and the Scottish Chamber Orchestra.
The London Sinfonietta specialises in performing contemporary music which,
in its various forms, appeals to growing audiences, especially of younger people.
Groups playing early instruments attract interest throughout the country.
British conductors such as Sir Colin Davis, Sir Neville Marriner, Simon Rattle
and Jeffrey Tate reach a wide audience through their recordings as well as by
their performances, and the works of living composers such as Sir Michael
Tippett and Sir Peter Maxwell Davies enjoy international acclaim. The Master of
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
415
Choirs
Pop and
Rock Music
Jazz
Opera and
Dance
Dance and Mime
Companies
the Queen’s Music, Malcolm Williamson, holds an office within the Royal House¬
hold with responsibility for organising and writing music for state occasions.
The principal choral societies include the Bach Choir, the Royal Choral Society,
the Cardiff Polyphonic Choir, the Edinburgh Choral Union and the Belfast
Philharmonic Society. Almost all the leading orchestras have close links with
particular choirs. The English tradition of church singing is represented by
choirs such as those of King's College Chapel, Cambridge, and Christ Church
Cathedral, Oxford. There are many male-voice choirs in Wales and in certain
parts of England.
Among the characteristics of modern pop and rock music are the diversity of
styles, the frequency with which new styles and stars emerge, and the short
lifespan of many groups. Electric guitars and drums usually provide the
instrumental basis, but there has been an increasing use of brass instruments,
while many groups have adopted synthesisers. In the 1960s and 1970s such
groups as The Beatles, The Rolling Stones, The Who, Led Zeppelin and Pink
Floyd achieved international success. British groups continue to have enormous
appeal to audiences throughout the world and often set new trends in music;
some of the more recent groups to have achieved renown are Dire Straits, the
Eurythmics and Five Star. Well-known performers include Van Morrison, Billy
Ocean, George Michael, Phil Collins and Paul McCartney. In recent years black
British musicians have made a large contribution to the development of popular
music.
Jazz has an enthusiastic following in Britain and is played in numerous clubs
and public houses. British musicians such as Barbara Thompson, Stan Tracey,
John Surman and Courtney Pine have established strong reputations through¬
out Europe. Festivals of jazz music are held annually at Camden (London),
Edinburgh and Bracknell (Berkshire) and at a number of other places.
Regular seasons of opera and ballet are held at the Royal Opera House, Covent
Garden, London. The Royal Opera and Royal Ballet, which rank among the
world’s finest companies, are supported by a permanent orchestra. Seasons of
opera in English are given by the English National Opera at the London
Coliseum and their broad range of productions receive much critical acclaim.
Sadler’s Wells Theatre is the home of Sadler’s Wells Royal Ballet and the New
Sadler s Wells Opera Company, and stages many of the London performances of
visiting opera and dance companies. Scottish Opera (which celebrated its Silver
Jubilee in 1987) has regular winter seasons at the Theatre Royal in Glasgow,
and tours mainly in Scotland and northern England. Welsh National Opera puts
on seasons in Cardiff and other cities and, with Kent Opera and Opera 80,
provides most of the touring productions in England. Opera North, based in
Leeds, undertakes tours in the north of England and Opera Factory stages
experimental work in opera and music drama. Opera in Northern Ireland is
promoted by Opera, Northern Ireland.
An opera season for which international casts are specially assembled is held
every summer at Glyndebourne in Sussex; this is followed by an autumn tour by
Glyndebourne Touring Opera using different casts.
Subsidised dance companies also include: London Festival Ballet, which divides
its performances almost equally between London and the regions; Rambert
Dance (Britain’s oldest ballet company, which re-formed in 1966 as a leading
modern dance company); Scottish Ballet, based in Glasgow; London Contempor¬
ary Dance Theatre (providing regular seasons of contemporary dance in London
416
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Training in
Music, Opera
and Dance
FILMS
Government
Support for the
Film Industry
besides touring extensively); and Northern Ballet Theatre, based in Manchester,
which also tours widely throughout England. A number of modern dance groups
are supported by regional arts associations and about 30 small dance and mime
groups by the Arts Council. The three Arts Councils also support individuals
and offer commissions to small groups.
Professional training in music is given mainly at colleges of music. The leading
London colleges are the Royal Academy of Music, the Royal College of Music, the
Guildhall School of Music and Drama and Trinity College of Music. Outside
London the main centres are the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama in
Glasgow, the Royal Northern College of Music in Manchester, the Welsh College
of Music and Drama, Cardiff, and the Birmingham School of Music. The
National Opera Studio provides advanced training courses. Leading dance
schools include the Royal Ballet School, the Ballet Rambert School and the
London School of Contemporary Dance which, with many private schools, have
helped in raising British dance to its present high standard. Dance is now a
subject for degree studies at the Laban Centre, the University of Surrey and
Dartington College. Courses for students intending to work with community
groups are available at three institutions.
Youth and Music, an organisation affiliated to the international Jeunesses
Musicales, encourages attendance by young people at opera, dance and concert
performances. Special performances of orchestral music for children include the
Robert Mayer Concerts, held in London on Saturday mornings. Ludus Dance in
Education Company and Outreach (in the north of England) work mainly
with young people. Scottish Ballet Steps Out works in schools throughout
Scotland.
Many children learn to play musical instruments at school, and some take the
examinations of the Associated Board of the Royal Schools of Music. The
National Youth Orchestras of Great Britain, of Scotland and of Wales and other
youth orchestras are noted for their high standards. Nearly a third of the players
in the European Community Youth Orchestra come from Britain. There is also a
National Youth Jazz Orchestra.
The British film industry continues to enjoy considerable success. British films,
actors and the creative and technical services which support them are widely
acclaimed in international film festivals and other events. Besides feature films,
including co-productions with other countries, the industry produces films for
television as well as promotional, advertising, industrial, scientific, educational
and training films.
There are approximately 700 cinema screens in Britain and estimated
attendances in 1987 amounted to about 75 million, an increase of over 41 per
cent since 1984. Cinema attendance figures declined rapidly between the
mid-1950s and the early 1980s, the main reason being competition from
television. However, cinema-going started to rise in 1985, partly as a result of
British Film Year, which was successful in promoting the cinema and British
films, and in spite of the rising number of households with video recorders and
the greater availability of films on video. There has also been a growth in recent
years in the number of grant-aided regional film theatres and film societies
offering alternative programmes to those of the commercial cinema chains.
Following a wide-ranging review of the film industry, measures were taken by
the Government in 1985 to remove certain statutory controls on cinemas which
had become outdated and were no longer contributing to the industry’s
development. British Screen Finance, a private sector company whose share¬
holders are drawn from the film and television industries, was set up in 1986 to
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
417
British Film
Institute
Children’s
Films
Training in Film
Production
provide a source of finance for new film-makers in commercially viable
productions who have difficulty in attracting funding elsewhere. The company,
investing its own money, together with contributions from the Government
amounting to £10 million over five years, part-finances the production of low-
and medium-budget films involving largely British talent and encourages the
early stages of film project development and the production of short films.
An annual government grant of £10 million is made to the British Film
Institute.
The development of film and television as an art form is promoted by the British
Film Institute, founded in 1933, and in Scotland by the Scottish Film Council.
The Institute offers direct financial and technical help through its Film
Production Board to new and experienced film-makers who cannot find support
elsewhere, and helps to fund film and video workshops in liaison with the
Channel Four Television Company. It administers the National Film Theatre in
London and the National Film Archive, and has a library from which films and
video-cassettes may be hired. The Institute’s Information Division holds
extensive international collections of books, periodicals, scripts, stills and
posters. It offers an information service on all aspects of film and television, and
its publications include the British National Film and Video Catalogue, which
records films and video-cassettes available in Britain, and a quarterly journal,
Sight and Sound. The Education Department produces study materials and
offers an advisory service to the growing number of teachers of film and
television at all levels of formal education and in adult education.
The National Film Archive contains over 90,000 films, including newsreels
and other miscellaneous items, and over 20,000 television programmes. BFI
South Bank comprises the Museum of the Moving Image, which opened in
September 1988 (see p 420), and the National Film Theatre, which has two
cinemas showing films of historical, artistic or technical interest, and is unique
in offering regular programmes unrestricted by commercial considerations or by
the age or nationality of the films. Each autumn the National Film Theatre
mounts the London Film Festival, at which about 150 of the finest new films
from all over the world are screened.
The British Film Institute has promoted and helps to fund the development of
some 40 regional film theatres, and is involved in establishing film and
television centres with a range of activities and facilities in a number of major
cities. It also co-operates with the regional arts associations and grant-aids their
film activities. The Welsh Arts Council acts as the Institute’s agent in Wales. In
Scotland the Scottish Film Council supports regional film theatres, administers
the Scottish Film Archive, and promotes and provides material for media
education. Together with the Scottish Arts Council, it set up the Scottish Film
Production Fund, which makes grants towards film production in Scotland.
Grants in Northern Ireland are made by the Arts Council of Northern Ireland.
There is an annual festival of film and television in the Celtic countries held in
rotation in Scotland, Wales, Ireland and France.
The Childrens Film and Television Foundation produces and distributes
entertainment films specially designed for children. In view of the rapid decline
of the children’s matinee movement (only about 50 cinemas now provide
programmes for children on Saturday mornings) the Foundation’s films are
increasingly shown through the medium of video and television.
The National Film and Television School, financed jointly by the Government
and the film and television industry, offers courses for writers, directors
producers and camera technicians. Training in film production is also given at
418
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Cinema
Licensing
and Film
Classification
Videos
VISUAL ARTS
the London International Film School, the Royal College of Art, and at some
polytechnics and other institutions.
Cinemas showing films to the public must be licensed by local authorities,
which have a legal duty to prohibit the admission of children under 16 to
unsuitable films, and may prevent the showing of any film. In considering the
suitability of films the authorities normally rely on the judgment of an indepen¬
dent non-statutory body, the British Board of Film Classification, to which films
offered to the public must be submitted. The Board was set up on the initiative
of the cinema industry to ensure a proper standard was maintained in films
shown to the public. It does not use any written code of censorship, but can
require cuts to be made before granting a certificate; very rarely, it refuses a
certificate. Films passed by the Board are put into one of five categories: U
meaning universal—suitable for all; PC, meaning parental guidance, in which
some scenes may be unsuitable for young children; 15 and 18, for people of not
less than 15 and 18 years of age respectively; and Restricted 18, for restricted
showing only at segregated premises to which no one under 18 is admitted—for
example, licensed cinema clubs.
The British Board of Film Classification is also legally responsible for the
classification of videos. The system of classification is similar to that for films. It
is an offence to supply commercially a video which has not been classified or to
supply it in contravention of its classification—for example, to sell or hire a video
classified 18 to a person under the age of 18.
State support for the visual arts mainly takes the form of maintenance and
purchase grants for the national museums and galleries, purchase grants for
municipal museums and galleries, funding for living artists channelled through
the Arts Councils, the Crafts Council and 12 regional arts associations, and
grants towards the cost of art education. The Government also encourages high
standards of industrial design and craftsmanship through grants to the Design
Council.
All national museums and galleries are financed chiefly from government
funds. They are free to levy entrance charges to their permanent collections,
special exhibitions and outstations at their discretion. Government policy is to
give priority to the conservation of the buildings and collections of the national
institutions rather than to increasing purchase grants for acquisitions. All the
national collections in England, Scotland and Wales are managed by indepen¬
dent trustees. Museums and art galleries maintained by local authorities,
universities and private benefactions may receive help in building up their
collections through annual government grants administered by the Museums
and Galleries Commission (for England and Wales) and the National Museums of
Scotland. Financial and practical assistance to both national and local
museums and galleries is also given by the Arts Council and by trusts and
voluntary bodies including the Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation, the National
Art-Collections Fund and the Contemporary Art Society. Pre-eminent works of
art accepted by the Government in place of inheritance tax are allocated to public
galleries. Financial help may be available from the National Heritage Memorial
Fund, which has received over £100 million from the Government since its
creation in 1980. In recent years, the Fund has made important contributions
towards pictures bought by the Birmingham, Leeds and Manchester City Art
Galleries, and by the national galleries and museums.
Support given by the Arts Council, in co-operation with regional arts
associations, comprises grants towards the public presentation of the visual
arts, especially contemporary and experimental works, publication of books and
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
419
Museums and
Art Galleries
Museums
Association
National
Collections
magazines, and the commissioning of works of art in public places. The South
Bank Board maintains a collection of contemporary British art and organises
touring exhibitions throughout the country on behalf of the Arts Council. The
Council supports a number of art and photography galleries in London,
including the Hayward Gallery, Serpentine Gallery, Photographers Gallery and
Whitechapel Art Gallery, and in the regions, such as the Arnolfini in Bristol and
the Museum of Modern Art in Oxford. It also provides support for artists and
photographers through purchasing and commissioning fellowships and resi¬
dences. Similar support is given by the Scottish Arts Council to galleries in
Scotland such as the Fruitmarket Gallery in Edinburgh. The Welsh and
Northern Ireland Arts Councils have galleries in Cardiff and Belfast respectively.
A number of modern British sculptors and painters have high international
reputations, and have received many international prizes and commissions for
major works in foreign cities. Among the best known are the late Henry Moore,
Elisabeth Frink, Francis Bacon and David Hockney.
A major expansion in the number of museums is taking place and many are
introducing new display techniques that attract increasing numbers of visitors.
Over 73 million people a year attend the 2,000 or so museums and galleries open
to the public, which include the major national collections and a wide variety of
municipally and independently or privately owned institutions.
The Government is advised on policy matters by the Museums and Galleries
Commission, which also promotes co-operation between national and provincial
institutions. Nine area museum councils supply technical services and advice
on conservation, display, documentation and publicity.
The independent Museums Association, to which museums and art galleries
and their staffs belong and which has many overseas members, is a focus for the
collection of information and discussion of matters relating to museums and
galleries, and an examining body for professional qualifications. It manages a
comprehensive, publicly available database on British museums and operates
active training, seminar, research and publishing programmes. Through its
subsidiary, Museum Enterprises, high-quality consultancy services to
museums and galleries are provided in the fields of planning, trading and
recruitment.
The national museums and art galleries, which are mostly located in London,
contain some of the world's most comprehensive collections of objects of artistic,
archaeological, scientific, historical and general interest. They are the British
Museum (including the Museum of Mankind), the British Museum (Natural
History), the Victoria and Albert Museum, the Science Museum, the National
Gallery, the Tate Gallery, the National Portrait Gallery, the Imperial War
Museum, the National Army Museum, the Royal Air Force Museum, the National
Maritime Museum, the Wallace Collection, the Geological Museum and a group
of museums and galleries on Merseyside. Some of the museums in London have
branches outside London, examples being the National Railway Museum (York)
and the National Museum of Photography, Film and Television (Bradford) which
are part of the Science Museum.
New developments at the Tate Gallery have included the opening in 1987 of the
Clore Gallery to house the paintings bequeathed to the nation by J. M. W.
Turner, and the opening of the Tate Gallery Liverpool in May 1988. An extension
to the National Gallery, to be financed by the Sainsbury family, has also been
announced. A national theatre museum opened in 1987 in Covent Garden
London.
In Scotland the national collections are the National Museums of Scotland
420
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Other
Collections
Crafts
(formed by the bringing together in 1985 of the Royal Scottish Museum and the
National Museum of Antiquities of Scotland, and embracing the Scottish United
Services Museum in Edinburgh Castle) and the National Galleries of Scotland
(comprising the National Gallery of Scotland, the Scottish National Portrait
Gallery and the Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art). The National Museum
of Wales, in Cardiff, has a branch at St Fagan’s Castle where the Welsh Folk
Museum is housed, an Industrial and Maritime Museum in CardifFs dockland,
the Museum of the Woollen Industry at Drefach Felindre, and the Slate
Museum at Llanberis. Northern Ireland has two national museums: the
Ulster Museum in Belfast and the Ulster Folk and Transport Museum in
County Down.
Other important collections in London include the Royal Armouries in the Tower
of London, the Museum of London, Sir John Soane’s Museum, the Courtauld
collection and the London Transport Museum. The Queen’s Gallery in Bucking¬
ham Palace has exhibitions of pictures from the extensive royal collections.
Most cities and towns have museums devoted to art, archaeology and natural
history, usually administered by the local authorities but sometimes by local
learned societies or by individuals or trustees. Both Oxford and Cambridge are
rich in museums, many of them associated with the universities, such as the
Ashmolean Museum in Oxford, founded in 1683, the oldest in the world, and the
Fitzwilliam Museum in Cambridge. Many private art collections in historic
family mansions, including those owned by the National Trusts, are open to the
public, while an increasing number of open air museums depict the regional life
of an area or preserve early industrial remains (for example, the Weald and
Downland Museum in Sussex, the North of England Open Air Museum in
Durham, and the Ironbridge Gorge Museum in Shropshire). Skills of the past
are revived in a number of ‘living’ museums like the Gladstone Pottery Museum
near Stoke on Trent and the Quarry Bank Mill at Styal in Cheshire. Among the
newest museums are the National Horseracing Museum at Newmarket, the
Jorvik Viking Centre, a reconstruction of the Viking settlement in York, and a
new maritime museum in Portsmouth, housing the restored wreck of the Mary
Rose, the flagship of Hemy VIII, which sank in 1545 and was raised in 1982. The
Burrell gallery in Glasgow houses a world-famous collection of tapestries,
paintings and objets d art. A new Museum of the Moving Image, which opened
on the South Bank of the Thames in September 1988, features exhibitions of
moving images ranging from ancient shadow plays, through television and
video, to images produced using optic fibres and lasers.
Apart from their permanent collections, most museums and galleries stage
temporary exhibitions on particular themes. In addition, there are a number of
national art exhibiting societies, the most famous of which is the Royal Academy
of Arts at Burlington House. The Academy holds an annual Summer Exhibition,
where the works of hundreds of professional and amateur artists can be seen,
and important exhibitions during the rest of the year. The Royal Scottish
Academy holds annual exhibitions in Edinburgh. There are also children’s
exhibitions, including the National Exhibition of Children’s Art.
Government aid for the crafts, amounting to just over £2 million in 1988—89, is
administered in England and Wales by the Crafts Council. The Council supports
artist craftsmen and women by promoting interest in their work, making it
accessible to the public and encouraging the creation and appreciation of
articles of fine craftsmanship. Grants are available to help with training, setting
up workshops and acquiring equipment. The Council maintains a selective
index of craftsmen and women and a non-selective national register: it also
arranges exhibitions and seminars and circulates information. A range of
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
421
Training in Art
and Design
The Art Market
LITERATURE
AND
LIBRARIES
literature is published, including Crafts magazine which is issued every two
months. The Council also manages a British crafts shop at the Victoria and
Albert Museum. Funding is given to the Welsh Arts Council and the regional arts
associations in England for the support of crafts, and to Contemporary Applied
Art, a membership organisation that holds exhibitions and sells work through
its London gallery.
Scotland receives a separate government grant which is administered by the
Crafts Consultative Committee of the Scottish Development Agency.
Most practical education in art and design is provided in colleges of art (among
the best known of which are the Slade School and the Royal College of Art, both
in London), further education colleges and private art schools. Four art colleges
in London (Camberwell, Central, Chelsea and St Martin’s) were merged in 1986
with other colleges to form the London Institute. Degrees at postgraduate level
are awarded by the Royal College of Art. Art is also taught at an advanced level at
the four Scottish Central (Art) Institutions.
Courses at universities and polytechnics concentrate largely on academic
disciplines such as the history of art. The leading institutions include the
Courtauld and Warburg Institutes of the University of London and the
Department of Classical Art and Archaeology at University College, London. Art
has a place in all school curricula, and the Society for Education through Art
encourages, among other activities, the purchase by schools of original works of
art by organising an annual Pictures for Schools exhibition.
The Open College of the Arts, launched in 1987, offers an art foundation
correspondence course to people wishing to study at home.
London is a major centre for the international art market, and sales of works of
art take place in the main auction houses (two of the longest established being
Sotheby’s and Christie’s), and through private dealers. Certain items are
covered by export control. These are: works of art and collectors’ items over 50
years old and worth £16,000 or more (£4,000 or more in the case of British
historical portraits); photographic material over 60 years old and worth £400 or
more apiece; and documents, manuscripts and archives over 50 years old,
irrespective of value. A licence is required before such items can be exported.
The application for a licence is considered by the Department of Trade and '
Industry, and, if the Department’s expert advisers recommend the withholding
of a licence, the matter is referred to the Reviewing Committee on the Export of
Works of Art. If the Committee considers a work to be of national importance it
can advise the Government to withhold the export licence for a specified time to
give a public museum or art gallery an opportunity to buy at a fair price.
Literature is an important part of the mainstream of English culture. There are
free public libraries throughout the country, private libraries and several private
literary societies. Book reviews are featured in the press and on television and
radio and there are numerous periodicals concerned with literature. Recogni¬
tion of outstanding literary merit is provided by a number of awards, some of the
most valuable being the Booker, W. H. Smith & Son, and Whitbread prizes.
Awards to encourage young writers include those of the Somerset Maugham
Trust Fund and the E. C. Gregory Trust Fund. Many British writers are
internationally recognised and in 1983 the Nobel prize for literature wa^
awarded to the novelist William Golding. Other well-known living authors are
Graham Greene, Anthony Burgess, Anita Brookner and Iris Murdoch, while
distinguished British poets include Ted Hughes, Seamus Heaney, Tony
Harrison, James Berry, Gavin Ewart and Elizabeth Jennings. Ted Hughes is the
Poet Laureate, who writes verse to mark royal occasions.
422
Authors’
Copyright
Literary and
Philological
Societies
Libraries
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
A public lending right scheme, introduced in 1982, gives registered authors
the right to receive payment from a central fund (totalling £3-5 million in
1988-89) for the use of their books borrowed from public libraries.
The Government remains committed to providing a free basic library service
but believes there is scope for greater private sector involvement. It is making
available £250,000 a year over three years from April 1988 for an incentive
funding scheme to encourage new developments and increase efficiency in
public library services in England; priority will be given to projects involving
collaboration with other libraries and the private sector.
The author of any original literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work is
automatically protected by the Copyright Act 1956 and its related international
conventions1 from the unauthorised reproduction of the work both before and
after publication. The author of the work is the first owner of the copyright, and
the normal term of copyright in published original works is the life of the author
and a period of 50 years after his or her death.
Societies to promote literature include the English Association and the Royal
Society of Literature. The British Academy for the Promotion of Historical,
Philosophical and Philological Studies (the British Academy) is the leading
society for humanistic studies.
Other specialist societies are the Early English Text Society, the Biblio¬
graphical Society, the Harleian Society, the Saltire Society, and several societies
devoted to particular authors, the largest of which is the Dickens Fellowship.
Various societies, such as the Poetry Society, sponsor poetry readings and
recitals. There are a number of clubs and societies, such as the Poetry Book
Society, which distribute selected new books to their members.
The British Library is the national library of the United Kingdom and ranks with
the Library of Congress in Washington and the Bibliotheque Nationale in Paris
as one of the world’s greatest libraries. Publishers have a legal obligation to
supply the Library with a copy of each item published in Britain. The
Humanities and Social Sciences division provides comprehensive information
and reference services based on its world-famous collections of some 15 million
items of monographs, manuscripts, maps, stamps, newspapers and recorded
sound. The Library’s exhibition galleries are housed in the British Museum
building in Bloomsbury, London, where many of the Library's greatest treasures
are on permanent display and temporary exhibitions are regularly mounted.
The British Library Science, Technology and Industry division comprises the
Document Supply Centre in West Yorkshire and the Science Reference and
Information Service in London. The former operates a rapid inter-library lending
service supplying over 3 million requests each year from its own stock of 7
million documents which include journals, reports, theses, conference proceed¬
ings and books. It also has access to many millions of books in other libraries
and is the national centre for inter-library lending within Britain and between
Britain and countries overseas. The Science Reference and Information Service
is Western Europe’s most comprehensive collection of material on modern
science, technology and commerce, and is also the National Patents Library.
Services offered include document delivery, information services, publications
and seminars. The Library’s Bibliographic Services division processes the
material deposited with the Library for inclusion in its catalogues, and
1 A copyright work first published in Britain has automatic copyright in all countries which are
members of the Berne Copyright Convention and the Universal Copyright Convention. Legislative
proposals to reform copyright law have been brought before Parliament.
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
423
University
Libraries
Special
Libraries
Public
Libraries
maintains a machine-readable database of bibliographic records from which is
derived the printed British National Bibliography (which lists new books and
new editions published in Britain) and a range of automated bibliographic
services including book selection, information retrieval, cataloguing and other
technical processes. The Research and Development Department is a major
source of funding for research and development in library and information
services. A new building at St Pancras, to come into use during 1993, is
expected eventually to house on one site most of the Library’s London-based
collections and public services.
The National Libraries of Scotland and Wales, the Bodleian Library of Oxford
University and the Cambridge University Library can claim copies of all new
British publications under legal deposit.
Some of the national museums and government departments have important
libraries. The Public Record Office contains the records of the superior courts of
law and of most government departments, as well as famous historical
documents. The Scottish Record Office in Edinburgh serves the same purpose.
Besides a number of great private collections, such as that of the London
Library, there are the rich resources of the learned societies and institutions.
Examples are the libraries of the Royal Institute of International Affairs, the
Royal Commonwealth Society, the Royal Geographical Society, the British
Theatre Association, the Royal Academy of Music, the National Library for the
Blind and the National Book League.
The university libraries of Oxford and Cambridge are unmatched by those of the
more recent foundations, although the combined library resources of the
colleges and institutions of the University of London total 9 million volumes, the
John Rylands University Library in Manchester contains 3-4 million volumes,
Edinburgh 2 million, Leeds 1-8 million, and Birmingham, Glasgow, Liverpool
and Aberdeen each has over 1 million volumes. Many universities have
important research collections in special subjects; examples include the Barnes
Medical Library at Birmingham and the British Library of Political and
Economic Science at the London School of Economics.
Numerous associations and commercial and industrial organisations operate
library and information services. Although most of these are primarily intended
for use within the organisation, many special libraries can be used, by
arrangement, by people interested in the area covered, and the specialist
publications held are often available for inter-library lending.
Local library authorities have a duty to provide a free lending and reference
library service in their areas, and Britain's network of libraries has a total stock
of 137 million books. About one-third of the total population are members of
public libraries. Some areas are served by mobile libraries, and domiciliary
services cater for people unable to visit a library. Many libraries have collections
of records, audio- and video-cassettes, and musical scores for loan to the public,
while a number also lend from collections of works of art, which may be originals
or reproductions. Most libraries hold documents on local history, and nearly all
provide children's departments, while reference and information sections and
art, music, commercial and technical departments meet the growing and more
specific demands in these fields. The information role is one of increasing
importance for many libraries, and greater use is being made of information
technology including microcomputers and reference databases.
The Government is advised on library and information matters by four Library
and Information Services Councils or Committees, representing England,
Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, respectively.
424
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Books
In 1987 British publishers issued nearly 54,000 separate titles. Of these about
40,700 were new titles and the remainder reprints and new editions. The British
publishing industry devotes much effort to the development of overseas
markets, and the value of exports of British books in 1987 amounted to over
£537 million. The industry is also distinguished for its interest in new
technological developments, including electronic publishing and the develop¬
ment of software for educational and other purposes.
Among the leading organisations representing publishing and distribution
interests are the Publishers Association, which has 400 members, and the
Booksellers' Association. The Publishers Association, through its associated
body the Book Development Council, has been active in promoting the export of
British books world-wide.
The British Council publicises British books overseas through its 116
libraries in over 60 countries, participation in international book fairs and a
programme of travelling exhibitions. The Council also publishes a monthly
periodical, British Book News.
The Book Trust, whose membership includes authors, publishers, book¬
sellers, librarians and readers, encourages an interest in books and arranges
exhibitions throughout Britain.
The Press
More daily newspapers, national and regional, are sold per person in Britain
than in most other developed countries. On an average day two out of three
people over the age of 15 read a national morning newspaper; about three out of
four read a Sunday newspaper. Three out of four adults regularly read a paid-for
regional or local newspaper. National papers have a total circulation of 14-8
million on weekdays and 17-6 million on Sundays though the total readership is
considerably greater. There are about 130 daily (Monday to Saturday) and
Sunday newspapers, 1,700 weekly newspapers (including business, sporting
and religious newspapers) and some 7,500 periodical publications.
The press caters for a variety of political views, interests and levels of
education. There is no state control or censorship of the press, but it is subject
to the general laws on publication (see p 433). Newspapers are almost always
financially independent of any political party; where they express pronounced
views and show obvious political leanings in their editorial comments, these
derive from proprietorial and other non-party influences. Nevertheless, during
general election campaigns many newspapers recommend their readers to vote
for a particular political party. Even newspapers which espouse strong political
views in their editorial columns include feature and other types of articles by
authors of a variety of political persuasions. In order to preserve their character
and traditions, a few newspapers and periodicals are governed by various
trustee-type arrangements. Others have management arrangements to ensure
their editors’ authority and independence.
Much greater reliance is now placed on computer-based technology (see p 430)
by the national press (the regional press has been using it extensively for some
time) and working practices are undergoing profound changes throughout the
newspaper industry in response to the challenges posed by the new technology
and the need to reduce costs. Using computerised technology reduces the initial
capital outlay required to produce new papers; two new national newspapers
were launched in 1986.
Newsprint, about two-thirds of which is imported, forms roughly 20 per cent
of average national newspaper costs; labour represents about 55 per cent but
this proportion is likely to fall with the growing use of new technology. Revenue
from sales accounts for varying proportions of income; many newspapers and
periodicals derive considerable earnings from their advertising.
Unlike most of its European counterparts the British press receives no
subsidies and relatively few tax and postal concessions. Newspaper and
magazine sales (but not advertising receipts) are zero-rated for value added tax
Newspapers registered with the Post Office receive a concession on postal rates,
and there are concessions on per-word' rates for international press telegrams
and photo-telegrams. Like all postal customers, publishers can obtain reduc¬
tions in charges for regular bulk postings.
In discussions on a ‘new world information and communication order’ Britain
has opposed measures designed to increase governmental regulation of the
media or to limit the free flow of information. At the same time, it has reaffirmed
its willingness to support efforts to improve communications systems in the
developing world.
426
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Newspaper
Ownership
Ownership of the national, London and regional daily newspapers is concen¬
trated in the hands of a number of large press publishing groups (the groups
controlling the national press are listed in Table 52). There are, in addition,
some 350 independent regional and local newspaper publishers.
Although most enterprises are organised as limited liability companies,
individual and partner proprietorship survives. The large national newspaper
and periodical publishers are major corporations with interests ranging over the
whole field of publishing and communications; some have shares in indepen¬
dent television and radio companies while others are involved in industrial and
commercial activities.
The law provides safeguards against the risks inherent in undue concentra¬
tion of the means of communication. For instance, if it appears that newspaper
shareholdings in independent television or independent local radio companies
have led or are leading to results contrary to the public interest, the Independent
Broadcasting Authority can, with the consent of the Home Secretary, notify the
Table 52: National Newspapers
Title and foundation date
Controlled by
Circulation3
average
Jan.—June
1988
National dailies
‘Populars’
Daily Express (1900)
Daily Mail (1896)
Daily Mirror (1903)
Daily Star (1978)
Morning Star (1966)
The Sun (1964)
Today (1986)
‘Qualities’
Financial Times (1888)
The Daily Telegraph (1855)
The Guardian (1821)
The Independent (1986)
The Times (1785)
National Sundays
‘Populars’
News of the World (1843)
Sunday Express (1918)
Sunday Mirror (1963)
The Mail on Sunday (1982)
The People (1881)
‘Qualities’
Sunday Telegraph (1961)
The Observer (1791)
The Sunday Times (1822)
United Newspapers 1,679,438
Associated Newspapers Group 1,792,701
Mirror Group Newspapers (1986) 3,061,109
United Newspapers 1,013,688
Morning Star Co-operative Society 29,000
News International 4,146,644
News International 408,078
Pearson 206,300
The Daily Telegraph 1,138,673
The Guardian and Manchester
Evening News 470,023
Newspaper Publishing 375,317
News International 450,626
News International 5,213,901
United Newspapers 2,143,374
Mirror Group Newspapers (1986) 2,747,981
Associated Newspapers Group 1,932,799
Mirror Group Newspapers (1986) 2,723,195
The Daily Telegraph 716,044
Lonrho International 749,644
News International 1,362,743
a Circulation figures are those of the Audit Bureau of Circulations (founded in 1931 and consisting of publishers,
advertisers and advertising agencies) and are certified average daily or weekly net sales for the period. The circula¬
tion figure of the Morning Star is otherwise audited.
THE PRESS
427
The National
Press
Regional
Newspapers
England
companies that their programmes may cease to be transmitted. There are
additional controls over newspaper interests in cable television services. In
addition, it is unlawful to transfer a newspaper or newspaper assets to a
proprietor whose newspapers have an average daily circulation amounting, with
that of the newspaper to be taken over, to 500,000 or more copies without the
written consent of the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry. Except in
certain limited cases, consent may be given only after the Secretary of State has
referred the matter to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission and received its
report.
Twelve morning daily papers and eight Sunday papers (see Table 52) circulate
throughout most parts of Britain, and are known as national newspapers.
Formerly they were produced in or near Fleet Street in London with, in some
cases, northern editions being printed in Manchester. Recently, a majority of the
national papers have moved, or made plans to move, their editorial and printing
facilities to other parts of London (including the Docklands) or away from the
capital altogether. Today, a new national newspaper launched in 1986, is
printed at Poyle (Middlesex) and Manchester. The Independent, which also
began publishing in 1986, uses printing presses in Bradford, Northampton,
Peterborough and Portsmouth. Scottish editions of The Sun, The Times, News
of the World and The Sunday Times are printed in Glasgow.
Several newspapers have had very long and distinguished histories: for
example, The Observer, first published in 1791, is the oldest national Sunday
newspaper in the world, and The Times, one of the most influential of all
newspapers and Britain s oldest daily national newspaper, celebrated its
two-hundredth anniversary in 1985.
The leading Scottish papers. The Scotsman and the Glasgow Herald, have a
considerable circulation outside Scotland.
National newspapers are often thought of as either ‘quality’ or ‘popular’ papers
on the basis of differences in style and content. Quality newspapers are directed
at readers who want full information on a wide range of public matters and are
prepared to spend a considerable amount of time reading it, while popular
newspapers appeal to people wanting news of a more entertaining character
presented in a more concise form and with ample illustrations. At present, all
quality papers are broadsheet in format and all popular papers, with the
exception of the Sunday Express, tabloid. Five dailies and three Sundays are
usually described as quality newspapers. A number of papers produce colour
supplements as part of the paper.
The total circulation of national newspapers amounted to 32 million in 1987
(compared with 36 million in 1973).
The regional newspapers of England (outside London, 89 morning or evening
dailies and Sundays and some 750 newspapers appearing once or twice a week)
provide mainly regional and local news. The daily newspapers also give coverage
of national and international affairs. Generally, regional evening newspapers are
non-political, while the morning newspapers adopt a more positive political
stance and tend to be independent or conservative in outlook.
Of the morning papers the Yorkshire Post (Leeds) and the Eastern Daily Press
(Norwich) each has circulations of 92,000, and two provincial Sunday papers 
the Sunday Sun (Newcastle upon Tyne) and the Sunday Mercury
(Birmingham)—sell 121,000 and 160,000 copies, respectively. Circulation
figures of evening papers start at about 12,000 and most are in the 20,000 to
100,000 range: those with much larger sales include the Manchester Evening
News (291,000), the Birmingham Evening Mail (233,000), Wolverhampton’s
Express and Star (239,000) and the Liverpool Echo (207,000). Weekly papers are
428
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Wales
Scotland
Northern
Ireland
Free
Distribution
Newspapers
Ethnic Minority
Publications
of mainly local appeal and are also a valuable medium for local advertising. Most
have circulations in the 5,000 to 60,000 range.
There is currently one London evening newspaper, the Evening Standard
(with a circulation of 493,000). A number of evening newspapers are published
in the outer metropolitan area. The hundred or so local weeklies include papers
for every district in Greater London, often in the form of local editions of an
individual paper.
Wales has one daily morning newspaper, the Western Mail, published in Cardiff;
its circulation of 74,000 is mainly in south Wales. In north Wales the Daily Post,
published in Liverpool, gives wide coverage to events in the area. Evening papers
published in Wales are the South Wales Echo, Cardiff; the South Wales Argus,
Newport; the South Wales Evening Post, Swansea; and the Evening Leader,
Wrexham. Their circulation range is between 28,000 and 93,000. North Wales is
also served by the Liverpool Echo, while the Shropshire Star covers parts
of north and mid-Wales, and there is coverage to a smaller extent by the
Manchester Evening News.
The weekly press (some 68 publications) includes English-language papers,
some of which carry articles in Welsh; bilingual papers; and Welsh-language
papers. Welsh community newspapers receive an annual grant as part of the
Government’s wider financial support for the Welsh language.
Scotland has six morning, six evening and four Sunday newspapers. The
morning papers, with circulations of between 88,000 and 764,000, are The
Scotsman (published in Edinburgh); the Glasgow Herald; the Daily Record
(sister paper of the Daily Mirror); the Dundee Courier and Advertiser; the
Aberdeen Press and Journal; and the Scottish Daily Express (printed in
Manchester). The evening papers have circulations in the range of 12,000 to
180,000 and are the Evening News of Edinburgh, Glasgow’s Evening Times,
Dundee’s Evening Telegraph, Aberdeen’s Evening Express, the Paisley Daily
Express and the Greenock Telegraph. The Sunday papers are the Sunday Mail,
the Sunday Post, the Scottish Sunday Express (printed in Manchester), and a
new quality broadsheet paper, Scotland on Sunday, which was launched in
August 1988.
Local weekly newspapers number more than 100.
Northern Ireland has two morning newspapers, one evening and one Sunday
paper, all published in Belfast with circulations ranging from 42,000 to
148,000. They are the News Letter (unionist) and the Irish News (nationalist),
the evening Belfast Telegraph and the Sunday News. There are 51 weeklies.
Newspapers from the Irish Republic, as well as the British national press, are
widely read in Northern Ireland.
About 950 free distribution newspapers (mostly weekly and financed by
advertising) are now published in Britain; over half of them are produced by
established newspaper publishers. They have enjoyed rapid growth in recent
years and now have an estimated total weekly circulation of over 40 million.
Europe’s first daily free distribution paper, the Daily News (published four
days a week), was launched in Birmingham in 1984.
Some 100 newspapers and magazines are produced by members of the ethnic
minorities, about 60 of which are intended for the Asian community. Most are
published weekly or monthly. They include the Asian newspapers The Daily
Jang, New Life and Asian Times; and The Weekly Gleaner—a local edition of the
Jamaican Gleaner—and West Indian Digest. The Voice and Caribbean Times are
aimed at the black population in general as is the magazine Root; Chic is a
THE PRESS
429
The Periodical
Press
fashion and beauty magazine. An Arabic daily, Al-Arab, is also produced in
Britain.
The 7,500 periodical publications are classified as ‘consumer general’, ‘special¬
ised’, ‘trade’, ‘technical’ and ‘professional’. There are also several hundred ‘house
magazines’ produced by industrial undertakings, business houses or public
services for the benefit of their employees and/or clients and some 460 free
consumer magazines. Directories and similar publications number more than
2,000. The ‘alternative’ press comprises several hundred further titles, most of
them devoted to radical politics, community matters, religion, the occult,
science or ecology.
Consumer general and specialised periodicals include magazines for a wide
range of interests: women's magazines: publications for children; religious
periodicals; fiction magazines; magazines dealing with sport, motoring, garden¬
ing, pop music, hobbies and humour; computer magazines; and the publica¬
tions of learned societies, trade unions, regiments, universities and other
organisations. In recent years several overseas women’s magazines have built up
large circulations; Prima and Best, for instance, each sells around 1 million
copies.
The weekly periodicals with the highest sales are: Radio Times and TV Times,
which carry details of the week’s television and radio programmes on BBC and
independent television, respectively, each of which has a circulation of over 3
million, and Woman’s Weekly, Woman’s Own, Woman, Weekly News (which sells
mainly in Scotland) and My Weekly, with circulations in the 550,000 to 1-2
million range. Woman’s Realm and Chat have circulations of 598,000 and
488,000 respectively. Of monthly magazines Reader's Digest has the highest
circulation (1-5 million). The leading journals of opinion are The Economist, an
independent conservative publication covering a wider range of topics than its
title implies; the New Statesman and Society, which reviews social issues,
politics, literature and the arts from an independent socialist point of view; the
Spectator, which covers much the same subjects from an independent
conservative standpoint; Tribune, which represents certain left-wing views
within the Labour Party; and New Scientist, which reports on science and
technology in terms which the non-specialist can understand. Articles and
features relating largely to BBC and independent television and radio program¬
mes appear in The Listener. Punch, traditionally the leading humorous
periodical, and Private Eye, a satirical fortnightly, also cover public affairs.
Financial Weekly and Investors Chronicle are two of a number of periodicals for
people with business and investment interests. Two new weekly newspapers for
children—Early Times and Scoop—were launched in 1988. Weekly ‘listings’
magazines including Time Out and City Limits provide details of cultural and
other events in London and other large cities.
Literary and political journals and those specialising in international and
Commonwealth affairs, published monthly or quarterly, generally appeal to the
more serious reader. Trade, technical, business, scientific and professional
journals, publication of which ranges from twice weekly to quarterly, are an
important aspect of British publishing and business communication, many
having a considerable circulation overseas. There are about 500 publications
covering business and industrial affairs.
Periodicals published in England circulate throughout Britain. In Wales there
are also several monthly and quarterly journals published in both Welsh and
English; in Scotland there are three monthly illustrated periodicals, a weekly
paper devoted to farming interests, a number of literary journals and numerous
popular magazines; and Northern Ireland has weekly, monthly and quarterly
publications covering business, professional and leisure interests.
430
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
New
Printing
Technology
News Agencies
The heavy production costs of newspapers and periodicals continue to
encourage publishers to look for ways of reducing these costs, often by using
computer systems to control editing and production processes. The ‘front end’
or ‘single stroking' system, for example, allows journalists or advertisement staff
to input ‘copy’ directly into a video terminal, and then by pressing a button to
transform it automatically into computer-set columns of type. Although it is
possible for these columns to be assembled electronically on a page-sized screen,
turned into a full page, and made automatically into a plate ready for transfer to
the printing press, at present very few such systems are in operation. Most
involve the production of bromides from the computer setting which are pasted
up into columns before being placed in a plate-making machine. The most
advanced systems present opportunities for reorganisation which have implica¬
tions throughout a newspaper office and may give rise to disputes over manning
levels and other industrial relations problems. Generally, and most recently in
the case of national newspapers, the introduction of computerised systems has
led to substantial reductions in workforces, particularly, but not solely, among
print workers.
Most of the national newspapers now use some computer technology, while its
use in the provincial press, which has generally led the way in adopting new
techniques, is widespread. The national newspapers Today, The Guardian and
The Independent are produced by fully computerised systems: journalists type
articles directly into and edit them on computer terminals: colour pictures and
graphics are entered into the same system electronically. News International,
publisher of three daily and two Sunday papers, uses at its east London
headquarters more than 500 computer terminals, one of the largest systems
ever installed at one time anywhere in the world.
Other national papers have moved into new computer-based printing plants
outside Fleet Street. Where printing plants are some distance from editorial
offices, pages for printing are sent by facsimile machine from typesetter to print
plant.
Other technological developments include the use of full-colour printing, and
a switch from traditional letterpress printing to the web-offset litho or
plastic-plate processes.
The four principal news agencies in Britain are: Reuters, an international news
organisation registered in London, The Press Association, The Exchange
Telegraph Company and Extel Financial.
Reuters is a publicly owned company, employing some 9,600 full-time staff in
80 countries. Of its 1,200 journalists, 840 work outside the United Kingdom.
The company’s world-wide communications network makes use of satellites,
cables and microwave radio, and is connected to computerised message¬
handling systems and data banks located around the world. Services include
general news for the media delivered by teleprinter or fed directly into clients’
computers, and specialised economic news and information services for
business delivered through video terminals, by teleprinter or by direct computer
feed. Reuters serves subscribers in 130 countries including financial institu¬
tions, commodities houses, traders in currencies, equities and bonds, news¬
papers, radio and television stations, and news agencies.
In 1985 Reuters launched its own world service of news pictures, having in the
previous year acquired the news pictures business outside the United States of
United Press International, the American news agency.
The Press Association, the British national news agency, is co-operatively
owned by the principal daily newspapers of the United Kingdom outside London,
and of the Irish Republic. It provides national and regional newspapers and
broadcasting services with a complete service of home news, including general
THE PRESS
431
Training for
Journalism
and parliamentary news, legal reports, and all types of financial, commercial and
sports news, and includes in its services to regional papers the world news of
Reuters and Associated Press. News is teleprinted from London, certain items
being available in teletypesetting form. Its ‘Newsfile’ service provides general
home news on screen to non-media as well as media clients by means of
telephone and viewdata terminals. Also available on screen is the ‘Esmerk’
service, an international digest of business information. The photographic
department provides newspapers and broadcasters with a daily service of
pictures from Britain and overseas; these are wired to the regional press. The
NewsFeatures service supplies reports of local or special interest and provides
exclusive rights to syndicated articles and visual features.
The Exchange Telegraph Company is the chief supplier of sports information
throughout Britain, providing results and commentary to every national
newspaper, television and radio, as well as overseas news agencies and the
Ceefax and Oracle teletext services. The Racing News Service is supplied to all
betting shops in Britain and the Irish Republic and provides a full news and
information service about race meetings, including running commentaries from
many meetings. This information is transmitted by Extelnet through 12 centres
in Britain by high-speed digital circuits provided by British Telecom and
managed by Extel Communications. Changes in legislation controlling licensed
betting offices have encouraged the development of more advanced technology to
supply closed-circuit video to betting shops and other subscribers.
Extel Financial supplies information and services to British and international
financial institutions. Based in London, it has a network of offices in Europe
and the United States and representatives in Japan and South-East Asia. Data
are collected from all the world’s money exchanges, from companies and from
the international press. The agency is a major source of reference material on
companies and finance; it supplies a comprehensive range of data products on
international linancial matters; and provides specialised services by computer
to banks, insurance companies and other institutions. Up-to-the-minute
business and company news is provided by the agency’s specialist financial
news service.
The British press and broadcasting organisations are also served by Associ¬
ated Press and United Press International, which are British subsidiaries of
United States news agencies.
A number ol other British, Commonwealth and foreign agencies and news
services have offices in London, and there are minor agencies in other cities,
mostly specialising in various aspects of newspaper and periodical require¬
ments. Syndication of features is not as common in Britain as in some
countries, but a few agencies specialise in this type of work.
The National Council for the Training of Journalists (NCTJ), which represents
the principal regional press organisations, sets and conducts examinations, and
organises short training courses for journalists.
The two main methods of entry into newspaper journalism are selection for a
one-year NCTJ pre-entiy course at a college of further education or direct
recruitment by a regional or local newspaper. Both categories of entrant take
part in an apprenticeship scheme consisting of ‘on-the-job’ training, and
block-release courses are provided for those who have not attended a pre-entry
course. There are similar courses for press photographers. Postgraduate
diploma courses in journalism are provided at the University of Wales College of
Cardiff, the City University, London, and Lancashire Polytechnic, Preston.
Courses are provided by the Newspaper Society Training Service for regional
newspapers in such subjects as newspaper sales, advertising, industrial
relations and management.
432
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Press
Institutions
Specialist training courses for senior journalists from developing countries
are run by the Thomson Foundation in London. The Foundation also conducts
training courses in developing countries and provides consultants to assist
newspapers and magazines in such areas as advertising, management, circula¬
tion and the introduction and operation of new technology. It runs an
international journalism training centre in collaboration with Xinhua News
Agency in Peking.
The Periodicals Training Council is the official training organisation in
periodical publishing. It offers a wide range of short courses covering editorial
work, advertisement sales and circulation sales. It has special responsibility for
editorial training and administers an industry-wide editorial training scheme
for those already in employment. The postgraduate courses in journalism at the
University of Wales College of Cardiff and the City University, London, offer
periodical journalism options, and the London College of Printing provides
postgraduate courses and General Certificate of Education Advanced level
courses in periodical journalism. Reed Business Publishing, one of the largest
publishing companies, runs an in-company training course for suitable
candidates from the general public on a fee-paying basis.
Under the Harry Brittain Memorial Fellowship Scheme, administered by
the Commonwealth Press Union, several young Commonwealth journalists
each year spend three months working and studying in Britain, while the
Reuter Foundation, established in 1982, awards six fellowships each year to
journalists from developing countries to study at Oxford, Stanford and
Bordeaux universities. In 1987 the Reuter Foundation established a fellowship
for photo-journalists from developing countries at the School of Journalism,
University of Missouri.
Annual Student Media Awards are presented jointly by The Guardian
newspaper and the National Union of Students to students in higher education
who have excelled in college press, television and radio journalism.
The most important employers' organisations are the Newspaper Publishers
Association, whose members publish national newspapers in London and
Manchester; the Newspaper Society, which represents the regional, local and
London suburban press; the Scottish Daily Newspaper Society, which repre¬
sents the interests of daily and Sunday newspapers in Scotland; the Scottish
Newspaper Proprietors’ Association, which represents the owners of weekly
newspapers in Scotland; Associated Northern Ireland Newspapers, whose
members are the proprietors of weekly newspapers in Northern Ireland; and the
Periodical Publishers Association, whose membership embraces the majority of
independent publishers of business, professional and consumer journals.
Organisations representing journalists are the National Union of Journalists,
with some 33,000 members, and the Institute of Journalists, with about 2,300
members. Two main printing unions are concerned with the press: the Society
of Graphical and Allied Trades (SOGAT) '82, with 190,000 members, and the
National Graphical Association 1982, with 130,000 members, about one-sixth
of whom work on newspapers.
The Guild of British Newspaper Editors is the officially recognised profes¬
sional body for newspaper editors. It has approximately 425 members and aims
to maintain the professional status and independence of editors, defend the
freedom of the press, and improve the education and training of journalists. The
British Association of Industrial Editors is the professional organisation to
which most editors of house journals belong. The Association of British Editors,
representing the whole range of media including radio, television, newspapers
and magazines, was established in 1984.
The main aim of the Foreign Press Association, founded in 1888, is to help the
THE PRESS
433
The Press
Council
Advertising
Practice
The Press and
the Law
correspondents of overseas newspapers in their work by arranging press
conferences, tours, briefings and a range of other facilities.
The Press Council is a voluntary and non-statutory body founded by the
newspaper industry in 1953, on the recommendation of the first Royal
Commission on the press, to safeguard the freedom of the press and to ensure
that it conducts itself responsibly. It comprises equal numbers of press and
non-press members with an independent chairman. Its full aims are to preserve
the established freedom of the press; maintain the character of the press in
accordance with the highest professional and commercial standards; keep
under review any developments likely to restrict the supply of information of
public interest and importance; deal with complaints about the conduct of the
press or the conduct of individuals and organisations towards the press; report
on developments in the press which may tend towards greater concentration or
monopoly; make representations on appropriate occasions to the Government,
the United Nations and press organisations abroad; publish its adjudications
and periodic reports recording its work; and review from time to time
developments in the press and the factors affecting them.
Dealing with complaints from the public about the content and conduct of the
press is the Council’s best-known function. It has no power to impose penalties
on publications which it has found guilty of malpractice, but relies on the
sanction of adverse publicity. It can censure newspapers, magazines, editors
and journalists, and issues adjudications which the editor of the newspaper or
magazine criticised by the Council has a moral obligation to publish in full. The
Council sometimes initiates inquiries into aspects of press conduct without first
receiving public complaints. Its annual reports include press statistics and
articles on the structure of leading press groups.
Advertising practice in the press (and in the cinema and on posters) is regulated
and controlled by the Advertising Standards Authority, an independent body
which aims to promote and enforce the highest standards of advertising in the
interests of the public and the industry, in particular through the British Code
of Advertising Practice. The objects of the code are to ensure that advertisements
are legal, decent, honest and truthful; that they are prepared with a sense of
responsibility to the consumer; that they conform to the principles of fair
competition as generally accepted in business; and that no advertisement brings
advertising into disrepute or reduces confidence in advertising as a service to
industry and the public.
The Authority’s main activities are monitoring advertisements for their
compliance with the code; initiating modifications to the code; and dealing with
complaints received direct from members of the public. Its main sanction is the
recommendation to media that advertisements considered to be in breach of the
code should not be published. It also publishes regular reports on the results of
its investigations, naming the companies involved. The Director General of Fair
Trading has the power to seek a court injunction to prevent the publication of a
misleading advertisement.
The press has generally the same freedom as the individual to comment on
matters of public interest. There are no specific press laws, but certain statutes
include sections which apply to the press. There is a legal requirement to
reproduce ‘the printer’s imprint’ (the printer’s name and place of publication) on
all publications, including newspapers. In addition, publishers are legally
obliged to deposit copies of newspapers and other publications at the British
Library and to make annual returns to Companies House in the rare
circumstances in which a newspaper is not printed and published as a joint
434
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
stock company. Other provisions relate to the extent of newspaper ownership in
television and radio companies; the transfer of newspaper assets; restrictions on
reporting certain types of court proceedings and on publishing material likely to
stir up racial hatred; the right of press representatives to be admitted to
meetings of local authorities; restrictions on the publication of advertisement
and investment circulars (which are governed by Acts dealing with the
publication of false or misleading descriptions of goods and services and with
fraud) and of advertisements for remedies for certain diseases, which are
covered by public health legislation; agreements between British Telecom and
newspaper proprietors on telegraphic communications, which must comply
with telegraphs legislation; restrictions on certain types of prize competition;
and copyrights, which come under copyright laws.
Of particular relevance to the press are laws such as those on contempt of
court, official secrets, libel and defamation. A newspaper may not publish
comments on the conduct of judicial proceedings which are likely to prejudice
the courts’ reputation for fairness before or during the actual proceedings, nor
may it publish before or during a trial anything which might tend to influence
the result. The unauthorised acquisition and publication of information from
state and official sources is an offence under the Official Secrets Act 1911; the
Government has published proposals for reform of the Act under which
unauthorised disclosure of only a narrow range of official information harmful
to the public interest would constitute a criminal offence. Newspapers are also
liable to proceedings for seditious libel and incitement to disaffection. Most legal
proceedings against the press are libel actions brought by private individuals. In
such cases, the editor, proprietor, publishers, printer and distributor of the
newspaper, as well as the author, may all be held responsible.
Government officials and representatives of the media form the Defence, Press
and Broadcasting Committee, which has agreed that in some circumstances the
publication of certain categories of information might endanger national
security. Details of these categories are contained in Defence Notices (D Notices)
circulated to the media, which are asked to seek advice from the Secretary of the
Committee, a retired senior military officer, before publishing information in
these areas. Compliance with any advice offered by the Secretary is expected but
there is no legal force behind it and the final decision on whether to publish lies
with the editor, producer or publisher concerned.
23 Television
and Radio
Broadcasting is based on the tradition that it is a public service accountable to
the people through Parliament. Two public bodies—the British Broadcasting
Corporation (BBC) and the Independent Broadcasting Authority (IBA)—provide
television and radio services throughout the country. In Wales the Welsh Fourth
Channel Authority is responsible for programmes on one television channel. The
authorities work to broad requirements and objectives defined by Parliament,
but are otherwise independent in the day-to-day conduct of business. The
Government plans to introduce legislation to create the foundations for a
broadcasting framework conducive to greater competition and wider choice for
viewers and listeners.
Independence carries with it certain obligations over programmes and
programme content. Programmes must display, as far as possible, a proper
balance and wide range of subject matter, impartiality in matters of controversy
and accuracy in news coverage, and must not offend against good taste. Codes of
guidance on violence in television programmes, particularly during hours when
large numbers of children are likely to be viewing, are operated by both
authorities. A new broadcasting standards council is being set up to deal with
complaints about violence and sex in television and radio programmes and in
video recordings. A code of advertising standards and practice is operated by the
IBA. (The BBC does not broadcast advertisements.) A complaints commission
deals with allegations of unfair treatment or infringement of privacy in
programmes. Publicly available video recordings are classified according to their
suitability for different audiences.
As well as regulating broadcasting generally, the Home Secretary is answer-
able to Parliament on broad policy questions, and may issue directions on a
number of technical and other matters.
Television viewing is by far the most popular leisure pastime in Britain: nearly
everyone watches television, average viewing time per person being about 26
hours a week. Over 50 per cent of households have two or more receivers. The
growth in use of video-cassette recorders and equipment (including home
computers) for playing television games has for many people increased the
choice of entertainment available in the home. More than 50 per cent of
households rent or own a video-cassette recorder. Practically every home has a
radio set, and car radios and portable sets have made radio a major daytime
diversion.
Britain is one of the world's foremost exporters of television productions; in
1986 overseas earnings of the television companies amounted to £101 million.
British television productions continue to win large numbers of international
awards.
The British The constitution and finances of the BBC are governed by Royal Charter and by
Broadcasting a Licence and Agreement. The Corporation’s board of 12 governors, including
Corporation the chairman, vice-chairman and national governors for Scotland, Wales and
Northern Ireland, is appointed by the Queen on the advice of the Government
436
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The
Independent
Broadcasting
Authority
and has ultimate responsibility for all aspects of broadcasting. Committees
advise them on a wide range of matters including the social effects of television,
religious broadcasting, music, agriculture, schools broadcasting, further educa¬
tion, programmes for ethnic minorities, science and engineering, and charitable
appeals. The governors appoint the Director-General, the Corporation’s chief
executive officer, who heads the BBC’s board of management, which is in charge
of the daily operation of the services.
The National Broadcasting Councils for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland
control the policy and content of television and radio programmes intended
primarily for reception in their areas. Local radio councils, representative of the
local community, advise on the development and operation of the BBC’s local
radio stations.
The domestic services of the BBC are financed principally from the sale of
television licences. Households with television must buy an annual licence
costing £21 for black and white or £62-50 for colour. Over 19-3 million licences
were current in February 1988, about 17-1 million for colour. Licence income is
supplemented by profits from trading activities, including television programme
exports, sale of recordings and publications connected with BBC programmes,
hire and sale of educational films, film library sales, and exhibitions based on
programmes. More than two-thirds of expenditure on domestic services relates
to television. The BBC meets the cost of its local radio stations while some local
education authorities help to make educational programmes.
The BBC’s World Service is financed by a grant-in-aid from the Foreign and
Commonwealth Office.
Recommendations on the financing of the BBC’s domestic services were made
by a government-appointed committee under the chairmanship of Sir (then
Professor) Alan Peacock whose report was published in 1986. The report made
proposals for radical changes in the structure of broadcasting. Its central
recommendation was that British broadcasting should move towards a sophisti¬
cated market system based on freedom of consumer choice with viewers and
listeners having the option of purchasing broadcasting services from as many
alternative sources of supply as possible. Public finance would, however,
continue to be needed for programmes of a public service nature. The report
rejected the idea that the BBC should be funded by advertising, and this has
been accepted by the Government.
The IBA’s constitution and finances are governed by statute. Its 12 members
(three of whom have responsibility for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland) are
appointed by the Home Secretary. The IBA does not produce radio or television
programmes; these are provided by independent programme companies on a
regional basis and by the Channel Four Television Company (a wholly owned
subsidiary of the IBA). The IBA's main functions are to appoint the companies,
supervise programme arrangements, control advertising, and build, own and
operate transmitting stations. Its chief executive officer, the Director-General, is
supported by a headquarters and regional office staff covering all technical and
administrative services.
The IBA is advised by a General Advisory Council, by Scottish, Northern
Ireland and Welsh committees, and by committees on educational broadcasting,
religious broadcasting, charitable appeals and advertising. A specialist panel
advises on advertisements of a medical nature. Local committees advise on local
radio services.
The IBA’s finance comes from annual rental payments made by the television
and radio programme companies for the use of its transmitters. The television
programme companies are also liable to pay to the IBA, for transfer to
government funds, a levy related to their profits.
TELEVISION AND RADIO
437
The Programme
Companies
Television
Fifteen independent (ITV) companies hold contracts to provide programmes in
the 14 independent television regions (two companies share the contract for
London, one providing programmes during weekdays and the other at the
weekend). A contract to provide a national early morning television service,
transmitted on the ITV network, is held by an additional company. The
companies operate on a commercial basis, deriving most of their revenue from
the sale of advertising time. The financial resources, advertising revenue and
programme production of the companies vary considerably, depending largely
on the size of population in the areas in which they operate. Although
newspapers can acquire an interest in programme companies, there are
safeguards to protect the public interest.
The Government is considering the case for reform of the IBA’s system for award-
ing ITV franchises before the end of 1992, when new contracts will be as¬
signed.
In consultation with the IBA, each company plans the content of the
programmes to be broadcast in its area. These are produced by the company
itself and by other programme companies or bought from elsewhere. There are
controls on the number of television programmes which may be bought from
abroad. The five largest companies, serving London, north-west England, East
Midlands, West Midlands and Yorkshire, provide more programmes for broad¬
cast elsewhere on the national network than do the smaller ones. A common
news service is provided by Independent Television News, a non-profit-making
company in which all the programme companies are shareholders. Negotiations
for the supply, exchange and purchase of programmes and their co-ordinated
transmission through the independent television network take place largely on
the Network Programme Committee, which consists of representatives of all the
programme companies and of the IBA.
Similar principles apply to independent local radio. The programme com¬
panies are under contract to the IBA, operate under its control and are financed
by advertising revenue. News coverage is supplied as a common service by
Independent Radio News.
Four television channels are in operation. BBC 1 and BBC 2 are owned by the
BBC; ITV is controlled by, and Channel 4 is owned by, the IBA; all four channels
broadcast on 625 lines ultra-high frequency (uhf). About 99 per cent of the
population live within range of transmission.
The BBC and ITV have accepted a government target that, by 1993, 25 per
cent of their original programme output should be acquired from independent
producers. Both the BBC and the commercial television companies enter into
co-production agreements with overseas television corporations in order to
make new programmes economically.
Apart from a break during the second world war the BBC has been providing
regular television broadcasts since 1936. Over 115 hours of programmes are
transmitted by BBC 1 and almost 100 by BBC 2 every week; all BBC 2
programmes and the majority of those on BBC 1 are broadcast on the national
network. Approximately 70 per cent of the BBC’s home-produced network
programmes for 1987-88 were produced in London and 30 per cent elsewhere in
Britain.
Through co-ordinated planning on its two services the BBC caters simul¬
taneously for people of different interests. While both services cover the whole
range of television output, BBC 1 presents more programmes of general interest,
such as light entertainment, sport, current affairs, children’s programmes and
outside broadcasts, while BBC 2 places greater emphasis on minority interests,
but also provides documentaries, travel programmes, serious drama, music,
programmes on pastimes and international films. The daytime schedule
438
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Teletext
Cable
Services
contains an early morning television service on BBC 1 from Monday to Friday,
providing news, information and light entertainment.
The first regular ITV programmes began in London in 1955. On average each
of the 14 ITV areas transmits some 107 hours of television programmes a week,
nearly two-fifths of them comprising informative programmes—including news,
documentaries, and programmes on current affairs, education and religion. ITV
programmes are broadcast 24 hours a day in some parts of the country, and
there are plans to extend this.
Almost three-quarters of programmes are produced by the programme
companies. A national early morning television service on ITV provides over
three hours of news, information, current affairs and light entertainment daily.
Channel 4, which began broadcasting in 1982, provides a national television
service throughout Britain, except in Wales which has a corresponding service
(Sianel 4 Cymru—S4C—see below). The IBA must ensure that programmes on
Channel 4 are complementary to those of ITV, catering for tastes and interests
not normally provided for by the original independent service. It must provide a
suitable proportion (about 15 per cent) of educational programmes, encourage
innovation and experiment, and include a substantial proportion of pro¬
grammes from independent producers. Channel 4 broadcasts for approximately
90 hours a week, about half of which are devoted to informative programmes. It
transmits late-night programmes until 03.00 hours seven days a week. The
service, both nationally and in Wales, is financed by subscriptions from the
programme companies in return for advertising time in fourth channel
programmes broadcast in their own regions. In Wales programmes on the fourth
channel are run and controlled by the Welsh Fourth Channel Authority,
appointed by the Home Secretary. The Authority is required to ensure that a
significant proportion (in practice some 23 hours a week) are in Welsh and that
those broadcast between 18.30 and 22.00 hours are mainly in Welsh. At other
times the Welsh fourth channel shows national Channel 4 programmes.
The BBC and the IBA each operate a teletext service providing constantly
updated information on a broad variety of subjects, including news, sport, travel
information, local weather conditions and entertainment. The teletext system
allows the television signal to carry additional information which can be selected
and displayed as pages’ of text and graphics on receivers equipped with the
necessary decoders. Both Ceefax, the BBC’s service, and the IBA’s Oracle service
have a subtitling facility for certain of their programmes for people with hearing
difficulties.
Until recently, a small proportion of households with television sets have
received their television services by cable. The vast majority of cable systems
have been used solely to relay broadcast television and radio services in order to
improve reception quality, to avoid ‘screening’ by buildings or the local
topography, or because external aerials are not allowed on some residential
buildings.
Legislation has been passed to allow a much more general expansion of
non-broadcast cable television services. It is intended that cable investment
should be privately financed (the Government is, however, providing £5 million
to the cable television industry to encourage the development of advanced
interactive services such as home banking and shopping over broadband cable
systems); that regulation should be as light as possible to allow the development
of a wide range ol services and facilities, and flexible enough to adapt to
changing technology; and that there should be certain safeguards for existing
broadcasting services. A new national Cable Authority has been established to
issue licences, supervise programme services and promote cable development.
TELEVISION AND RADIO
439
Broadcasting
by Satellite
Radio
In 1983 licences were awarded to 11 cable systems to serve as pilot projects, and
some existing cable operators, formerly relaying broadcast services, have been
licensed to offer additional services on their existing systems. By March 1988
the Cable Authority had awarded a further 12 cable franchises and was
considering a number of others.
In March 1988 over 1-37 million homes were capable of receiving non¬
broadcast cable services. The number of homes receiving such services was
257,000. Cable operators are represented by the Cable Television Association.
Eight British-based satellite television channels have been set up to provide
programmes to cable operators in Britain and, in most cases, throughout
Europe. While some offer general entertainment, others concentrate on specific
areas of interest, such as sport, arts and children’s programmes.
It is hoped that during 1989 direct broadcasting by satellite, by which
television pictures are transmitted directly from space into people’s homes,
will be available throughout Britain; the signals will be receivable on small
dish aerials. The IBA has appointed a programme contractor, British
Satellite Broadcasting, for three of the five satellite channels allocated to the
United Kingdom by international agreement. It is expected that four separate
programme services will be set up devoted to news and sport, feature films,
children s programmes and general entertainment. They will be commercial
services funded by advertising and subscription. Plans have been announced to
broadcast other new, privately financed, satellite television channels in Britain
in 1989 or soon after.
BBC Radio has four national channels. Radio 1 broadcasts rock and pop music,
while Radio 2 provides music and light entertainment as well as being the
principal channel for the coverage of sport. Radio 3 broadcasts mainly classical
music in addition to drama, poetry and short stories, talks and documentaries,
and Test match cricket (on medium wave only). Radio 4 is the main speech
network, providing the principal news and current affairs service, as well as
drama, comedy, documentaries and panel games; it also carries parliamentary
coverage and live relays of major public events.
There are 32 BBC local radio stations serving England and the Channel
Islands, and regional and community radio services in Scotland, Wales and
Northern Ireland, as well as 49 ILR (independent local radio) contractors
throughout Britain. Further BBC and ILR stations are planned. About 90 per
cent of the population is served by BBC or ILR stations. Broadcasts provide a
comprehensive service of local news and information, music and other
entertainment, education, consumer advice and coverage of local events, and
offer listeners a chance to air their views, often by using the phone-in technique.
Some 200 hospitals and 20 universities have closed-circuit radio stations. The
organisers of sporting events can apply for licences to transmit their own radio
broadcasts locally providing information and commentaries.
The Government is to bring before Parliament legislative proposals, based on a
Green Paper published in 1987, on the long-term future of radio broadcasting.
The BBC would continue to broadcast nationally programmes of a public service
nature, that is, high-quality and wide-ranging programmes that inform,
educate and entertain, but up to three additional national radio services run on
commercial lines would be assigned by competitive tender to provide greater
choice and also competition. A new tier of independent community or special
interest local stations would be established.
Educational
Broadcasting
Both the BBC and the IBA broadcast educational programmes for children and
students in schools of all kinds, as well as for pre-school children, and for adults
440
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
BBC
World
Service
COI Overseas
Radio Services
in colleges and other institutions and in their homes. Broadcasts to schools
cover most subjects of the curriculum, while education programmes for adults
cover many fields of learning, vocational training and recreation. Supporting
material, in the form of books, pamphlets, filmstrips, computer software, and
audio and video cassettes, is available to supplement the programmes. The BBC
broadcasts television and radio programmes made specially for students of the
Open University, most of whose 140 or so undergraduate courses contain video
and audio components, some of them available on cassette for use with
correspondence texts. The BBC Open University Centre also produces educa¬
tional and training audio-visual materials in collaboration with external
agencies such as the Department of Trade and Industry, the Department of
Education and Science and the Engineering Industry Training Board. The Open
College, a new initiative in vocational training, was launched in 1987; it
transmits courses on Channel 4 ranging from basic literacy and numeracy to
high-level technological studies.
The BBC plans to start broadcasting in September 1988 a night-time medical
television service for doctors; a specially adapted video recorder will be needed to
receive the service.
The BBC World Service broadcasts by radio world-wide, using English and 36
other languages, for over 730 hours a week. The main objectives are to give
unbiased news, reflect British opinion and project British life, culture and
developments in science and industry. News bulletins, current affairs pro¬
grammes, political commentaries and topical magazine programmes form the
main part of the output, with a full sports service, music, drama and general
entertainment. Regular listeners are estimated to number 120 million.
The languages in which the World Service broadcasts and the length of time
each is on the air are prescribed by the Government. Apart from this the BBC
has full responsibility and is completely independent in determining the content
of news and other programmes. A plan to improve audibility is in progress.
There are broadcasts by radio for 24 hours a day in English which are
supplemented at peak listening times by programmes of special interest to
Africa, South Asia and the Falkland Islands. Plans to broadcast a televised
service are being considered by the BBC.
BBC news bulletins and other programmes are re-broadcast by the radio
services of many countries. Re-broadcasting involves direct relays from BBC
transmissions and the use of recorded programmes supplied through the BBC
Transcription Service. There are some 2,600 re-broadcasts weekly of World
Service programmes in about 50 countries. The Transcription Service offers
programmes to about 100 countries.
The BBC’s English by Radio and Television Service is the most extensive
language-teaching undertaking in the world. English lessons are broadcast daily
by radio with explanations in 26 other languages, and recorded lessons are
supplied to numerous stations free of charge. English by Television programmes
are also shown in more than 100 countries. There is a wide range of printed and
audio material accompanying these programmes.
Another part of the World Service, the Monitoring Service, listens to and
reports on foreign broadcasts, supplying a daily flow of significant news and
comment from overseas to the BBC and the Government. This information is
also sold to the press, to companies, to academic staff and public bodies.
Radio for overseas is also produced by the radio services of the Central Office of
Information (COI). A wide range of recorded material is sent to radio stations in
about 100 countries. COI television services provide material such as
documentary and magazine programmes for distribution to overseas stations.
TELEVISION AND RADIO
441
Advertising
Parliamentary
and Political
Broadcasting
Audience
Research
The BBC does not give publicity to any firm or organised interest except when it
is necessary to provide effective and informative programmes. It must not
broadcast any commercial advertisement or any sponsored programme (it may,
however, cover sponsored events).
Advertisements are broadcast on independent television at the beginning and
end of programmes as well as in breaks during programmes; advertisers are not
permitted to directly influence programme content or editorial control. Adver¬
tisements must be clearly distinguishable and separate from programmes, and
the time given to them must not be so great as to detract from the value of the
programmes as a medium of information, education or entertainment. Advertis¬
ing is limited to seven and a half minutes an hour between 18.00 and 23.00
hours with the overall amount of advertising throughout the day normally
restricted to seven minutes an hour. The IBA’s Oracle teletext service carries
paginated advertisements (see p 438). Independent local radio stations are
normally limited to a maximum of nine minutes of advertising each hour. The
IBA has a code governing standards and practice in advertising on television and
radio and giving guidance on the types and methods of advertisement which are
prohibited; this includes advertising with a political or religious object or on
behalf of cigarettes or betting. Advertisements may not be inserted in certain
types of programme, such as broadcasts to schools. A comparable code has been
adopted by the Cable Authority, which is responsible for advertising control and
policy on cable television. Both the IBA and the Cable Authority have the power
to prevent transmission of advertisements which they consider misleading. The
IBA has endorsed the Principles for Advertising by Direct Satellite Broadcasting
which have been drawn up by the European Broadcasting Union.
The Government has no general privileged access to radio or television but
government publicity material to support non-political campaigns may be
broadcast on independent radio and television. This is prepared through the
COI and broadcast and paid for on a normal commercial basis. Short public
service items, concerning health, safety and welfare, are also produced by the
COI for free transmission by the BBC and independent television and radio.
Parliamentary reporting includes a daily factual and impartial account of
proceedings in Parliament. Proceedings, including those of committees, are
recorded by radio and transmitted live, or in recorded form in radio and
television news and current affairs programmes. In February 1988 the House of
Commons voted in favour of televising its proceedings for a trial period. An
experiment in televising the House of Lords began in 1985, and in 1986
members decided that it should continue on a permanent basis.
Ministerial and party political broadcasts are transmitted periodically on radio
and television, under rules agreed between the major political parties, the BBC
and the IBA, and there are special arrangements for the period following the
announcement of a general election.
Both the BBC and the IBA are required to keep themselves informed on the state
of public opinion about the programmes (and, in the case of the IBA, the
advertising) they broadcast. This is done through the continuous measurement
of the size and composition of audiences and their opinions of programmes. For
television, this work is undertaken through the Broadcasters’ Audience
Research Board, which is owned jointly by the BBC and the IBA. Information is
collected from a panel of about 3,000 homes throughout the country designed to
be representative of all private households in Britain with a television set. Meters
attached to each television set and linked to a central computer are used to
record times of viewing, numbers of viewers and programmes watched. Regular
surveys and questionnaires are conducted by both the BBC and the IBA to gauge
442
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Technical
Developments
International
Relations
audience opinion on television and radio services, and public opinion is further
assessed by both bodies through the work of their many advisory committees,
councils and panels (whose members are drawn from a wide cross-section of the
public); the regular holding of public meetings to debate the services provided;
and careful consideration of correspondence and telephone calls from listeners
and viewers.
One of the most important recent developments has been the introduction of
smaller, lighter cameras and video recorders for use on location. Electronic
news-gathering equipment, whereby pictures can be transmitted directly to a
studio or recorded on video tape on location, reduces significantly the time
before an item can be broadcast. Other developments include the use of new
types of video tape recorders, the increasing use of computers to generate
graphical shapes such as captions and credits and displays for weather
forecasts, and the improvement of the quality of video tape pictures.
Among recent developments by the BBC are the ACE digital television
standards converter, probably the most advanced in the world, which is used to
convert pictures between the European and American standards, and the
NICAM system used to cany high-quality sound programme signals across the
country. Both of these systems have been licensed to commercial manufactur¬
ers. The BBC has also developed a data-labelling system for sound programmes
which will make programme and station selection much easier. Research
includes investigations into stereo sound for television, digital transmission of
signals over fibre-optic cables, improved picture displays, and many aspects of
satellite broadcasting. The IBA is in the process of equipping its television
networks for digital stereo sound. It is also engaged in the further development
of digital techniques for studio applications and inter-city links, and a study of
the future use of satellites for broadcasting which has included the development
of a new MAC/packet family of transmission systems for use on future direct
broadcast satellites and for distribution on cable networks. The European
Broadcasting Union has recommended the MAC/packet family system as the
standard for Europe, and the Government has endorsed the use of D-MAC as the
system for British direct broadcasting by satellite.
The IBA has contributed to the development of an enhanced MAC system
capable of providing wide-screen pictures at a subjective definition of about
1,000 lines, fully compatible with conventional MAC transmissions.
The BBC and IBA co-operated in the development of teletext. More than 95 per
cent of teletext sets throughout the world are based on the British system, and
working services operating to the British standard are in use or on trial in 13
countries, including Australia, the Federal Republic of Germany and the United
States. British Telecom’s public viewdata service, ‘Prestel’, offers a wide range of
information which is transmitted via the telephone and viewed on the television
screen.
The BBC and the IBA (together with the Independent Television Association) are
active members of the European Broadcasting Union. This body manages
Eurovision, the international network of television news and programme
exchange, and is responsible for the technical and administrative arrangements
for co-ordinating the exchange of programmes and news over the Eurovision
network and intercontinental satellite links; it also maintains a technical
monitoring station where frequency measurements and other observations on
broadcasting stations are carried out. The Union provides a forum linking the
major public services and national broadcasters of Western Europe and other
parts of the world and co-ordinates co-operation in radio and television.
Co-operation between governments takes place within the Council of Europe
TELEVISION AND RADIO
443
which, in 1986, adopted a British proposal to prepare a convention on the
regulation of broadcasting across frontiers. Rules are being devised covering
programme standards, advertising, sponsorship, copyright and the leasing of
satellite capacity.
Visnews is the largest television news agency in the world, supplying world
newsfilm to more than 400 subscribers in 82 countries and running bureaux in
22 capital cities. Worldwide Television News, owned by Independent Television
News, the American Broadcasting Company and Channel 9 in Australia,
supplies services to over 500 broadcasters in 75 countries. Both agencies supply
services via the Eurovision network and by satellite.
The BBC and the IBA are associate members of the Asian Pacific Broadcasting
Union, and the BBC also belongs to the Commonwealth Broadcasting Associa¬
tion (CBA), whose members extend to one another such facilities as the use of
studios, recording channels and programme contributions.
The BBC provides technical aid, particularly in training the staff of other
broadcasting organisations throughout the world; members of its staff are
seconded for service overseas.
The Government finances a number of overseas students on broadcasting
training courses at the BBC, the British Council (which aims to promote a wider
knowledge of Britain and the English language abroad and to develop closer
cultural relations between Britain and other countries) and the Thomson
Foundation Television College in Glasgow, which sends lecturers and arranges
courses overseas.
The BBC and the IBA participate in the work of the International Telecom¬
munications Union, the United Nations agency responsible for regulating and
controlling all international telecommunications services (including radio and
television), allocating and registering all radio frequencies and promoting and
co-ordinating the international study of technical problems in broadcasting.
The BBC and the IBA are also represented on the United Kingdom Committee of
the International Special Committee on Radio Interference.
24 Sport and
Recreation
The British invented and codified the rules of many of the sports and games
which are now played all over the world, and there is widespread interest in most
kinds of sport throughout the country. Large crowds attend occasions such as
the football and rugby league Challenge Cup Finals at Wembley Stadium,
international rugby union matches at Twickenham, Murrayfield and Cardiff
Arms Park, the Wimbledon lawn tennis championships, the classic horse races,
Grand Prix motor racing and international cricket matches. Extensive coverage
on television (2,850 hours in 1987, compared with 1,200 in 1975) has helped to
generate interest in a wide variety of sports and recreations including
basketball, darts, snooker, ice skating, skiing and athletics, while American
football and baseball are becoming known to the British public through televised
transmissions from the United States.
Levels of participation in sport have been rising due mainly to the increases in
leisure time and facilities, greater mobility and rising living standards. A
growing awareness of the importance to good health of regular exercise has been
reflected in the upsurge of interest in jogging, keep fit and dance-related forms of
exercise. It has been estimated that 23 million adults regularly take part in sport
or exercise, men still outnumbering women. Walking is by far the most popular
recreation, followed by swimming, snooker and billiards, darts, angling,
athletics, football, squash, golf and cycling.
The Government has long recognised the importance of physical recreation for
the health and general welfare of the community; the social role that sport can
play has become more important at a time of high unemployment and rapid
change in work and leisure patterns. In addition, success in sport is thought to
enhance Britain’s international status and prestige. The ten-year strategy for
the development of sport in England drawn up by the Sports Council in 1982,
and reviewed in 1988, is to encourage further increases in participation,
particularly among young people and women; to provide adequate facilities for
the whole community, especially in the inner cities and in deprived rural areas;
and to continue to encourage high standards of performance. Similar strategies
are being followed by the Sports Councils for Scotland, Wales and Northern
Ireland. The Sports Council s Action Sport programme is designed principally
to encourage people in inner cities to take up sport and recreation; about 600
sports leaders were provided to work with disadvantaged groups by early 1988.
The Council has also supported initiatives aimed at strengthening links
between football clubs and their local communities. ‘What’s Your Sport?’, a
campaign to increase participation in sports, was launched by the four Sports
Councils in 1987. A major review of sport and recreation provision in inner
cities is being undertaken in 1988 by a government-appointed group of business
people, athletes and sports administrators.
In November 1987 the Government initiated a public debate on the future
direction of official sports policy. It posed the questions of whether or not a
correct balance was being achieved between funding sporting excellence and
encouraging wider participation, and whether enough was being done to
446
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Drug Abuse
Spectator
Violence
Gleneagles
Agreement
promote private sector investment in sport, especially through corporate
sponsorship.
The problem of drug-taking in sport in order to achieve improvements in
performance unfairly has been a cause of concern both to the Sports Councils
and to the governing bodies of sport. A campaign to tackle the problem,
launched by the Sports Council, includes the introduction of a new drug testing
regime in April 1988, which provides for random testing of competitors in and
out of competition by independent sampling officers, and the publication of
adverse findings. The Sports Council finances the analysis of samples taken in
Britain and some from abroad, and funds research into methods of detection for
new drugs that unfairly aid performance.
The Government and the Sports Council have also taken firm action at
international level by supporting the adoption of a Council of Europe Anti-
Doping Charter and by chairing an international working party to examine ways
of promoting effective anti-doping measures. Council of Europe member
countries have agreed to a British government proposal to draw up a European
Convention to tackle the problem of drug abuse.
Spectator violence associated with football both in Britain and overseas has
been a subject of widespread concern, and the Government has worked closely
with the football authorities and the governments of other European countries
to combat the problem. After serious disturbances involving English supporters
at the European Cup Final in Brussels in 1985 which led to the deaths of 38
spectators, English clubs were withdrawn from European competitions for the
1985—86 season by the English Football Association; an indefinite ban on the
clubs was subsequently imposed by the Union of European Football Associa¬
tions (UEFA). Britain has signed a Council of Europe Convention, adopted in
1985, which is designed to eliminate spectator violence at all sporting events,
including football. Legislation introduced in Scotland in 1980, and in the rest of
Britain in 1985, restricts the sale of alcohol in football grounds and bans its sale
on transport to matches. It is an offence to take cans or bottles into grounds.
Under new public order legislation, the courts have powers to ban convicted
hooligans from football matches, and a new offence of disorderly conduct has
been created covering behaviour which, while not in itself violent, causes
unnecessary distress to others. Possession of smoke bombs and fireworks at or
on entry to a football ground has also become an offence. Greater use is being
made of closed-circuit television, and most Football League clubs in England
and Wales had introduced 50 per cent membership schemes for home spectator
accommodation at their grounds by the beginning of the 1987—88 season.
Following extensive violence involving English supporters during the Euro¬
pean championships in the Federal Republic of Germany in June 1988, the
Government plans to reinforce existing measures for controlling football
hooliganism. It is examining how best to enforce restrictions on the sale of
alcohol in the vicinity of football grounds, and applications from local
authorities to restrict or prevent consumption of alcohol in public places are
being studied. Consideration is also being given to ways of stopping convicted
hooligans from attending matches in Britain and abroad; the Government is to
introduce legislation for the setting up of a compulsory national membership
scheme to control access to all Football League grounds.
In accordance with the statement on apartheid in sport, agreed by the
Commonwealth heads of Government at Gleneagles in Scotland in 1977, the
Government seeks to discourage sporting contacts with South Africa and
withholds any form of support for such contacts; in a democratic society,
SPORT AND RECREATION
447
ORGANISATION
AND
PROMOTION
Sports Councils
Countryside
Commissions
however, it cannot prevent these contacts if an individual sportsman or
sportswoman or the governing body of the sport concerned chooses to ignore its
advice.
Government policy on sport, active recreation and children’s play is co-ordinated
in England by the Minister for Sport (a Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State
at the Department of the Environment). The Secretaries of State for Wales,
Scotland and Northern Ireland have similar responsibilities in their countries.
Responsibility for the organisation and promotion of sport is largely decentral¬
ised, and many sports and recreation facilities are provided by local authorities.
The Government provides financial and other assistance through a number of
official bodies and schemes. This ‘arm’s length’ principle of funding safeguards
the long-established independence of sports organisations in Britain. Some of
these bodies, such as the Sports Councils and the Countryside Commissions,
have specific responsibilities for sport and/or recreation, and help other public
and private bodies to provide lacilities. Others, like the Forestry Commission,
the British Waterways Board, the Nature Conservancy Council and the regional
water authorities, provide recreational amenities in addition to their main
functions.
Individual sports are run by over 370 independent governing bodies whose
functions usually include drawing up rules, holding events, regulating mem¬
bership, selecting and training national teams and promoting international
links. There are also organisations representing people who take part in more
informal physical recreation, such as walking and cycling.
A National Coaching Foundation has been established to improve the
knowledge and practice of coaching. Its work complements that of the four
Sports Councils and the governing bodies of sports.
Government assistance for the development of sport in Great Britain is
channelled through three independent bodies—the Sports Council (for England
and for general matters affecting Britain as a whole), the Sports Council for
Wales and the Scottish Sports Council. In Northern Ireland the Department of
Education makes direct grants towards the capital cost of facilities to local
authorities and voluntary sports bodies; the Sports Council for Northern Ireland
has limited grant-making powers. The Councils will allocate government funds
amounting to £48 million in 1988—89. They make grants for sports develop¬
ment, coaching and administration to the governing bodies of sports and other
national organisations, and administer the national sports centres. Grants and
loans are also made to voluntary organisations and local authorities (and, in
some cases, to commercial organisations) to help them to provide sports
facilities. The Sports Council assists British representatives at international
sports meetings and encourages links with international and overseas organisa¬
tions. All four Councils have information centres providing data on a wide range
of sports topics. The Sports Council consults with the Central Council of
Physical Recreation, comprising members of the national governing and
representative bodies of sport and physical recreation in England; the equiva¬
lent bodies in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland are the Scottish and Welsh
Sports Associations and the Northern Ireland Council of Physical Recreation.
Ten regional councils for sport and recreation in England, on each of which
sporting, recreational, educational, and local authority interests are repre¬
sented, advise on investment in and the planning of sporting and recreational
facilities and the promotion of sport.
Two Countryside Commissions (one for England and Wales, the other for
Scotland) are responsible for conserving and enhancing the natural beauty and
448
The British
Olympic
Association
Children’s
Play
The National
Playing Fields
Association
Sport for
People with
Disabilities
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
amenity of the countryside, and encouraging the provision and improvement of
facilities for open-air recreation. Government support in 1988—89 amounts to
£20-7 million for the Countryside Commission for England and Wales, of which
about £9-5 million will be spent on recreation. The Commission has launched a
series of policy initiatives aimed at increasing people’s enjoyment of the
countryside. These focus on the maintenance and sign-posting of public
footpaths and other ‘rights of way’ and the development of long-distance routes,
while rural communities are to be encouraged to build up local facilities which
promote public enjoyment of the countryside. These initiatives will operate
alongside established policies for grant aiding the provision by local authorities
and private bodies of country parks, picnic sites and informal recreation
facilities. In Northern Ireland the Ulster Countryside Committee advises the
Department of the Environment on the preservation of amenities and the
designation of ‘areas of outstanding natural beauty’.
The British Olympic Association, founded in 1905, is the National Olympic
Committee for the United Kingdom and its primary function is to organise the
participation of British teams in the Olympic Games. The Association comprises
representatives of the 29 governing bodies of those sports in the programme of
the Olympic Games (summer and winter). It determines the size of the British
teams, raises funds, makes all arrangements and provides a headquarters staff
for the management of the teams. It has established the British Olympic Medical
Centre, which provides a medical back-up service for competitors before and
during Olympic Games. The Association has an education programme aimed at
encouraging interest in the Olympic Games and fostering the aims and ideals of
the Olympic movement in Britain.
In January 1988 the British Olympic Association, the Sports Council and the
Central Council of Physical Recreation agreed to form the British International
Sports Committee to co-ordinate and promote British interests at international
sporting forums.
The Minister for Sport has responsibility for co-ordinating policy on children’s
play. The Department of Education and Science is concerned with play in
schools, and the Department of Health with play for the under-fives. The Sports
Council supports a central service to assist voluntary organisations to develop
opportunities for children's play and recreation.
The National Playing Fields Association is a charity with a Royal Charter whose
purpose is to preserve, improve and acquire playing fields, playgrounds and play
space where they are most needed, in particular for children, young people and
handicapped people. There are affiliated associations in the counties of England
and Wales and branches in Scotland, Northern Ireland and the Isle of Man.
The British Sports Association for the Disabled, founded in 1961, is the
co-ordinating body of sport and physical recreation for people with all kinds of
disabilities. The Association, which has a strong regional structure, aims to
encourage and provide opportunities for people with disabilities to take part in
all forms of sport and physical recreation. Through its classification system, it
aims to ensure fair competition at local, regional and international levels.
In 1986 the Council of Europe adopted a European Charter on Sport for All
Disabled Persons designed to encourage participation in sport by people with
disabilities. The Charter makes recommendations to both governments and
sporting bodies on the financing of sporting activities for disabled people; their
representation on sports policy-making bodies; steps to be taken towards
integration into traditional sports clubs and organisations; the training of
SPORT AND RECREATION
449
Private
Sponsorship
PROVISION OF
FACILITIES
qualified staff; and the encouragement of the training of disabled people as
physical education teachers and coaches. In February 1988 the Government
initiated a review of sport for disabled people; the review body is considering
existing sports facilities, future provision, funding and arrangements for
overseas representation.
Sports clubs for disabled people throughout Britain are affiliated to the
Association, which helps to organise sporting and physical activities at all levels,
including national and international meetings. At present it co-ordinates the
activities of seven major disability sports organisations and, on behalf of 450
member clubs, provides regional and national championships in 12 sports. As
well as offering advice to local clubs and groups, the Association arranges
conferences, seminars and coaching courses, and acts as a co-ordinating body
for the various disability groups. It serves as the focal point for national team
management and selection at world and Paralympic levels, and organises world
events on behalf of international bodies. The Scottish Sports Association for the
Disabled and the Welsh Committee on Sport for the Disabled have similar
co-ordinating roles in Scotland and Wales.
The first sports stadium in the world designed for people with disabilities was
opened at Stoke Mandeville, Buckinghamshire, in 1969, and is owned and
maintained by the British Paraplegic Sports Society. Annual national games
organised by several of the associations for disabled people take place at Stoke
Mandeville, at Crystal Palace in London and at other locations; the Seventh
World Wheelchair Games (or Paralympics) were held at Stoke Mandeville in
1984. Britain will be sending a team to the Paralympic Games to be held in
Seoul, Korea, in October 1988.
Increasing numbers of sports receive financial sponsorship from commercial
organisations, and its importance as a source of funding is recognised by the
Government and the Sports Councils. The estimated value of commercial
sponsorship was more than £160 million in 1987. Sponsorship may take the
form of financing specific events, or of grants to individual sports organisations
or sportsmen and sportswomen. The Sports Aid Foundation and Sports Aid
Trust raise and distribute funds from industry, commerce and private sponsors
in order to assist the training of talented individuals; grants are awarded on the
recommendation of the governing bodies of sport. The Scottish and Welsh
Sports Aid Foundations and the Ulster Sports and Recreation Trust fulfil similar
functions. Sponsorship advisory services are run by the Sports Councils and the
Central Council of Physical Recreation.
Successive governments have negotiated voluntary agreements with the
tobacco industry to regulate tobacco companies’ sponsorship of sport, the last
one having come into force in 1987. This should lead to a reduction in spending
by tobacco firms on sports sponsorship and introduces a ceiling on promotional
activity. It prohibits sponsorship of events where a majority of the participants
are under 18 years of age or which are designed to appeal mainly to spectators of
less than 18. The depiction of any participants in a sport in media advertising is
not permitted, and strict controls are imposed on siting of signs at televised
events and on the size of health warnings on these signs.
Local authorities are major providers of land and large-scale facilities for
community recreation: their estimated expenditure on sport and recreation
amounted to about £1,000 million in Britain in 1987—88. Provision of facilities
was substantially increased in the 1970s to meet the increasing demand and to
encourage expansion of participation. The facilities provided include parks,
lakes, playing fields, sports halls, tennis courts, golf courses, swimming pools
and sports centres catering for a wide range of activities.
450
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Sports Centres
The Government is instituting competitive tendering for the management of
local authority sports and leisure facilities to make them more cost-effective and
responsive to consumer demand. School and college facilities are to be exempted
from competition, and councils will retain controls over pricing, admission and
opening hours.
Increased emphasis is being placed on the need to provide new and improved
sports facilities in areas of urban deprivation. A broad range of sports and
recreational projects in urban areas have been supported under the Govern¬
ment’s Urban Programme, while the Derelict Land Grant scheme provides
funding towards sports and recreational facilities on reclaimed sites.
Recreational facilities are also made available by local sports clubs. Some cater
for indoor recreation, but more common are those providing sports grounds,
particularly for games such as cricket, football, rugby, hockey, tennis and golf.
Many clubs linked to business firms cater for sporting activities. Commercial
facilities include tenpin bowling centres, ice and roller-skating rinks, squash
courts, golf courses and driving ranges, curling rinks, riding stables, marinas
and, increasingly, fitness centres.
Publicly maintained schools must provide for the physical education of their
pupils. All (except those solely for infants) are expected to have a playing field or
the use of one, and most secondary schools have a gymnasium. Some have other
amenities such as swimming pools, sports halls and halls designed for dance
and movement. Sports and recreation facilities are also provided at institutions
of higher and further education (some of which have departments of physical
education), and there are ‘centres of sporting excellence’, often at universities
and other colleges, which enable selected young athletes to develop their talents
and which cater, where appropriate, for their educational needs.
To achieve the maximum use of sports facilities, the Government and the
Sports Councils are encouraging greater community use of sports halls and
other facilities owned by schools, colleges and other public and private sector
institutions, including football clubs. The Education (No 2) Act 1986 contains a
provision aimed at encouraging the wider adoption of schemes allowing
community use of school facilities outside school hours.
Safety at sports grounds and stadiums is governed by legislation, but,
following the fire at Bradford City Football Ground in 1985 in which 56 people
died, and the subsequent findings of a committee of inquiry, safety standards
are being strengthened. The Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 is
designed to improve provisions for the safety of spectators at sports grounds and
indoor sports premises. It empowers local authorities to restrict or ban the
admission of spectators to sports grounds where there is a serious risk to safety,
and requires them to arrange for the inspection of designated football, rugby
and cricket grounds with accommodation for over 10,000 spectators. Indoor
sporting events may only take place after the inspection of premises by local
authority safety experts.
Five national sports centres, four in England and one in Wales, are run by the
Sports Council, and offer a range of competition and training facilities. As well
as offering residential courses for national teams, coaches and enthusiasts from
all over Britain, the centres are used extensively by local sports clubs and the
local community. Combined facilities for a number of sports are provided at
three of the centres: Crystal Palace in south-east London, Bisham Abbey in
Buckinghamshire and Lilleshall in Shropshire. Crystal Palace provides major
competition venues for athletics and swimming and a variety of indoor sports,
and Lilleshall houses the training school of the Football Association. The other
two are specialist centres: the National Water Sports Centre at Holme Pierre-
pont, Nottinghamshire, which caters for rowing, canoeing and water-skiing:
SPORT AND RECREATION
451
POPULAR
SPORTS AND
RECREATIONS
Angling
Association
Football
and the Plas-y-Brenin National Centre for Mountain Activities in north Wales.
The Sports Council for Wales runs the National Sports Centre for Wales in
Cardiff and the National Outdoor Pursuits Centre at Plas Menai in north Wales.
The Scottish Sports Council operates three national sports training centres:
Glenmore Lodge near Aviemore for outdoor pursuits, Inverclyde at Largs for
general sports, and a national water sports training centre on Great Cumbrae
Isle in the Firth of Clyde. The Sports Council for Northern Ireland operates one
national facility, the Northern Ireland Mountain Centre at Tollymore in County
Down.
There are some 1,500 swimming pools and 2,000 sports centres serving local
rather than national needs; in Northern Ireland there has been a major
development of multi-purpose centres. Several privately run centres cater for
specialised interests, such as the British Equestrian Centre, run by the British
Horse Society, and the Ludwig Guttmann Sports Centre for the Disabled at
Stoke Mandeville.
Some of the major sports and recreations in Britain are described below. The
increased provision of sports centres has improved opportunities for participa¬
tion in indoor sports such as basketball, volleyball, fencing, judo, karate and
other martial arts, gymnastics, squash, table tennis and shooting. Almost all
outdoor sports have continued to gain in popularity, including ‘high-risk’
activities such as rock-climbing and sub-aqua diving. The number of people
enjoying the recreational amenities of the countryside, rivers and coastline is
similarly growing.
Sportsmen and sportswomen may be professionals (paid players) or amateurs.
Some sports—such as rugby union, hockey and rowing—are amateur, but in
others the distinction between amateur and professional status is less strictly
defined, or does not exist. The Amateur Athletic Association, for example, allows
payments to be made into trust funds held by many top-ranking athletes.
The most popular country sport is fishing, and there are about 4 million anglers
in Britain. Many fish for salmon and trout, particularly in the rivers and lochs of
Scotland and in Wales, but in England and Wales the most widely practised form
of fishing is for coarse fish such as pike, perch, carp, tench and bream. There
are separate organisations in England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland for
game (salmon and trout), coarse and sea fishing clubs, which are co-ordinated
in England and Wales by the National Anglers’ Council. The National Federation
of Anglers in England organises national championships for coarse fishing and
enters a team in the world angling championships. In 1987 England won the
world team event. Freshwater fishing usually has to be paid for: most coarse
fishing is let to angling clubs by private owners, while trout and salmon
fishermen may rent a stretch of river, join a club, or pay for the right to fish by
the day, week or month. Coastal and deep-sea fishing are free to all (apart from
salmon and sea trout fishing which is by licence only).
The largest spectator sport and one of the most popular participation sports,
association football was first developed and codified in England during the
nineteenth century, and is controlled by separate football associations in
England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland. In England over 335 clubs are
affiliated to the English Football Association (FA) and over 40,000 clubs to
regional or district associations. The full-time professional clubs in England and
Wales belong to the Football League (92 clubs) and in Scotland to the Scottish
Football League (38 clubs); the clubs play in four divisions in England and Wales
and three in Scotland. In Northern Ireland, 14 semi-professional clubs play in
the Irish Football League. During the season, which lasts from August until
452
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Athletics
Highland
Games
Badminton
May, attendances at over 2,000 English league matches total about 18 million.
The Football Association, founded in 1863, and the Football League, founded in
1888, were both the first of their kind in the world.
The annual competitions for the FA Challenge Cup, the Littlewoods Challenge
Cup (formerly the League Cup), the Scottish FA Cup, the Skol Cup (formerly the
Scottish League Cup), the Irish Cup and the Welsh FA Cup are organised on a
knock-out basis, and the finals are played at Wembley Stadium, London, at
Hampden Park, Glasgow, at Windsor Park, Belfast, and on a two-match home
and away basis in Wales. British clubs were European club champions
(Liverpool three times, Nottingham Forest twice and Aston Villa once) for six
consecutive years between 1977 and 1982, and Liverpool became champions
again in 1984. Aberdeen won the European Cup-Winners Cup in 1983, as did
Everton in 1985; Ipswich Town and Tottenham Hotspur won the UEFA cup
competition in 1981 and 1984 respectively.
The Sports Councils have made grants to a number of clubs and local
authorities to enable them to modernise or expand football facilities in areas of
urban deprivation. Grants for various improvements such as all-weather pitches
are also made throughout Britain by the Football Associations and the Football
Trust, a body financed by the football pools (see p 460) companies; the Football
Grounds Improvement Trust is specifically concerned with ground safety.
Amateur athletics is governed in England by the Amateur Athletic Association
(which, formed in 1880, was the first national governing body for athletics) and
by the Women’s Amateur Athletic Association. Scotland, Wales and Northern
Ireland have their own associations. International athletics and the selection of
British teams are the concern of the Amateur Athletic Association, which also
administers coaching schemes. For the Olympic Games and the world and
European championships one team represents the United Kingdom.
Athletics is attracting increasing numbers of participants, both men and
women, in part because of the success of British competitors and the wide
coverage of athletics events on television.
Many British athletes, especially middle-distance runners, have enjoyed
distinguished reputations: in 1954, for example, Dr Roger Bannister became
the first man to run a mile in under four minutes. More recently British athletes
won six silver and two bronze medals at the 1988 Olympic Games in Seoul,
Korea. In September 1988 Britain had one world champion (Fatima Whitbread
in the women’s javelin), while Britons held world records in the 800 metres
(Sebastian Coe), the mile (Steve Cram) and the decathlon (Daley Thompson).
Scottish Highland Games, at which sports (including tossing the caber, putting
the weight and throwing the hammer), dancing and piping competitions take
place, attract large numbers of spectators from all over the world. Among
better-known Highland Games are the annual Braemar Gathering, the Argyll¬
shire and Cowal Gatherings and the meeting at Aboyne.
The origins of badminton are not clear, but the Badminton Association of
England, which together with the Scottish, Welsh and Irish Badminton Unions
today organises the sport in Britain, was formed in 1893 and the first
tournament was promoted five years later. Badminton expanded rapidly in the
1970s and is played in a variety of locations from sports centres to village halls;
up to 2 million people are estimated to play the game in Britain, about 1 million
of them regularly. Some 6,250 clubs are affiliated to the four governing bodies
and the Badminton Association of England organises the All England Cham¬
pionships each year. The England women’s team won a silver medal, and the
men’s a bronze at the 1984 world team championships. The English team (men
SPORT AND RECREATION
453
Basketball
Billiards and
Snooker
Bowls
Boxing
and women) are reigning Commonwealth Games champions. Darren Hall was
the winner of the men's European championships in 1988.
Basketball is played in Britain, mainly indoors, by both men and women. There
are about 1,100 registered clubs and the sport is played in most secondary
schools and many other institutions; in all, over 1 million people participate and
its popularity has been increasing rapidly. The English Basket Ball Association
is the governing body of the sport in England, and there are similar associations
in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland. The leading English clubs play in a
National League and the main events of the year are the Carlsberg National
Championship Finals, held at Wembley Arena in London, and the men's
National Cup Final, staged at the Royal Albert Hall.
The character of the present game of billiards was established in Britain at the
end of the seventeenth century. Snooker, a more varied game invented by the
British in India in 1875, has greatly increased in popularity and become a major
spectator sport as a result of widespread television coverage of the professiorlal
tournaments. It is estimated that between 7 and 8 million people now play the
game. British players have an outstanding record in snooker and the major
professional championships have been largely dominated by them. The main
tournament is the annual Embassy World Professional Championship, held in
Sheffield; British winners of this event include Steve Davis (1981, 1983, 1984,
1987 and 1988), Joe Johnson (1986), Dennis Taylor (1985) and Alex Higgins
(1972 and 1982). Northern Ireland won the world team championship in 1984,
1985 and 1987, as did England in 1981 and 1983.
The controlling body for the non-professional game is the Billiards and
Snooker Control Council, which holds the copyright of the rules. The World
Professional Billiards and Snooker Association is responsible for professional
players, and it organises professional events.
Bowls has been played in Britain since the thirteenth century. The game of lawn
bowls is played on a flat green; in the midlands and north of England and in
north Wales a variation called crown green bowls is played, so named because
the centre of the green is higher than its boundaries. Lawn and crown green
bowls are mainly summer games; in winter indoor bowls, played on synthetic
greens, is growing in popularity. Once regarded as a pastime for the elderly,
bowls is increasingly played by adults of all ages. About 4,000 lawn bowling
clubs are affiliated to the English, Scottish, Welsh and Irish (Northern Ireland
Region) Bowling Associations, which, together with the Women’s Bowling
Associations for the four countries, play to the rules of the International Bowling
Board. Other associations, including the English Bowling Federation, are not
under the Board s control. The British Crown Green Bowling Association is the
governing body of crown green bowls, and has 2,500 affiliated clubs.
The outstanding player is David Bryant, who has won six world singles
championships.
Boxing in its modern form, which has been adopted in many overseas countries,
dates from 1865 when the Marquess of Queensberry drew up a set of rules
eliminating much of the brutality that had characterised prize-fighting and
making skill the basis of the sport. Boxing is both amateur and professional,
and in both strict medical regulations are observed.
All amateur boxing in England, including schoolboy, club, association and
combined services boxing (in the armed forces), is controlled by the Amateur
Boxing Association. England is divided into eight associations and Scotland and
Wales have separate associations; Northern Ireland forms part of the Irish
454
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Chess
Cricket
Boxing Association. The associations organise amateur boxing championships
as well as training courses for referees, coaches and others, and teams take part
in international meetings including the Commonwealth Games and European
and world championships. Boxing is an Olympic sport; Richard Woodhall won a
bronze medal in the light middleweight class at the 1988 Olympic Games.
Professional boxing is controlled by the British Boxing Board of Control. The
Board appoints inspectors, medical officers and representatives to ensure that
regulations are observed and to guard against overmatching and exploitation.
British boxing has a distinguished record and at various times British boxers
have held European, Commonwealth and world championship titles; Lloyd
Honeyghan is the current holder of the World Boxing Council welterweight world
title.
Chess has increased in popularity and England now ranks second among
chess-playing nations (Scotland, Wales and Ireland are separately represented),
having taken silver medals at the last two chess Olympics. There are local chess
clubs and leagues throughout the country and the game is widely played in
schools and colleges. Important domestic competitions include the Kleinwort
Grieveson British Championships, the Peterborough Software National Club
Championships, the Leigh Grand Prix, the BIS Group Universities Cham¬
pionship and The Times Schools Chess Tournament. The Hastings Chess
Congress, dating back to 1895, is the world’s longest running annual
international chess tournament. The governing bodies of the game are the
British Chess Federation, the Scottish Chess Association and the Welsh and
Ulster Chess Unions.
Cricket is among the most popular of summer sports and is sometimes called
the English national game, having been played as early as the 1550s. Among the
many clubs founded in the eighteenth century was the Marylebone Cricket Club
(MCC), which continues to frame the laws of the game. The Club is based at
Lord’s cricket ground in north London, the administrative centre of the world
game. Men’s cricket in Britain is now governed by the Cricket Council,
consisting of representatives of the Test and County Cricket Board (representing
first-class cricket), the National Cricket Association (representing club and
junior cricket), the Minor County Cricket Association, the Scottish Cricket
Union, the Irish Cricket Union and the MCC.
Cricket is played in schools, colleges and universities, and in most towns and
villages amateur teams play weekly games from late April to the end of
September. Throughout Britain there is a network of league cricket contested by
teams of Saturday afternoon players.
The main competition in professional cricket is the Britannic Assurance
County Championship of three-day and four-day games played by 17 county
teams, which also take part in three one-day competitions—the Benson and
Hedges Cup, the National Westminster Bank Trophy, and the Refuge Assurance
League played on Sundays. Some of the best supported games are the annual
series of five-day Cornhill Test matches played between England and a touring
team from Australia, India, New Zealand, Pakistan, Sri Lanka or the West
Indies. A team representing England usually tours one or more of these
countries in the British winter. Texaco Trophy one-day international games also
attract large crowds. A World Cup competition takes place every four years, with
some of the smaller cricketing nations as well as the major countries competing;
India and Pakistan jointly staged the last one in 1987.
Cricket is also played by women and girls, the governing body being the
Women's Cricket Association, founded in 1926. Women's cricket clubs have
regular local fixtures, usually played at weekends, and may participate in an
SPORT AND RECREATION
455
Curling
Cycling
Darts
Field Sports
Golf
outdoor national knockout tournament and an indoor league competition. The
game is also played at county, national and international levels; Test match
series and other matches are played by England against Australia, India, New
Zealand and the West Indies.
The ice sport of curling is popular in Scotland where it is played almost
exclusively indoors. The governing body of the sport in Scotland and the world
authority for curling is the Royal Caledonian Curling Club, which was formed in
1838. The sport’s most prestigious international competition is played for the
Silver Broom trophy and is contested by teams from ten countries; Scotland has
won the trophy on many occasions.
Since the 1970s there has been a substantial resurgence of interest in cycling,
both as a means of transportation and as a sport and recreation, and this has led
central and local government to make greater provision for cycling. Cycling
activities include road and track racing, cycle speedway, time-trialling, cross¬
country racing, touring, bicycle polo and bicycle moto-cross.
The British Cycling Federation acts as the governing body for cycling as a
sport, while the Cyclists’ Touring Club, formed in 1878, is the national
association for recreational cycling and represents cyclists’ interests in general.
The Scottish Cyclists Union controls the sport in Scotland.
Darts, an indoor game which has its origins in medieval archery, is played
mainly in public houses as a casual recreation to accompany drinking. It has
gained in popularity as a result of widespread television coverage of the
professional game. An estimated 4 million people play the game regularly.
Darts is organised in Britain by the British Darts Organisation, which forms
part of the World Darts Federation; its rules have become the code for the world
sport. The Organisation arranges events in Britain which bring entrants from
as many as 45 countries. Every two years a World Cup tournament takes place;
England won the 1987 competition, held in Copenhagen. The main individual
title in the game is the Embassy World Professional Championship. British
players have dominated the event and in 1988 the title was won by Bob
Anderson.
British field sports include hunting (on horseback and on foot), fishing,
shooting, stalking, falconry and coursing. Fox hunting on horseback with a
pack of hounds is the most popular British hunting sport, and there are over
370 packs of hounds of all kinds in Britain.
Game shooting as an organised sport probably originated in the early part of
the nineteenth century, and takes place in many parts of Britain. Game consists
of grouse, black-game, ptarmigan, partridge and pheasant, species which are
protected by law during a close season when they are allowed to breed on
numerous estates supervised by gamekeepers. It is necessary to have a licence to
kill game and a certificate issued by the police to own a shot-gun.
The British Field Sports Society and the British Association for Shooting and
Conservation look after the interests of all field sports. Public opposition to field
sports is not inconsiderable and is organised through such bodies as the League
Against Cruel Sports. s
Golf originated in Scotland, where for centuries it has borne the title of the Royal
and Ancient Game. The oldest golf club in the world is the Honourable Company
of Edinburgh Golfers. The Royal and Ancient Golf Club, the ruling authority of
the sport for most of the world, is situated at St Andrews on the east coast Golf
456
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Hockey
(Field and
Indoor)
Ice Skating
Judo
is played throughout Britain and there are golf courses in the vicinity of most
towns, a few of them owned by local authorities. The main event of the British
golfing year, and considered by many to be the world’s leading tournament, is
the Open Championship; other important events include the Walker Cup match
for amateurs and the Ryder Cup match for professionals, which are played
between Great Britain and Ireland and the United States and Europe and the
United States respectively. Among the leading British professional players are
Nick Faldo, Sandy Lyle, Ian Woosnam and Sam Torrance. In 1987 Laura Davies
became the first British woman to win the United States Open Championship.
Variants of hockey have been played in Britain for at least five centuries, and
some, like hurling in Ireland and shinty in Scotland, are still played. The modern
game was started in the nineteenth century by the Hockey Association (of
England), which was founded in 1886. There are similar associations in
Scotland, Wales and Ireland. Throughout Britain there are some 1,000 men's
hockey clubs, many of which have women's and junior sections; large numbers
of boys’ and girls' schools also play the game. Cup competitions and leagues are
played at national, divisional or district, and club levels both indoors (six-a-side)
and outdoors, and there are regular international matches.
The controlling body of women’s hockey in England is the All England
Women’s Hockey Association (founded in 1895) to which are affiliated some
1,000 clubs and about 2,400 schools; there are similar associations in Scotland,
Wales and Ireland. County, club and school championships for both outdoor and
indoor hockey are played annually in England. The first international women's
hockey match took place in 1896; nowadays one of the main international
matches is played each year at Wembley Stadium.
Men's and women's hockey are Olympic sports, and the British men's team
won a gold medal at the 1988 Olympic Games. England gained a silver medal in
the sixth World Hockey Cup competition for men held at the national hockey
centre in Willesden, north London, in 1986.
Ice skating became popular in Britain in the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries and takes three main forms: ice dancing, figure skating and
speed-skating. The governing body for the sport is the National Skating
Association of Great Britain, founded in 1879. Participation in ice skating is
concentrated among the under-25s. There are over 40 ice rinks in Great Britain,
a small number compared with many other European countries. In spite of this,
British couples have won the world ice dance championship 17 times, and Jayne
Torvill and Christopher Dean were world ice dance champions for four
successive years between 1981 and 1984, European champions in 1981, 1982
and 1984, and gold medal winners at the Sarajevo winter Olympic Games in
1984.
Judo, a modern combat sport derived from the ancient Japanese arts of ju-jutsu,
is growing rapidly in popularity in Britain, both as a sport and general fitness
training method and as a self-defence technique. Men and women take part in
judo at all levels. Dennis Stewart won a bronze medal in the over 95 kg class at
the 1988 Olympics. Recent leading British exponents of the sport include Karen
Briggs, Brian Jacks, Neil Adams, Neil Eckersley, Ann Hughes, Colin Savage and
Diane Bell. More than 1,200 judo clubs are registered with the British Judo
Association, which is the official governing body of the sport throughout
Britain.
Other martial arts, such as karate, kung fu and aikido, are attracting
increasing numbers of participants.
SPORT AND RECREATION
457
Motor and
Motor-cycle
Sports
Mountaineering
and Rock-
Climbing
Racing
Motor racing and rallying, and motor-cycle racing, are popular spectator sports
in Britain. The governing body for four-wheeled motor sport is the RAC [Royal
Automobile Club] Motor Sports Association. The Association issues competition
licences for a variety of motoring competitions and organises both the RAC
Rally, an event in the contest for the World Rally Championship, and the British
Grand Prix, held in alternate years at the Silverstone and Brands Hatch racing
circuits as part of the Formula One World Motor Racing Championship.
British car constructors including Lotus, McLaren and Williams have enjoyed
outstanding successes in Grand Prix racing, and Britain has had six world
champion motor racing drivers; Nigel Mansell and Derek Warwick are among the
most successful of current drivers. Other popular types of motor-car sport
include autocross, drag racing and karting.
Motor-cycle sport, governed by the Auto-Cycle Union in England and Wales
and the Scottish Auto-Cycle Union and Motor Cycle Union of Ireland (in
Northern Ireland), caters for all forms of competition on two or three wheels,
from low-speed trials to Grand Prix road racing. The major events of the year are
the Isle of Man TT races, the British Road Race Grand Prix and other world
championship events for trials, moto-cross, speedway and track racing. The
Auto-Cycle Union provides off-road training by approved instructors for young
riders between the ages of 6 and 17.
The popularity of mountaineering and rock-climbing has increased steadily.
Clubs in the British Mountaineering Council and the Mountaineering Council of
Scotland, the representative bodies of the sport, number 330, ranging from
national clubs such as the Alpine Club (founded in 1857, the oldest moun¬
taineering club in the world) and the Scottish Mountaineering Club to small
regional clubs with 20 to 30 members. The National Centre for Mountain
Activities is at Plas-y-Brenin in north Wales, and climbing takes place at other
centres managed by the Sports Councils at Plas Menai (north Wales), Glenmore
Lodge near Aviemore in Scotland and Tollymore in Northern Ireland. A number
of local education authorities and national bodies such as the Outward Bound
Trust have also established mountaineering training centres. The most popular
areas in Britain for climbing include the Peak District of Derbyshire, the Lake
District, Snowdonia in north Wales and the Western Highlands of Scotland.
British mountaineers have taken a leading part in exploring mountain ranges
and climbing many of the great mountains of the world, achieving, for example,
the first ascent of the Matterhorn in 1865, Everest in 1953, Kangchenjunga in
1955, Everest by its south-west face in 1975, the west wall of Changabang in
1976, Kongur in 1982 and Jitchu Drake in 1988.
British rock climbers have long been recognised as among the foremost in the
world; in recent decades Joe Brown, Don Whillans, Pete Livesey, Jerry Moffatt
and Johnny Dawes have all pioneered difficult routes.
Horse-racing takes two forms—flat racing (from late March to early November)
and steeplechasing and hurdle racing (normally from August to early June). The
Derby, run at Epsom, is the outstanding event in the flat racing calendar. Other
classic races are: the Two Thousand Guineas and the One Thousand Guineas,
both run at Newmarket; the Oaks, run at Epsom; and the St Leger, run at
Doncaster. The most important steeplechase and hurdle race meeting is the
National Hunt Festival Meeting held at Cheltenham in March. The Grand
National, run at Aintree near Liverpool, is the world’s best-known steeplechase
and dates from 1837.
The Jockey Club administers all horse-racing in Britain. Its rules are the basis
of turf procedure and it also licenses racecourses. Racing takes place on most
days (excluding Sundays) throughout the year and about 12,500 horses are in
458
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Riding
Rowing
training. British thoroughbreds continue to be a source of the world’s best
bloodstock.
The racing of greyhounds after a mechanical hare (one of Britain’s most
popular spectator sports) takes place at 89 tracks licensed by local authorities.
Meetings are usually held two or three times a week at each track with at least
ten races a meeting. The rules for the sport are drawn up by the National
Greyhound Racing Club, the sport’s judiciary body. The Stewards of the Club are
also responsible for overall administration and organisation. The representative
body is the British Greyhound Racing Board.
Horse riding takes a number of forms ranging from recreational riding to show
jumping. The art of riding is promoted by the British Horse Society, which is
concerned with the welfare of horses, road safety, bridleways and training. It
runs the British Equestrian Centre at Stoneleigh in Warwickshire. With some
41,000 members, the Society is the parent body of the Pony Club and the Riding
Club movements, which hold rallies, meetings and competitions culminating in
annual national championships. Horse trials are held during the spring and
autumn under the auspices of the Society. Three-day events (comprising
dressage, cross-country riding and showjumping) held each year include those
at Badminton (Avon), Windsor (Berkshire), Bramham (Yorkshire), Burghley
House (Lincolnshire), and Chatsworth (Derbyshire).
Showjumping is promoted by the British Show Jumping Association, which
has over 16,000 members and some 1,820 shows affiliated to it. The major show
jumping events each year include the Royal International Horse Show at the
National Exhibition Centre, Birmingham, the Horse of the Year Show at
Wembley in London, and the Olympia International Show Jumping Cham¬
pionships in London.
The authority responsible for equestrian competitions (other than racing) at
international level is the British Equestrian Federation, which co-ordinates the
activities of the British Horse Society and the British Show Jumping Associa¬
tion. British equestrian teams have an outstanding record in international
competitions: a British team won the three-day event world championship held
in Australia in 1986, and Virginia Leng won the individual gold medal. The
British show jumping team won the team silver medal at the 1986 world
championships and Nick Skelton won the individual bronze medal. The British
three-day event team won a silver medal at the 1988 Olympic Games, while Ian
Stark won the silver and Virginia Leng the bronze medal in the three-day
individual competition.
Oarsmanship is taught in many schools, colleges and rowing clubs (including
women’s clubs) throughout Britain. The governing body of the sport in England
is the Amateur Rowing Association, and there are similar bodies in Scotland,
Wales and Ireland. There are about 500 rowing clubs, and each year about 250
regattas and head races are held in England, Wales and Scotland under
Association rules.
The University Boat Race (between eight-oared crews from Oxford and
Cambridge) originated in 1829 and has been rowed on the Thames almost every
spring since 1836. The Head of the River Race (also on the Thames) is the largest
assembly of racing craft in the world, with more than 420 eights racing in
procession. At the Henley Regatta in Oxfordshire, founded in 1839, crews from
all over the world compete each July in various kinds of race over a straight
course of 1 mile 550 yards (about 21 km).
The National Water Sports Centre at Holme Pierrepont, near Nottingham, has
a rowing course of Olympic 2,000-metre standard, as does Strathclyde Park in
SPORT AND RECREATION
459
Rugby Football
Sailing
Skiing
Squash Rackets
west-central Scotland. Britain won the gold medal in the men’s coxless pairs and
a bronze in the men’s coxed pairs events at the 1988 Olympic Games.
Rugby football takes its name from Rugby School, in Warwickshire, where it is
believed to have originated in 1823. Since 1893 the game has been played
according to two different codes: rugby union (a 15-a-side game) is played by
amateurs and rugby league (a 13-a-side game) by professionals as well as
amateurs. Rugby union is played under the auspices of the Rugby Football
Union in England and similar bodies in Wales, Scotland and Ireland. Important
domestic competitions include the league, divisional and county championships
in England, the national club knock-out competitions in England and Wales and
the Scottish League Cup Championship. The Five Nations Tournament between
England, Scotland, Wales, Ireland and France takes place each year and there
are overseas tours by the national sides and by the British Lions, a team
representing Great Britain and Ireland. In 1987 teams from 16 countries
competed for the first time in a world cup competition held in Australia and New
Zealand.
Rugby league is played mainly in the north of England. The governing body of
the professional game is the Rugby Football League, which sends touring teams
representing Great Britain to Australia, New Zealand and Papua New Guinea;
annual matches are also played against France. The Challenge Cup Final, the
major club match of the season, is played at Wembley Stadium in London. The
amateur game is governed by the British Amateur Rugby League Association;
matches between England and France take place each year. A national league
consisting of ten leading clubs was launched in 1986.
Sailing has always been popular in Britain, and the Royal Yachting Association
(RYA) has more than 1,500 affiliated clubs and classes. Over 1,000 practical or
shore-based teaching centres offer RYA and RYA Scotland courses in sailing,
windsurfing and navigation and over 50,000 people attend each year. One of the
world s principal regattas takes place each summer at Cowes, and major events
are held at other sailing centres. British sailors have undertaken many notable
voyages. Sir Francis Chichester was the winner of the first single-handed
transatlantic race in 1960 and made a solo circumnavigation of the world in
1966-67. The first non-stop solo circumnavigation was achieved by Robin
Knox-Johnston in 1968. In 1976 Clare Francis held the record for the fastest
single-handed crossing of the Atlantic, as did Naomi James in 1980. Mike
McIntyre and Bryn Vaile won a gold medal in the ‘Star’ class in the 1988
Olympics.
Board sailing, recognised as a type of yachting, has grown rapidly in
popularity since its introduction into Britain in 1974.
When there is sufficient snow, skiing takes place in several parts of Britain. The
governing body of the sport is the British Ski Federation and there are separate
national councils. Skiing in Scotland has become very popular, especially at the
winter sports centres established in the Cairngorms, Deeside, Glencoe and
Glenshee, where ski-runs equal to those in other areas of Europe have been
developed. Ski-lifts, ski-tows and professional instruction of a high quality are
now available. There are also some 100 artificial ski-slopes throughout Great
Britain. Interest in cross-country skiing has been increasing. There are nearly
300 ski clubs in Britain, and it is estimated that about one and a half million
people take part in the sport.
Squash rackets originated at Harrow School in the 1850s. The Squash Rackets
Association was formed in 1928 to promote and organise the men’s game, and
460
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Sub-Aqua
Swimming
Tennis
GAMBLING
there are separate governing bodies for Scotland, Wales and Ireland. The
governing body of women’s squash in England is the Women’s Squash Rackets
Association, founded in 1934. Squash enjoyed a period of very rapid growth
during the 1970s and remains a popular sport. There are 9,000 squash courts
in England, and the estimated number of players in Britain is 3 million. The
main tournament held in Britain is the British Open Championship.
Underwater activities are varied and include exploratory diving (for example,
wreck and reef diving), snorkel diving and underwater photography. The British
Sub-Aqua Club is the governing body for all underwater activities and promotes
underwater exploration, science and sport. The Club is the largest of its kind in
the world, with some 34,000 members and more than 1,000 branches in Britain
and overseas.
Swimming is enjoyed by millions of people in Britain, many of whom learn to
swim at public baths, schools or swimming clubs. Instruction and coaching are
provided by qualified teachers who hold certificates awarded by the Amateur
Swimming Associations in England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland
(Northern Ireland forms part of the Irish Amateur Swimming Association) to
which nearly 2,000 clubs are affiliated. The Associations also control swimming,
diving, synchronised swimming and water polo championships and competi¬
tions. For major international competitions, such as the Olympic Games and the
world and European championships, England, Scotland and Wales compete
together as one team under the auspices of the Great Britain Amateur
Swimming Federation. At the 1988 Olympics, Britain won a gold, silver and
bronze medal.
The modern game of tennis originated in England in 1872 and the first
championships were played at Wimbledon in 1877. The controlling body in
Great Britain, the Lawn Tennis Association, was founded in 1888; Northern
Ireland forms part of the Irish Lawn Tennis Association. The main event of the
season is the annual Wimbledon fortnight, widely regarded as the most
important tennis event in the world; this draws large crowds, with the ground at
the All England Club accommodating over 30,000 spectators. There are also
national and county championships and national competitions for boys’ and
girls’ schools. International events include the Davis Cup and European Cup for
men and the Federation Cup and European Cup for women. Women from
Britain and the United States compete annually for the Wightman Cup.
Various forms of commercial betting and gaming are permitted in Britain under
strict regulations. In 1986—87 the total money staked (excluding gaming
machines) was £6,809 million.
Gaming includes the playing of casino and card games, gaming machines and
bingo. Betting takes place mainly on horse or greyhound racing, and on football
matches (usually through football pools). Racing bets may be made at
racecourses and greyhound tracks, or through some 10,400 licensed off-course
betting offices which take nearly 90 per cent of the money staked. A form of pool
betting (totalisator betting) is organised on course by the Horserace Totalisator
Board (HTB). Bookmakers and the HTB contribute a levy to the Horserace
Betting Levy Board, which promotes the improvement of horse racing and
breeding and the advancement of veterinary science.
In addition, legislation allows local authorities and certain other bodies to
hold lotteries.
Appendix 1
Currency
The unit of currency is the pound sterling divided into 100 new pence (p) There
are seven coins: £1; 50p; 20p; 10p; 5p; 2p and Ip.
Bank of England notes are issued for sums of £5, £10, £20 and £50.
Length
Area
Capacity
Weight
(Avoirdupois)
Metric Conversions for British
1 inch
12 inches = 1 foot
3 feet = 1 yard
1,760 yards = 1 mile
Weights and Measures
2-54 centimetres
30-48 centimetres
0-914 metre
T609 kilometres
144 square inches
9 square feet
4,840 square yards
640 acres
1 square inch
= 1 square foot
= 1 square yard
= 1 acre
= 1 square mile
= 6-452 square centimetres
— 929-03 square centimetres
= 0-836 square metre
= 0-405 hectare
= 2-59 square kilometres
2 pints
4 quarts
8 gallons
8 bushels
1 pint
1 quart
1 gallon
1 bushel
1 quarter
0-568 litre
T136 litres
4-546 litres
36-37 litres
2-909 hectolitres
16 oz
14 lb
112 lb
20 cwt (2,240 lb)
2,000 lb
1 ounce (oz) =
1 pound (lib) =
1 stone (st) =
1 hundredweight (cwt) =
1 long ton -
1 short ton =
28-35 grammes
0-454 kilogramme
6-35 kilogrammes
50-8 kilogrammes
TO 16 tonnes
0-907 tonne
Double
Conversion
Tables for
Measures and
Weights
(Use the figures in the central column with those to the left or right, depending
on which conversion is required. For example, 1 centimetre = 0-394 inch and
1 inch = 2-540 centimetres.)
Centi¬
metres
Inches
Metres
Yards
Kilo¬
metres
Miles
Hec¬
tares
Acres
2-540
5-080
7-620
10-160
12-700
15-240
17-780
20-320
22-860
25-400
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0-394
0-787
1181
1-575
1- 969
2- 362
2- 756
3- 150
3-543
3-937
0-914
1- 829
2- 743
3- 658
4- 572
5- 486
6- 401
7- 315
8- 230
9- 144
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1- 094
2- 187
3- 281
4- 374
5- 468
6- 562
7- 655
8- 749
9- 843
10-936
1-609
3- 219
4- 828
6-437
8- 047
9- 656
11- 265
12- 875
14-484
16-093
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0-621
1-243
1- 864
2- 485
3- 107
3- 728
4- 350
4- 971
5- 592
6- 214
0-405
0-809
1-214
1- 619
2- 023
2-428
2- 833
3- 237
3- 642
4- 047
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
2-471
4-942
7-413
9-884
12-355
14-826
17-298
19-768
22-239
24-711
462
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Kilo- Av.
grammes Pounds
Litres
Pints
Litres
Gallons
Metric Hun-
Quintals dred-
per weight
Hectare per Acre
0-454
0-907
1-361
1- 814
2- 268
2- 722
3- 175
3- 629
4- 082
4-536
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
2-205
4-409
6-614
8-818
11-023
13-228
15-432
17-637
19-842
22-046
0-568
1-136
1- 705
2- 273
2- 841
3- 409
3- 978
4- 546
5- 114
5-682
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1-760
3-520
5-279
7- 039
8- 799
10-559
12-319
14- 078
15- 838
17-598
4-546
9-092
13-638
18-184
22-730
27-276
31-822
36-368
40-914
45-460
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0-220
0-440
0-660
0-880
1-100
1-320
1-540
1-760
1- 980
2- 200
1- 255
2- 511
3- 766
5- 021
6- 277
7- 532
8- 787
10- 043
11- 298
12- 554
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0-797
1- 593
2- 390
3- 186
3- 983
4- 780
5- 576
6- 373
7- 169
7-966
Thermometrical Table
0° Centigrade = 32° Fahrenheit
100° Centigrade = 212° Fahrenheit
To convert “Fahrenheit into “Centigrade: subtract 32, then multiply by %;
“Centigrade into “Fahrenheit: multiply by %, then add 32.
Bank and Public Holidays in Britain,
Monday 2 January
Tuesday 3 January
Friday 17 March
Friday 24 March
Monday 27 March
Monday 1 May
Monday 29 May
Wednesday 12 July
Monday 7 August
Monday 28 August
Monday 25 December
Tuesday 26 December
1989
Extra day because New Year’s Day falls on
a Sunday
Bank Holiday (Scotland only)
St Patrick’s Day (Northern Ireland only)
Good Friday
Easter Monday (England, Wales and
Northern Ireland only)
Early May Bank Holiday
Spring Bank Holiday
Orangeman’s Day (Northern Ireland only)
Bank Holiday (Scotland only)
Summer Bank Holiday (England, Wales
and Northern Ireland only)
Christmas Day
Boxing Day
Appendix 2
Chapter 1
Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
Chapter 7
Chapter 8
Chapter 10
Chapter 11
Chapter 12
Chapter 13
Chapter 14
Chapter 15
Chapter 16
Chapter 17
Chapter 19
Chapter 23
Guide to Sources
The principal official periodical sources used in the preparation of this edition are given below:
Land and People
Social Trends, Population Trends, Regional Trends, General Household Survey, Family Expendi¬
ture Survey
Overseas Relations
British Aid Statistics, British Overseas Aid. Arms Control and Disarmament Quarterly Review,
Developments in the European Community
Defence
Statement on the Defence Estimates
Justice and the Law
Criminal Statistics, England and Wales; Criminal Statistics, Scotland
Education
Education Statistics for the United Kingdom
The Environment
General Household Survey, Housing and Construction Statistics, Digest of Environmental
Protection and Water Statistics
National Economy
United Kingdom National Accounts (the Blue Book'), Employment Gazette
Framework of Industry
United Kingdom National Accounts (the Blue Book'), British Business
Manufacturing and Service Industries
Report on the Census of Production, Monthly Digest of Statistics, Employment Gazette, British
Business
Energy and Natural Resources
Digest of United Kingdom Energy Statistics, Development of the Oil and Gas Resources of the
United Kingdom (the ‘Brown Book’), United Kingdom Mineral Statistics
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
Annual Review of Agriculture
Transport and Communications
Transport Statistics, Great Britain
Employment
Employment Gazette, New Earnings Survey
Public Finance
Financial Statement and Budget Report, The Government's Expenditure Plans (the public
expenditure White Paper)
Overseas Trade
Monthly Review of External Trade Statistics, United Kingdom Balance of Payments (the ‘Pink
Book'), British Business
Television and Radio
BBC’s Annual Report and Accounts, ISA's Television and Radio and Annual Report and Accounts
464
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Full purchasing details of British Government publications can be obtained from the annual list
Government Publications issued by Her Majesty’s Stationery Office (HMSO), which has agents
overseas. The list includes all Bills and Acts of Parliament and the official parliamentary report
Hansard, White Papers, annual reports, reports of official committees and most publications of
government departments including the Central Statistical Office, which publishes a Guide to
Official Statistics. HMSO also sells in Britain many titles published by international organisa¬
tions such as the United Nations, the European Community and the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development.
A Catalogue of British Official Publications not published by HMSO, published by Chadwyck-
Healey, lists the more specialised departmental publications. Details of this and other commercial
publications are available from bookshops or, overseas, from the British Council.
Index
Items are indexed under England, Northern Ireland, Scotland or Wales only where they are
matters peculiar to these countries; otherwise they are indexed under the relevant subject
headings.
Bold type in a sequence of figures indicates main references.
A 
Abortion 145
Accidents 72, 321-2
fire casualties 72
road 321—2
Administrative tribunals 132-3
Advertising 280, 433, 441
broadcasting 441
industry 280
press, practice 433
Advisory Board for the Research
Councils 401
Advisory bodies 53
Advisory, Conciliation and
Arbitration Service 356—7
Aerospace industry 267-9
Agriculture 54, 58, 59, 79, 305—15,
404
Agricultural and Food Research
Council 313-14, 404
Agricultural Development and
Advisory Service 312
and Fisheries, Department of, for
Scotland 58
animals 306—8, 313, 314
diseases, control ofS 13, 314
welfare 307—8
Common Agricultural Policy 310-11
crofts 311
crops 308
Department of (Northern Ireland) 59
diseases and pests, control of 313
education and training 314-15
European Community policies 79
exports 309—10
farms 305—6
Fisheries and Food, Ministry of 54
government policy 310—13
grants and subsidies 311
horticulture 308-9
land use 305
livestock 306—8
cattle 306-7
pigs 307
poultry 307
sheep 306—7
welfare 307-8
marketing 310
co-opera tives 310
pesticides 313
plant diseases and pests,
control of 313
price guarantees 311
production 306—9
professional, scientific and technical
services 312—13
protection of countryside 312
research 313-14, 404
smallholdings 311
tenancy legislation 311-12
veterinary medicinal products 313
Aid to developing countries 82-3, 85,
95-8
bilateral aid 95
European Community 82-3
evaluation 97
financial aid 95
multilateral aid 97—8
official and other flows 94—5
projects 95-6
technical co-operation 85, 96—7
voluntary agencies 98
AIDS147-8
Aircraft 105, 267-9, 333-6
aerospace industry 267-9
civil 333—6
military 105
Alcoholic drinks 269—71
Alcoholism 147
Ambulance services 143
Ancient monuments 202—3
Arbitration Committee, Central
357
Architecture 203—4
Armed forces 102—5
Arms control and
disarmament 89-91
466
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
chemical and biological weapons 90
conventional weapons 90—1
nuclear weapons 89—90
Army 104—5
combat forces 104-5
see also Defence
Arts 54, 409-24
administration 409—10
and design, training 421
and Libraries, Office of 54
art market 421
British Council 412
broadcasting and 412
centres 412
community arts 411
Councils 411
crafts 420—1
dance 414, 415, 416
drama 413—14
ethnic minorities 411—12
festivals 412
films 416—18
finance 410—11
government policies 409
literature and libraries 421—4
local arts councils 412
museums and art galleries 419-20
music 414—15, 416
opera 414, 415, 416
promotion of 409—24
Regional Arts Associations 411
visual 418—21
Atomic energy
see Nuclear energy
Auction houses 281
B 
Balance of payments 394—6
capital flows 394—5
external assets and liabilities 396
Bank of England 374-5
Banking 374—9
see also Financial institutions
Beverages industry 269-71
Birth rates 21
Blood transfusion 142
Books 424
Botanical gardens 406-7
Britain 1—4, 20—31
economic and social pattern 25-31
historical outline 2
physical features 1—2
population 20-5
social framework 20-31
see also England, Northern Ireland,
Scotland and Wales
British Airways 334
British Broadcasting Corporation
435-6, 437-8, 439
see also Broadcasting
British Coal Corporation 291
British Council 74-5, 412
British Film Institute 415
British Nuclear Fuels 296—7
British Olympic Association 448
British Rail 325-9
British School Technology 175
British Technology Group 250
see also Science and technology
British Telecom 337—9
see also Telecommunications
Broadcasting 340, 412, 435-43
advertising 441
arts, broadcasting of 412
audience research 441—2
British Broadcasting
Corporation 435-6, 437-8, 439, 440
radio 439
television 437—8
World Service 440
cable services 340, 438—9
educational 439—40
Independent Broadcasting
Authority 436-7, 437-8
programme companies 437
television 437—8
international relations 442-3
parliamentary 441
political 441
satellite broadcasting 439
technical developments 442
Budget 365
Building
see Construction industry
Building societies 197-8, 378-9
Bus services 323—4
Business and Technician
Education Council 182
Business services 280—1
c 
Cabinet 51
meetings 51
Office 52
Cable TV 340, 438
Cancer screening 148
Capital 368, 394-5
INDEX
467
flows 394—5
taxes on 368
see also Taxation and duty
Cars
see Motor vehicles
Catering trades 279—80
Ceramics 262
Channel Islands 4
historical outline 4
Charities 405
research sponsored by 405
Chemicals industry 259—61
Children 127-8, 143-4, 153-5,
161-2, 177-8, 417, 448
child benefit 162
childcare 153—5
adoption 155
custodianship 155
children’s play 448
films for 417
health services for 143—4, 177—8
in trouble 127—8
Churches 215—18,219—20
Anglican Communion 216—17
co-operation among 219—20
England, Church of 215— 16
Free Churches 217-18
non-Christian religious
communities 219
Roman Catholic Church 218
Scotland, Church of 217
City Action Teams 192—3
City Grant 193
Civil aviation 333—6
air traffic 333—4
airports 335—6
development 336
ownership and control 335-6
Authority 331
government responsibilities 333
helicopters 334—5
navigation services 335
safety 335
structure of airline industry 334
British Airways 334
traffic control 335
Civil defence 107
Civil engineering 274—5
Civil Service 60-3
central management 61
conditions of service 62
Diplomatic Service 62
political and private activities 63
promotion 62
recruitment and training 62
security 63
structure 61
Clothing industry 271—2
Coal 253, 291-3
British Coal Corporation 291
consumption 291
development 291
European Coal and Steel
Community 253
industry 291-3
production 291
research 291—3
Commission for Racial
Equality 30
Commodity, shipping and freight
markets 385
Commons, House of
see Parliament
Commonwealth 55, 83-7
consultation 84—5
dependencies 86—7
Foreign and, Office 55
organisations 85—6
Secretariat 85
technical co-operation 85
Communications see Post Office and
Telecommunications
Companies 236-7, 242-3, 280-1,
368, 382
advertising 280
company law 242—3
computer services 280
corporation tax 368
factoring 382
management consultancy 280
market research 280
small firms 236—7
Competition policy 132, 237—40
anti-competitive practices 238
European Community policy 239—40
financial services 239
monopolies and mergers 238
public sector 238—9
Restrictive Practices Court 132
restrictive trade practices 239
Comptroller and Auditor
General 364
Computers 175, 280
in schools 175
services 280
Confederation of British
Industry 356
Conference centres 281
Conservation 202—8, 312, 406,
447-8
468
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
agriculture and protection of
countryside 312
ancient monuments 202—3
architectural standards 203—4
areas 203
areas of outstanding natural
beauty 205—6
coastal 204—5
Countryside Commissions 205, 447—8
derelict land, reclamation 207—8
environmental improvement 208
green belts 204
historic buildings 202—3
national parks 205—6
national scenic areas 205—6
nature conservation 206—7
open country 206
public rights of way 206
registers of unused and under-used
land 208
tree preservation 204
zoological gardens 406
Construction industry 273—5
civil engineering projects 274—5
housing construction 274
overseas construction 275
research and advisory services 275
structure 274
Consumer protection 241—2
consumer advice and information
241-2
Copyright, authors’ 422
Coroners’ courts 121
Council for National Academic
Awards 181
Countryside Commissions 205,
447-8
Courts 59, 116, 117-21, 129-33
civil 129—33
coroners’ 121
criminal 117—21
grant of bail by 116
Restrictive Practices Court 132
Scottish Courts Administration 59
Crafts 420—1
Crime 109—29, 135—6
criminal courts 117-21
appeals 119
Criminal Injuries Compensation
Scheme 111
criminal justice 109-29
criminal proceedings, aid in 135-6
criminals, treatment of 122-9
prevention 111
statistics 110—11
Crown Office 58
Crown Prosecution Service 55
Crown, The
see Monarchy and Royal family
Cultural and social life 10-11, 12-13,
15,19-20
HM Customs and Excise 55, 370
duties 370
D 
Dance 414, 415-16
dance and mime companies 415—16
training 416
Defence 55, 99—107, 399
armed forces 102—3
Army 104
civil 107
combat forces 103—5
commitments outside NATO area 102
contribution to NATO 100—1
Europe and NATO 101—2
Ministry of 55
NATO co-operation 106
NATO strategy 100
Northern Ireland 102
organisation and management
99-100
overseas commitments 102
personnel 102—3
procurement 105—7
production 107
research and development 106, 399
reserve and auxiliary forces 103
Royal Air Force 105
Royal Navy 104
sales 107
Strategic Defence Initiative 106
strategic nuclear forces 103—4
see also North Atlantic Treaty
Organisation
Dependencies 86—7
Deposit-taking institutions 375
Design 246, 421
industrial 246
training in 421
Development see Economy
and Regional development
Diplomatic Service 62
Disabled people 152, 162—3, 347, 448
benefits and pensions 162—3
employment services for 347
social services for 152
sport for 448
INDEX
469
Discount houses 378
Divorce 22
Drama 413-14
amateur theatre 414
professional theatre 413
training 414
young people, theatre for 413—14
Drugs 145—6,446
drug abuse in sport 446
E 
East—West relations 80, 87—8
Berlin 88—9
CSCE 88
Economy 7-10, 12, 14-15, 18-19,
25-31, 59, 221-9, 234-6
background 221—4
economic growth 222
employmen 1223
inflation and competitiveness 222
investment 222—3
oil, offshore 224
output, industrial 222
productivity 223, 235
trade 223—4
economic and social pattern 25—31
Economic Development, Department
of (Northern Ireland) 59
government policy 224—6
economic management 226
exchange rate 225
fiscal policy 225
monetary policy 224—5
supply side policies 225—6
national income and
expenditure 226—9
see also Balance of payments;
Industry; Public finance; and
Trade, overseas
Education 55, 58, 59, 126, 148—9,
167-88, 244-6, 314-15, 400-1,
404-5, 414, 416, 417-18, 421, 439-
40
administration 169—70
adult and continuing 183—4
agricultural 314—15
aids in 177
and Science, Department of 55, 400—1
art and design 421
Business and Technician Education
Council 182
careers education and guidance
177
Council for National Academic
Awards 181
curriculum 173—4
dance 416
Department of (Northern Ireland) 59
drama 414
educational broadcasting 439—40
English (as foreign language)
teaching 185—6
examinations, secondary school
175-6
examining bodies 181—2
film production 417— 18
finance 170-1
health 148—9
information technology in schools 175
management development 244—6
music 416
Open University 180—1
overseas links 184—6
English (as foreign language)
teaching 185—6
exchanges 186
overseas students in Britain
185
policies 167—9
polytechnics 181
post-school 178—84
prison, education in 126
records of achievement 176—7
religious 175
research on 184
schoolchildren, health and welfare
177-8
schools 171—8
Scottish Education Department 58
special educational needs 173
standards of 177
students 179, 185
teacher training 182—3
teachers 173, 182—3, 184
Technical and Vocational Education
Initiative 174—5
universities 179—81, 404—5
Vocational Education, National
Council for 181
youth service 186—8
see also Students, Training and
Universities
Elderly 152, 159-61
retirement pension 159—61
social services for 152
Elections 39—40, 65—6
local government 65—6
parliamentary 39—40
470
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Electrical engineering 262—5
Electricity supply industry 293—9
consumption 293
generation 293—4
nuclear energy 296—8
research 298
structure 293
Electronic engineering 262—5
Employers’ organisations 355—6
Confederation of British Industry 356
Employment 55, 78, 163, 223,
343-359
additional benefits 352
conditions of 350—2
Department of 55
earnings 351—2
employee share schemes 352
Employment Training 348
equal opportunities 350-1
European Community policies 78
health in 357—9
holidays 352
immigrants 350
industrial relations 356-7
law 350-1, 354-5, 357-8
pattern of 343
safety in 357—9
services 345—7
careers service 347
disabled people, services for 347
Enterprise Allowance Scheme 346
Jobclubs 346
Restart Programme 346
sickness benefit 162
trade unions 352—5
training services 347—50
trends 223, 331—2
unemployment 163, 343—5, 345—7
work, hours of 352
see also individual industries,
Employers’ organisations. Industrial
relations, Trade unions and
Unemployment
Energy 55, 283—303
coal 291—3
consumption 284, 287, 290, 291, 293
Department of 55
efficiency 284—5
electricity 293—6
gas 288-90
natural resources 283-303
Offshore Supplies Office 285
oil 285—8
policy 284
renewable sources 298-9
see also Coal, Electricity supply
industry, Gas, Nuclear energy and
Petroleum
Engineering 244, 262-5, 265-6, 267,
274-5,401
civil engineering projects 274—5
Council 244
electrical 262—5
electronic 262—5
instrument 262—5
marine 267
mechanical 265-6
Science and Engineering Research
Council 401
see also individual industries
England 1-2,5-11, 117, 118-19,
127-8, 129-30, 133-4, 215-16, 302,
427-8
Church of 215— 16
civil courts 129—30
appeals 130
criminal courts 117, 118—19
appeals 119
criminal prosecutions 117
cultural and social life 10-11
economy 7—10
government 7
historical outline 2—3
law, government responsibility in
administration of 133—4
regional newspapers 427—8
water resources 302
young offenders, treatment of 127—8,
129
Enterprise Initiative 193-6, 236
Enterprise zones 191
Environment 25—6, 55, 59, 78-9,
189-213, 312, 403, 447-8
agriculture and protection of
countryside 312
air, control of pollution of 211—12
architecture 203—4
coast 204—5
conservation 202—8
Countryside Commissions 205, 447-8
Department of 55
Department of (Northern Ireland) 59
environmental improvement 208
European Community policies 78—9
green belts 204
housing 25-6, 196-202
inner cities 192—6
land 207-8, 209
Natural Environment Research
Council 403
INDEX
471
nature protection 206—7
noise 212
open country 206
planning 189—91
pollution control 208—13
public rights of way 206
radioactive waste disposal 213
radioactivity 213
recycling and materials reclamation
209-10
sea, control of pollution in 210—11
trees and woodland 204
water quality 210
Equal opportunities 28—9, 350—1
Ethnic minorities 29—30, 350,
411-12, 428-9
arts of 411—12
employment 350
publications 428—9
see also Race relations
European Community 75—83, 151,
166, 239-40, 252-3, 310-11,
316-17, 380, 392
Common Agricultural Policy 310-11
competition policy 239—40
European Coal and Steel Community
253
European Investment Bank 253
European Regional Development Fund
252-3
external relations 80—3
Afghanistan 81
aid 82-3
Central America 81
East—West relations 80
Middle East 80-1
South Africa 81
terrorism 81—2
trade 82, 392
finance 77
fisheries policy 316—17
health arrangements 151
institutions 76-7
insurance, directives 380
internal policies 77—80, 151, 166,
239-40, 252-3, 310-11,380
agriculture 79
employment 78
environment 78—9
fisheries 79
industry 78
single market 77—8
transport 78
regional policy and aid 252—3
social security 166
trade policy 82, 392
Exchange 382
foreign exchange market 382
Excise duties
see Taxation and duty
Exhibition and conference
centres 281
Expenditure 226—9, 362—5, 370
personal 227—8
public 226-7, 228, 362-5
taxes on 370
see also Public expenditure
Exports 55, 393, 393—4
controls 393
credit insurance 393—4
ECGD (Export Credits Guarantee
Department) 55, 394
see also individual industries
and Trade, overseas
F 
Factoring companies 382
Families 143—4, 153, 163
family credit 163
health services for 143—4
social services for 153
Family planning 144
Farming see Agriculture
Films 281,416-18
British Film Institute 417
children’s 417
cinema licensing 418
film classification 418
government support 416—17
industry 281
training in production of 417— 18
videos 418
Finance and Personnel, Department
of (Northern Ireland) 60
Financial institutions 197—8, 253,
373-85
Bank of England 374—5
British overseas banks 377—8
building societies 197—8, 378—9
commodity, shipping and freight
markets 385
deposit-taking institutions 375—9
discount houses 378
euromarkets 384
European Investment Bank 253
factoring companies 382
finance corporations 382
finance houses 381
472
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
financial futures 384
financial markets 382—5
financial services 239, 373—4
supervision 373—4
foreign exchange market 384
insurance companies 379
investing institutions 379—81
investment and unit trusts 381
leasing companies 381—2
London gold market 384—5
merchant banks 377
money markets 383—4
National Savings Bank 379
overseas banks 377—8
pension funds 380—1
retail banks 375—7
assets 376
branches and accounts 376
deposits 376
payment systems and services
376-7
securities markets 383
Stock Exchange, International 382—3
see also Insurance
Fire services 70—2
fire casualties 72
fire losses 72
fire prevention 71
research 71—2
special services 72
Fisheries 315-17
administration 316
European Community policy 316-17
farming 315—16
fleets 315
freshwater 317
landings 315
limits 316
research 317
Food 149, 269-71, 306-9, 309-10,
313-14, 404
Agricultural and Food Research
Council 313-14, 404
exports 309—10
home production 306—9
industries 269—71
marketing 310
research 313—14, 404
safety of 149
Footwear industry 271—2
Foreign and Commonwealth Office
55
Forestry 317-18
Commission 317—18
Northern Ireland 318
policy 317-18
replanting 318
research 318
Freight services 322-3, 327, 329-30,
331, 333-4
Fuel see Coal, Electricity supply
industry, Energy, Gas, Nuclear
energy and Petroleum
G 
Gambling 460
Gas 55, 285, 288-90
Office of Gas Supply 55
offshore 285, 288—90
consumption 290
production 290
research 290
structure 288-90
transmission and storage 290
Government 7, 11, 13-14, 16-18,
33-70
advisory bodies 53—4
Cabinet 51
meetings 51
Office 52
composition 49—50
departmental ministers 50
junior ministers 50
Lord Chancellor and Law Officers
50
Ministers of State 50
non-departmental ministers 50
Prime Minister 49—50
departments of 52—60
functions 54—60
information services 54
see also Civil Service, Local
government. Ministers, Monarchy,
Parliament, Public expenditure and
Public finance
Great Britain see Britain, England,
Scotland and Wales
Green belts 204
H 
Handicapped people
see Disabled people
Health 55, 58, 60, 126, 137-51,
177-8, 358-9, 403
AIDS 147-8
INDEX
473
and Safety Commission 358
and Safety Executive 358-9
and Social Services, Department of
(Northern Ireland) 60
arrangements with other countries
151
centres 140
Department of 55
diet and 149
district nurses 140
education 148-9
employment, health in 357-9
environmental 149
family practitioner services 140
group practices 140
infectious diseases, control of 148
midwives 140
National Health Service 137-51
administration 138-9
finance 139
health service commissioners 139
hospitals and specialist services
141-9
primary health care 139-40
specialist services 141-9
organ transplants 142
parents and children 143-4
primary health care 139-40
prisoners, health services for 126
private medical treatment 141-2
professions 150-1
rehabilitation 143
research 150, 403
safety of medicines 150
schoolchildren, health services for
177-8
Scottish Home and Health
Department 58
smoking and 146-7
visitors 140
see also Safety
Health and Safety Commission 358
Health and Safety Executive 358-9
Historic buildings 202-3
Home and Health Department,
Scottish 58
Home Office 55
Horticulture 308-9
Hospices 143
Hospitals 141-9
and specialist services 141-9
rehabilitation 143
Hotels and catering 279-80
House of Commons 39
see also Parliament
House of Lords 38-9
see also Parliament
Housing 25-6, 163, 196-202, 274
378-9
administration 197
associations 200
benefit 163
building societies 197-8, 378-9
construction 274
home ownership 197-8
mortgage loans 197-8
improvements 200-2
privately rented 199-200
public sector 198—9
Human fertilisation and embryology
144
Human rights 17-18, 91-2
I 
Immigration 24-5, 350
employment of immigrants 350
Imports 393
controls 393
see also Trade, overseas
Income 36, 163, 226-9, 351-2, 357
366-8
Manpower Economics, Office of 357
national, and expenditure 226-9
personal, and expenditure 227-8
royal 36
sources of 228, 351-2
support 163
taxes on 366—8
Independent Broadcasting Authority
436-7
programme companies 473
Industrial relations 354—5, 356-7
Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration
Service 356—7
Central Arbitration Committee 357
collective bargaining 356
joint consultation 356
legislation 354—5
Manpower Economics, Office of 357
wages councils 357
Industry 57, 58, 59, 78, 126, 222,
222-3, 228-9, 231-53, 256-82,
399-400,405, 430
British Technology Group 250
construction industry, 273-5
Department for Scotland 58
deregulation 240
design 246
474
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
development agencies 252
Economic Development, Department
of (Northern Ireland) 59
European Community and 78, 252—3
government policies for 231—2,
235-52
gross domestic product, by industry
228-9
industrial and intellectual property,
protection of 243
industrial association 233—4
industrial awards 247
industrial design 246
industrial financing 243—4
industrial output 222
industrial performance 234—5
innovation, research and 247—50
investment in 222—3, 235, 240—1,
243- 4
management development and
industrial training 244—6
manufacturing 255—73
nationalised industries 233
organisation 232—4
prison industries 126
privatisation 240
productivity 223, 235
profitability 234—5
quality and standards 246—7
regional development 250—3
research and innovation 247—50,
399, 405
rural industries 252
science parks 405
service industries 275—82
small firms 236—7
technical and vocational training
244- 5
technological advance 257—9, 430
Trade and, Department of 57,
399-400
see also individual industries,
Employment, European
Community and Research
and development
Inflation 222
Information, Central Office of 56
Inland Revenue, Board of 56
see also Taxation and duty
Inner cities 192—6
City Action Teams 192—3
City Grant 193
Enterprise Initiative 193—6
Garden Festivals 193
Northern Ireland 196
Scotland 196
Task Forces 193
Urban Development Corporations 193
Urban Programme 192
Wales 196
Instrument engineering 262—5
Insurance industry 379—80
brokers 380
companies 379—80
European Community directives 380
Lloyd’s 380
International Stock Exchange
see Stock Exchange, International
Investment 222—3, 235, 240-1,
243-4, 253, 379-81,396
European Investment Bank 253
in industry 222—3, 235, 240—1, 243—4
investing institutions 379—81
insurance companies 379—80
pension funds 380—1
unit trusts 381
overseas 396
Invisible trade 390—1
see also Trade, overseas
Ireland: historical outline 3—4
Iron and steel 253, 261
European Coal and Steel Community
253
products 261
Isle of Man 4
historical outline 4
J 
Jewry 218—19
Judges 134
Justice 109—36
and the law 109—36
civil 129—33
criminal 109—29
Crown Prosecution Service 55
L 
Land 1-31, 207-8, 208, 209, 305
and people 1—31
pollution control 209
reclamation 207—8
registers of unused and under-used
land 208
use 207—8, 305
Law 43-5, 50, 56, 109-36, 242-3,
311-12, 351-2, 354-5, 433-4
INDEX
475
administration of the 133-6
agricultural holdings 311-12
centres 136
civil courts 129—33
appeals 130
civil justice 129—33
civil proceedings 131-2
legal aid 135
company 242—3
coroners’ courts 121
criminal courts 117-21
Criminal Injuries Compensation
Scheme 111
criminal justice 109-29
criminal trials 120-1
jury 121
legal aid 135—6
employment 351-2, 354-5
government responsibilities,
in administration of 133
judges 134
legal aid, advice and assistance
135-6
legal profession 134-5
legislative proceedings,
parliamentary 43—5
delegated legislation 45
Officers 50
Officers’ Department 56
press, legal requirements 433—4
prosecution 117-18
reform 136
terrorism, measures to combat
111-12
trade unions, legal framework 354-5
Learned societies 406
Leasing companies 381—2
Leather industry 271-2
Legal profession 134-5
Leisure trends 30-1
Libraries 54, 421—4
Arts and, Office of 54
public 423
special 423
university 423
Life, expectation of 21
Literature 421—4
literary and philological societies 422
Living standards 26-8
Lloyd’s insurance market 380
Local government 63—70, 198-9
authorities, types of 64-5
complaints system 70
elections 65—6
finance 68—70
capital expenditure 69
comm uni ty charge 70
control of 70
current expenditure 68-9
loans 70
new arrangements 70
rates 69—70
functions and services 66-7
housing 198—9
internal organisation 67
officers and employees 67-8
public access 67
London 380, 382-3, 384, 384-5
Financial Futures Exchange,
International 384
gold market 384—5
Lloyd’s insurance market 380
Stock Exchange, International 382-3
Lord Advocate’s Department 58
Lord Chancellor’s Department 56
Lords, House of
see Parliament
Lorries 322-3
M  
Management consultancy 280
Man-made fibres 259-61
Manpower Economics, Office of 357
Manufacturing 255-73
advanced technology, take-up 257-9
growth 255-7
high-technology industries 257
industries 255—73
structure 255
Marine engineering 267
Market research 280
Marriage 22
Mechanical engineering 265-6
Medicine and medical equipment
150,403
medical research 150, 403
Medical Research Council 403
safety of medicines 150
Mental health services 126, 152-3
Merchant banks 377
Mercury 339—40
see also Telecommunications
Metal manufacture 261-2, 265-6
iron and steel 261
metal products 265-6
non-ferrous metals 261-2
Migration 23
Minerals 261-2, 299-301
476
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
mineral products 261—2
non-fuel 299—301
exploration 299
production 299—301
Mines and quarries 291—3
coal 291—3
research 291—3
see also Coal
Ministers 49—52
departmental 50
junior 50
Lord Chancellor and Law Officers 50
ministerial responsibility 52
ministerial salaries 51
non-departmental 50
of State 50
Prime Minister 49—50
Monarchy 33—6
accession 35
acts of government 35—6
ceremonial 36
coronation 35
royal income and expenditure 36
royal visits 36
succession 35
Monopolies and mergers 238
see also Competition policy
Motor vehicles 266—7, 279, 370
car tax 370
industry 266—7
retail distribution 279
Museums and galleries 407, 419—20
Museums Association 419
national and other collections
419-20
scientific museums 407
Music 414—15, 416
choirs 415
jazz 415
orchestral and choral 414—15
pop and rock 415
training in 416
N 
National Council for Vocational
Qualifications 181
National Health Service 137—51
see also Health
National income 226—9
gross domestic product, by industry
228-9
National Insurance 159—63
benefits and allowances 159—63
contributions 159
National parks 205—6
National Playing Fields Association
448
National Savings Bank 379
Nationalised industries 233
see also individual industries
Nationality 24
NATO
see North Atlantic Treaty
Organisation
Natural Environment Research
Council 403—4
Natural resources 283—303
Navy
see Royal Navy
Net public sector debt 371
New towns 191
News agencies 430—1
Newspapers 425—9
see also Press
Non-departmental public bodies
53-4
North Atlantic Treaty
Organisation 100-2, 106
Britain’s contribution 100—1
co-operation 106
Europe and 101—2
strategy 100
Northern Ireland 16—20, 59—60, 102,
111-12, 118, 120, 128, 131, 134, 196,
250-2, 303, 318, 354, 359, 428
civil courts 131
criminal courts 118, 120
cultural and social life 19—20
defence 102
economy 18—19
employment, health and safety in 359
forestry 318
government 16—18
Anglo-Irish Agreemen 117
background to civil disturbances
16
direct rule and political initiatives
16- 17
human rights and security policy
17- 18
government departments 59—60
Agriculture 59
Economic Development 59
Education 59
Environment 59
Finance and Personnel 60
Health and Social Services 60
INDEX
477
industrial development
measures 250—2
inner cities policy 196
law, government responsibility
in administration of 134
press 428
terrorism, measures to combat
111-12
trade unions 354
water resources 303
young offenders, treatment of 128
Nuclear energy 296-8
British Nuclear Fuels 296-7
emergency plans 298
nuclear power programme 296
research 297
safety 297
Nuclear weapons 89-90, 103-4
o 
Offenders, treatment of 122-9
children 127-8
custody 122
non-custodial treatment 122-4
compensation and reparation 124
fines 123
probation 123
prisons 124—5
sentencing 122
young adult offenders 129
Offshore Supplies Office 285
Oil
see Petroleum
Old people
see Elderly
Open University 180-1
Opera 414, 415, 416
training 416
Ordnance Survey 56
Overseas Development
Administration 56
Overseas relations 73—98, 412
administration 73-4
British Council 74, 412
Commonwealth 55, 83-7
development co-operation 94-8
international organisations,
membership of 85, 91-4
international peace and security
87-91
United Nations 91-3
see also European Community
P  
Parliament 37-48, 56, 364-5, 441
broadcasting of proceedings 441
functions 37
House of Commons 39
House of Lords 38—9
legislative proceedings 43-5
delegated legislation 45
meeting of 37—8
parliamentary committees 45-7
joint committees 46
of the whole House 45
party committees 46-7
select committees 46, 364-5
standing committees 45—6
parliamentary control 47-8
Parliamentary Commissioner
for Administration 48
Parliamentary Counsel 56
parliamentary electoral system 39-40
parliamentary privilege 48
parliamentary procedure 42-3
political party system 40—1
Parliamentary Counsel 56
Patents 243
Paymaster General’s Office 56
Pension funds 380—1
Pensions 159-61, 162, 164-6
retirement 159-61
war 164-5
widows’ 162
Periodicals 429
Petroleum 224, 279, 285—8, 368
consumption 287
land-based oilfields 287
North Sea fields 285-7
offshore 224, 285—8
effect on economy 224
offshore supplies 285
oilfields 285—7
petrol retail trade 279
pipelines 287
refineries 287
research 288
revenue tax 368
structure of industry 287
trade 287
Planning 189—91, 208
development plans 189-90
enterprise zones 191
land registers 208
major schemes 190-1
new towns 191
public participation 190
478
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
simplified planning zones 191
Police 112-17
authorities and chief constables 113
central authorities 113
charging 116
common services 114—15
detention, treatment and questioning
115-16
in Scotland 116—17
forces 113
grant of bail 116
powers of arrest 115
status and duties 113—14
Political parties 40—2, 441
broadcasts 441
party system 40—2
Pollution control 208—13
administration 208—9
air 211-12
land 209
marine 210—11
noise 212
radioactive waste disposal 213
radioactivity 213
recycling and reclamation 209—10
water 210
Polytechnics 181
Population 20—5, 29—30, 56
age distribution 22
birth rates 21
Censuses and Surveys, Office of 56
distribution 22—3
divorce rates 22
ethnic minorities 29—30
immigration 24—5
marriage rates 22
migration 23
mortality, causes of 21
nationality 24
sex ratio 22
Ports 329—30
development 330
traffic 329-30
Post Office 340—1
specialist services 341
Power stations 293—7
Press 425—34
advertising practice 433
Council 433
England 427—8
ethnic minority publications 428—9
free distribution newspapers 428
institutions 432—3
journalism, training for 431—2
legal requirements 433—4
national 427
new technology 430
news agencies 430—1
newspapers 425—9
Northern Ireland 428
ownership 426—7
periodical 429
regional 427—8
Scotland 428
Wales 428
Prime Minister 49—50
Printing and publishing 424, 430
newspapers, new technology 430
Prisons and prisoners 124—7
discharge and after-care 127
education 126
industries 126
life licence 125
medical service 126
parole 125
privileges and discipline 126
psychological service 126
remission of sentence 125
repatriation 125
welfare 126—7
Privy Council 48—9
committees 49
Probation 123
Procurator General 56
Public expenditure 228, 362—5
audit and examination of 364—5
Comptroller and Auditor General
364
Public Accounts Committee 364—5
cash limits 363—4
central government financial funds 365
Estimates 364
reserve 363
Public finance 226—9, 361—71
Budget 365
government planning 361—2
planning cycle 361
public expenditure 228, 362—5
public sector borrowing 371
revenue, sources of 365—70
see also Balance of payments,
Public expenditure and
Taxation and duty
Public sector borrowing 371
net public sector debt 371
Pubbshing 422, 424, 430
authors’ copyright 422
books 424
printing and publishing
industries 424, 430
INDEX
479
9 
‘Quangos’ 53—4
R  
Race relations 29-30, 350-1
Commission for Racial Equality 30
employment, equal opportunities in
350-1
Race Relations Act 29—30
Radio 435-7, 439, 440
BBC World Service 440
COI Overseas Radio Services 440
see also Broadcasting
Railways 325—9
British Rail’s subsidiary activities
327-8
Channel Tunnel 328-9
freight 327
operations 325
passenger services 325-7
private 328
urban 328
Rates 69-70
Recreation see Sport
Refineries
see Petroleum
Regional development 58, 250-3
assisted areas and related measures
250-2
development agencies 252
European Community policy and aid
252-3
European Regional Developmen t
Fund 252-3
Northern Ireland 250—2
rural industries 252
Scottish Development Department 58
Religions 215-20
Churches 215-18, 219-20
co-operation among the churches
219-20
Jewry 218-19
non-Christian religious communities
219
Renewable sources of energy 298-9
Research and development 71-2,
106, 150, 184, 247-50, 275, 288, 290,
291-3, 297, 298, 303, 313-14, 317,
318, 397-408, 441-2
Agricultural and Food Research
Council 313-14, 404
broadcasting 441-2
charitable foundations 405
coal industry 291—3
construction 275
defence 106, 399-400
educational 184, 400-1
electricity supply industry 297, 298
expenditure 399
fire prevention 71—2
fisheries 317
food 313—14
forestry 318
gas supply and use 290
government responsibilities 397-9
industrial 247-50, 399-400, 405
medical 150, 403
Medical Research Council 403
Natural Environment Research
Council 403—4
nuclear energy 297
petroleum technology 288
professional institutions 405-6
Research Councils 401-4
Advisory Board for the 401
Science and Engineering Research
Council 401—2
astronomy 402
engineering 402
nuclear physics 402-3
other sciences 403
space 408
university 404—5
water industry 303
Restrictive Practices Court 132
Retail trades 277-80
hotels and catering 279-80
trends 278—9
diversification 278
promotions 279
shopping centres 278
technology, use of 279
vehicle and petrol retailing 279
Roads 319-25
developments 319—20
government responsibilities 320-1
haulage 322—3
in terna tional 323
licensing 323
structure of industry 322-3
passenger services on 323—5
safety 321-2
traffic in towns 322
Royal Air Force 105
see also Defence
Royal family see Monarchy
Royal Navy 104
480
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
see also Defence
Royal Society 406
s 
Safety 70-2, 149, 150, 213, 297,
321-2, 332-3, 335, 357-9
civil aviation 335
employment, safety in 357—9
Northern Ireland 359
fire services 70—2
food, safety of 149
Health and Safety Commission 358
Health and Safety Executive 358—9
medicines, safety of 150
nuclear industry 297
radioactive waste disposal 213
radioactivity 213
roads 321—2
sea, safety at 332—3
Schools 171-8, 414, 416, 417-18
British School Technology 175
careers education and guidance
177
curriculum 173—4
dance schools 416
drama schools 414
educational aids 177
educational standards 177
examinations 175—6
film schools 417—18
health and welfare in 177—8
information technology 175
independent 172-3
management of 171—2
nursery 172
primary 172
records of achievement 176—7
religious education in 175
secondary 172
special educational needs 173
teachers 173
Technical and Vocational Education
Initiative 174—5
see also Education
Science and technology 55, 247—9,
250, 257-9, 279, 397-408, 430
Advisory Board for the Research
Councils 401
astronomy 402
botanical gardens 406—7
British Technology Group 250
Education and Science, Department
of 55, 400-1
government responsibilities 397—9
international co-operation 407—8
learned societies 406
newspaper production, new
technology in 430
nuclear physics 402—3
professional institutions 405—6
promotion of 397—408
research and innovation, industrial
247-9
research councils 401—4
retail trades, use of technology in 279
Royal Society 406
Science and Engineering Research
Council 401—3
science parks 405
scientific museums 407
space technology 408
technology and industry 247—9,
257-9, 430
zoological gardens 406
see also Research and development
and Universities
Scotland 3, 13-15, 57-9, 116,
117-18, 119-20, 128-9, 130-1, 134,
196, 205-6, 217, 303, 354, 428
Church of 217
civil courts 130—1
criminal courts 117—18, 119—20
cultural and social life 15
economy 14—15
government 13—14
government departments 57—9
Agriculture and Fisheries 58
Central Services 58
Crown Office 58
Developmen 158
Education 58
Home and Health 58
Industry 58
Lord Advocate s 58
Scottish Courts Administration 59
historical outline 3
inner cities policy 196
law, government responsibility
in administration of 134
national scenic areas 205—6
police 116
press 428
trade unions 354
water resources 303
young offenders, treatment of 128—9
Sea 210-11, 331-3
marine pollution, control of 210—11
safety at 332—3
INDEX
481
transport 331-3
Serious Fraud Office 56
Service industries 275-82
advertising 280
auction houses 281
business services 280-1
computing services 280
distribution 276
exhibition and conference centres 281
film and TV 281
hotel and catering 279-80
management consultancy 280
market research 280
petrol retailing 279
retail trades 277-80
tourism 281—2
vehicle retailing 279
wholesale trades 276-7
Shipbuilding and marine engineering
267
Shipping 329-30, 331-3, 385
cargo services 331
commodity, shipping and freight
markets 385
merchant shipping legislation 332
passenger services 331—2
ports 329—30
safety 332-3
Simplified planning zones 191
Small firms 236—7
Smoking 146-7
Social life 10-11, 12-13, 15, 19-20
Social security 56, 157—66
arrangements with other countries
166
benefits 159-63, 166
contributions 159
Department of 56
family credit 163
housing benefit 163
income support 163
National Insurance 159—63
reform 158—9
taxation 166
war pensions 164-5
see also Children, Disabled people,
Employment, Health, Housing,
National Insurance, Pensions and
Women
Social services 60, 151—7
Health and, Department of
(Northern Ireland) 60
personal 151—5
children 153—5
disabled people 152
elderly 152
families 153
mentally ill people 153
people with mental handicaps 152
social workers 155
voluntary 155—7
Social welfare 137—66
see also Health, Social security,
Social services and Voluntary social
services
Solvent abuse 146
Space activities 408
Sport 445—60
British Olympic Association 448
children's play 448
Countryside Commission 447-8
disabled people, sport for 448-9
drug abuse in 446
facilities, provision of 449—51
gambling 460
Gleneagles agreement 446—7
National Playing Fields Association
448
organisation and promotion 447-9
popular sports 451-60
angling 451
association football 451—2
athletics 452
badminton 452—3
basketball 453
billiards and snooker 453
bowls 453
boxing 453—4
chess 454
cricket 454—5
curling 455
cycling 455
darts 455
field sports 455
golf 455-6
greyhound racing 457-8
Highland Games 452
hockey 456
horse racing 457—8
ice skating456
judo 456
lawn tennis 460
motor sports 457
mountaineering and rock climbing
457
racing 457—8
riding 458
rowing 458-9
rugby football 459
sailing 459
482
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
skiing 459
snooker 453
soccer 451—2
squash rackets 459—60
sub-aqua 460
swimming 460
tennis 460
private sponsorship 448
spectator violence in association
football 446
sports centres 450—1
Sports Councils 447
Standards 246—7
measurement 247
quality and 246—7
Stationery Office, Her Majesty’s 57
Steel see Iron and steel
Stock Exchange, International 382—3
Students 179, 185
overseas, in Britain 185
T 
Tariffs and Trade, General
Agreement on 392
Taxation and duty 166, 365—70
capital gains tax 368
car tax 370
corporation tax 368
customs duties 370
excise duties 370
income tax 366—7
inheritance tax 368
petroleum revenue tax 368
social security benefits and 166
stamp duty 368
value added tax 370
Teachers 173, 182—3, 184
teaching methods 184
training 182—3
Technology
see Science and technology
Telecommunications 55, 337—41
British Telecom 337-9
general services 338
international services 339
network modernisation 338
broadband cable systems 340
Cable and Wireless 340
Mercury 339—40
Office of 57
Television 281,340, 437-8
broadband cable systems 340
cable 340, 438-9
industry 281
satellite television 439
see also Broadcasting
Terrorism 81-2,111-12
Textiles 259-61,271-2
industries 271—2
man-made fibres 259—61
Theatre see Drama
Tobacco industry 269—71
Tourism 281-2
Trade, overseas 57, 82, 223—4, 287,
387-96
and Industry, Department of 57
balance of payments 394—6
commodity composition 388—9
controls on 393
ECGD (Export Credits Guarantee
Department) 394
European Community policy 82, 392
export promotion services 393-4
General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade 392
geographical distribution 389-90
government services 393—4
invisible 390—1
oil 287
policy 391-2
trends 223—4
visible 387—90
see also Balance of payments,
European Community, Exports,
Imports and Visible trade
Trade unions 352-5
legal framework 354—5
Northern Ireland 354
Scotland 354
Trades Union Congress 353—4
see also Industrial legislation
Training 62, 174-5, 182-3, 244-5,
314-15, 347-50. 414, 416, 417-18,
421,431-2
agricultural 314—15
Civil Service 62
dance 416
dramatic 414
Employment Training 348
film production 417-18
journalism 431—2
musical 416
operatic 416
services 347—50
teachers 182—3
technical and vocational 244—5
Technical and Vocational Education
Initiative 174—5
INDEX
483
visual arts and design 421
vocational qualifications 349-50
youth 349
Transplant surgery 142
Transports?, 78, 266-7, 267-9,
319-36
air 333—6
bus services 324
Channel Tunnel 328-9
Department of 57
equipment manufacturing 266-7,
267-9
European Community policies 78
inland 319—29
merchant shipping legislation 332
passenger services 323—5, 325—7,
331-2
policy 333
ports 329—30
railways 325—9
urban 328
roads 319-25
haulage 322—3
safety measures 321-2, 332-3, 335
shipping 331-3
taxis 324—5
traffic in towns 322
waterways, inland 329
see also Civil aviation; Waterways,
inland; Ports; Railways; Roads;
and Shipping
Travel see Tourism
HM Treasury 57
Solicitor’s Department 56
u 
Ulster see Northern Ireland
Unemployment 163, 343-5, 345-7
benefit 163
employment services 345-7
careers service 347
Enterprise Allowance Scheme 346
incentives to work 346-7
Jobelubs 346
Restart Programme 346
services for people with disabilities
347
Unit trusts 381
United Nations 91-3
economic and social affairs 92-3
human rights 91—2
international peace and security 91
Universities 179-81, 404-5, 423
libraries 423
Open University 180—1
research 404—5
Urban Development Corporations
193
Urban Programme 192
V 
Visible trade 387—90
commodity composition 388-9
geographical distribution 389-90
see also Trade, overseas
Visual arts 418-21
crafts 420—1
museums and art galleries 419-20
training in 421
Voluntary social services 155—7,
186-8
organisations 156—7
young people 188
youth services 186-8
w  
Wages councils 357
Wales 2-3, 11-13,57, 117, 118-19,
127-8, 129, 129-30, 133, 196, 302,
428
civil courts 129-30
criminal courts 117, 118-19
criminal prosecutions 117
cultural and social life 12-13
economy 12
government 11
historical outline 2-3
inner cities policy 196
law, government responsibility in
administration of 133
press 428
water resources 302
Welsh Office 57
young offenders, treatment of 127-8,
129
War pensions 164-5
Water resources 210, 301-3
development projects 303
England and Wales 302
statutory water companies 3'
supplies 302
484
BRITAIN 1989: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
water authorities 302
Northern Ireland 303
pollution control 210
research 303
Scotland 303
Waterways, inland 329
Welsh Office 57
Wholesale trades 276—7
Widows 162
Women 28-9, 148, 159-61, 161-2
162,350-1
benefits and pensions 159—61, 161
162
cancer screening 148
equal opportunities 28-9, 350—1
Y 
Youth 129, 349-50, 413-14
theatre for 413— 14
training services 349—50
young adult offenders 129
Youth service 186—8
organisations 188
voluntary service 188
workers 187—8
z 
Zoological gardens 406
Acknowledgement for photographs
John Cleare—Mountain Camera (between pp 40 and 41). David Williams;
Scottish Development Agency (between pp 136 and 137). The Channel Tunnel
Group (facing p 296). British Aerospace Quarterly Journal (between pp 296 and
297). Davy McKee (Stockton) Ltd; Markham & Co Ltd; Cable Belt; The Crown
Agents Review (between pp 392 and 393).
a0**-;
r '
Printed in the United Kingdom for Her Majesty's Stationery Office
12/88 C190 Dd 290524
JlQueen Elizabeth
fc Forest Park ^
Border
ForesL
Park*
Galloway
.Forest Park
Northui
Moors
istrict
inowdonia
prest Park
Ionia
Dean
Forest Park
Brecon
Beacons
Major conservation
and recreation areas
National parks
Forest parks
Areas of
outstanding
natural beauty
(national scenic
areas in Scotland)
Heritage coast
(coastal conservation
zones in Scotland)
Tourist Board
area boundaries
London
South East
Southern
West Country
Thames & Chilterns
Heart of England
East Anglia
East Midlands
North West
Yorkshire £t Humberside
Cumbria
Northumbria
Wales
Scotland
Northern Ireland
3
■
6
7
Orkney
Islands
1
The
Broads
Pembrokeshire
Coast ~
Exmoor
Dartmoor
noor
9
o
20 40 60 miles
Ullapool
Inverness
'le of Lochalsh
’Aberdeen
Fort William
Hawick
Coleraii
Dumfrie!
>ndonderry\
Battymena'
Penrith
Darlingtc
DunVannor
Working)
Enniskil
Scarborough
Barrow-in-Furnei
Burnley
Blackpool i
Stoke
Chester}
Shrew:
Birminghai
lorthamptoir
Felixstowe
iColchesten
Oxford#'
fcSwindin
Cardiff
JBatwick
ioutbfempton
lastings
Brighton
Plymouth
Motorways and major trunk roads
Motorways
completed
under construction
proposed
Other trunk roads
Orkney
Islands
Shetland
Islands
Andrews
ick-upon-Tweed
Newcastle upon Tyne
• Sunderland
I =
Harwich
Milford Haven^r^Z^
^ n
Dover
Folkestone
0
20 40 60 miles
Now in its 40th edition, this well-known handbook
is prepared by the Central Office of Information
with the co-operation of other government depart¬
ments and many national organisations. Updated
every year to include all the latest facts and figures
on most aspects of our way of life, Britain 1989
looks at history, politics and law, economic and
social affairs, arts and sport. Illustrated with colour
plates, maps and diagrams, it’s an invaluable
source of information for visitors as well as a
useful reference work for residents.
£ 13.95 net
