M4S£~3
GrX31 11
A Year Book of the Commonwealth
The present Commonwealth as a free association of sovereign
nations is the outcome of the development of self-government
in the older British Dominions and, more immediately, of their
demand during the First World War for an equally full control
of their own foreign policy. This Year Book includes an
outline of the constitutional development of the
Commonwealth and the nature of Britain’s relations with
Commonwealth countries, a list of British and Commonwealth
representatives and their offices in London, with a description
of each of the countries, their histories, organisation, social
conditions, industries, economies and constitutions, land
policy, government and officers concerned. A useful
reference for all seeking concise information on the
Commonwealth countries, from Australia to Zimbabwe, and
contacts abroad.
The above is available from HMSO bookshops and agents or
write to:—
HMSO, PO Box 569, London SE1 9NY.
Britain
1983
An Official Handbook
An Official Handbook
LONDON: HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
© Crown copyright 1983
First published 1983
Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
Government Bookshops
49 High Holborn, London WCiV 6HB
13a Castle Street, Edinburgh EH2 3AR
Brazennose Street, Manchester M60 8AS
Southey House, Wine Street, Bristol BSi 2BQ
258 Broad Street, Birmingham Bi 2HE
80 Chichester Street, Belfast BT1 4JY
Government publications are also available
through booksellers
Obtainable in the United States of America
from Kraus - Thompson Organisation Ltd,
Millwood, New York 10546
£13
A
tft
<25 Vi# FE .53
\?983^
ISBN 0 11 701027 8
Contents
Page
Introduction 1X
1 Land and People 1
Introduction 1
The Four Lands 4
Physical Features l9
The Social Framework 20
2 Government 31
The Monarchy 31
Parliament 35
The Privy Council 47
Her Majesty’s Government 47
Government Departments 51
The Civil Service 57
Local Government 61
The Fire Services 67
3 Overseas Relations 69
Membership of the European Community 71
The Commonwealth 76
International Peace and Security 80
Britain and the United Nations 83
Other International Organisations 85
Development Co-operation 86
4 Defence 92
Civil Defence 98
Defence Procurement 98
5 Justice and the Law too
The Law 100
Criminal Justice 100
Civil Justice ll&
Administration of the Law 120
6 Social Welfare 124
National Health Service 124
Personal Social Services 132
Social Security 135
Voluntary Service 142
7 Education 145
The Youth Service J59
8 The Environment 161
Housing !63
Conservation 171
Control of Pollution 177
9 The Churches
182
10 National Economy
11 Framework of Industry
12 Manufacturing and Service Industries
Manufacturing
Construction
Service Industries
13 Energy and Natural Resources
Energy
Non-fuel Minerals
Water
14 Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
Agriculture
Fisheries
Forestry
15 Transport and Communications
Inland Transport
Ports
Shipping
Civil Aviation
Communications
16 Employment
17 Public Finance
18 Banking and Financial Institutions
19 Overseas Trade and Payments
Overseas Trade
Balance of Payments
20 Promotion of Science and Technology
21 Promotion of the Arts
22 The Press
23 Television and Radio
24 Sport and Recreation
Appendix 1
Currency
Metric Equivalents for British Weights and Measures
Bank and Public Holidays in Britain, 1983
Appendix 2
Guide to Sources
187
195
212
212
234
236
244
244
263
265
268
268
277
279
281
281
291
293
295
300
304
322
332
343
343
349
353
364
378
386
393
403
403
403
404
405
405
Index
407
Diagrams
Availability of certain durable goods 27
The Royal Family: genealogical tree 33
Regional distribution of bilateral aid 1981 87
Housing by tenure I^3
Final expenditure at market prices in 1981 192
Distribution of personal income before and after tax: 1978-79 193
Components of consumers’ expenditure in 1971 and 1981 194
Manufacturing net output and index of production 213
Capital expenditure by manufacturing industry 1981 215
Primary energy consumption 24^
Aircraft and helicopters operated by British Airways in June 1982 298
Planned public expenditure 1982-83 323
Maps     
Fold-in map inside back cover
Britain 5
Membership of the European Community 71
Enterprise zones and new towns
Oil 248
Gas 252
Coal 255
Electricity 258
Some minerals produced in Britain 264
Main railway passenger routes 289
Photographs 
A Royal Family
Castles
Prisoners aid the blind
Submarine cables
Advances in television
Computer-controlled telex exchange
Tyne and Wear metro
Navigation aids
Biogas
Science parks
Old and new building
Museums
New fruit
Sport
Facing page 38
Between pages 38 and 39
Facing page 39
Facing page 166
Between pages 166 and 167
Facing page 167
Facing page 262
Between pages 262 and 263
Between pages 262 and 263
Facing page 263
Facing page 358
Between pages 358 and 359
Between pages 358 and 359
Facing page 359
Acknowledgement is made to Standard Telephones and Cables Limited for technical advice
on optical fibre cables (cover).
Acknowledgement is made for photographs to: Bidwells, managing agent for Trinity
College, for Cambridge Science Park (facing p 263); R Siefert and Partners for Cutlers
Gardens (facing p 358); The City Museum and Art Gallery, Stoke on Trent for museum
and art gallery (between pp 358 and 359); The British Engineerium Trust Limited for
British Engineerium (between pp 358 and 359).
The cover shows a diagrammatic representation of optical fibre cables. This new technology
is being increasingly used in telecommunications systems (see pp 302 and 219).
The year 1983 has been proclaimed World Communications Year by the United Nations in
recognition of the fundamental importance of communications infrastructures in the
economic and social development of all countries.
Introduction
Britain 19831$, the thirty-fourth official handbook in the series; it has
been prepared and revised by Reference Services, Publications
Division, of the Central Office of Information. The handbook is
widely known as an established work of reference and is the mainstay
of the reference facilities provided by British information services in
many countries. It is on sale by Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
throughout the world.
Britain 1983 describes many features in the life of the country,
including the workings of the government and other major insti¬
tutions. It does not attempt an analytical approach to current events.
Care should be taken when studying British statistics to note
whether they refer to England, to England and Wales (considered
together for many administrative and other purposes), to Great
Britain, which comprises England, Wales and Scotland, or to the
United Kingdom (which is the same as Britain, that is, Great Britain
and Northern Ireland) as a whole.
The factual and statistical information in Britain 1983 is compiled
with the co-operation of other government departments and
agencies, and of many other organisations. Sources of more detailed
and more topical information (including statistics) are mentioned in
the text and a guide to official sources is given in Appendix 2.
The text, generally, is based on information available up to
September 1982.
Reference Services
Publications Division
Central Office of Information, London
i Land and People
Historical
Outline
England and
Wales
INTRODUCTION
Britain comprises Great Britain (England, Wales and Scotland) and
Northern Ireland, and is one of the ten member states of the European
Community. Its full name is the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
The word Britain derives from Greek and Latin names probably stemming
from a Celtic original, which is also reflected in the name of the region of
north-western France (‘Brittany’ in English) settled by migrants from
Britain in the fifth and sixth centuries ad. Although, in the prehistoric time
scale, the Celts were relatively late arrivals in the British Isles (following
cultures which had produced such notable monuments as the stone circles
of Avebury and Stonehenge) it is only with them that Britain emerges into
recorded history, and the term Celtic is often used rather generally to
distinguish the earlier inhabitants of the British Isles from the later Anglo-
Saxon invaders.
Following sorties by Julius Caesar in 55 and 54 bc Britain was occupied
by the Romans in the first century ad and an ordered civilisation was
established under their rule for two or three hundred years except in the
territory north of Hadrian’s Wall (across northern England) and in some
western areas. Christian missionaries arrived not only in Roman Britain
but in Scotland and Ireland.
The final Roman withdrawal in the fifth century, however, followed a long
period of increasing disorder during which there began raids on the island
from northern Europe—mainly by peoples traditionally described as
Angles (from Schleswig), Saxons and Jutes. It is from the Angles (who are
reputed to have settled mainly in the region now known as East Anglia) that
the name England derives. In the following two centuries the raids turned
into settlement and the establishment of a number of small kingdoms (with
the Britons, or Celts, maintaining an independent existence in the areas
now known as Wales and Cornwall). Among these, powerful kingdoms
claiming overlordship over the whole country were established, first in the
north (Northumbria), then in the central area (Mercia) and finally in the
south (Wessex). However, the rise of Wessex in the ninth century was
contemporaneous with further raids and settlement from Europe, in this
case by the Vikings from Scandinavia. In the tenth century the Wessex
dynasty defeated the invading Danes and established a wide-ranging
authority in England. A second wave of Danish invasions, however, led to
the establishment of a Danish dynasty in England between 1017 and 1042,
when the Wessex line was restored.
The last successful invasion of England took place following a disputed
succession when Duke William of Normandy (a duchy established by the
Vikings and owing only nominal allegiance to the French king) enforced
his claims by defeating the English at the Battle of Hastings in 1066. There
was considerable settlement by Normans and others from France, French
became the language of the nobility for the next three centuries and the
2
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Scotland
legal and, to some extent, social structure was influenced by that which
prevailed across the Channel. The monarchy established by William and
his successors was (except in intervals of civil war) considerably more
effective both in administrative and military terms than its predecessors
and it began to establish its authority over increasingly wide areas of the
British Isles. This policy was pushed forward with most energy by Edward I
(1272-1307). His most lasting success was in Wales, the main stronghold
into which the Britons had retreated. With the death in battle in 1282 of the
Welsh Prince Llewellyn the royal authority became firmly established
there. Edward gave his own heir the title of ‘Prince of Wales’ which has
subsequently been borne by the eldest son of the sovereign. The rising led
by Owain Glyndwr at the beginning of the fifteenth century showed strong
continuing Welsh national feeling but a new dimension to the situation was
provided by the accession to the English throne in 1485 of Henry VII of the
Welsh House of Tudor. Wales was politically assimilated to England under
the Act of Union of 1535.
A more diflicult problem for English kings was that of relations with
Scotland. Hadrian’s Wall had proved no insurmountable barrier between
the Romans and their northern neighbours, and far-reaching expeditions
both by the Romans into Scotland and by the Piets into England took place.
In the sixth century the Scots from Ireland or ‘Scotia’ settled in the areas
of Scotland now known as Argyll. What is now Lothian was English in
population and Welsh (Britons) moved north from the invading English
into Strathclyde. A united kingdom, under the Scots king Kenneth
MacAlpine, emerged in the ninth century while Scotland, like England,
was endeavouring to defend itself against the Vikings.
Whether and in what sense the Scottish kingdom owed allegiance to
that of England was, from its inception, a subject of endless dissension
contributing to intermittent and inconclusive border warfare throughout
the Middle Ages, though the idea of uniting the two countries by force
ended with the English defeat at Bannockburn in 1314.
The eventual unification of the crowns reflected the fact that, after the
reformation (Henry VIII’s break away in 1534 from the supreme authority
of the Roman Catholic Church), old national antagonisms had become less
important than religious differences. Following the death of Henry’s
daughter Elizabeth I in 1603, the Protestant James Stuart, James VI of
Scotland, was welcomed to the English throne as James I. England, Wales
and Scotland were henceforth known as Great Britain. Apart from the
union of the monarchies, however, England and Scotland remained
separate during the seventeenth century, except for an enforced unifi¬
cation by Oliver Cromwell early in the brief period of the Commonwealth
(1649-1660) after he had defeated royalist forces in Scotland. By the
beginning of the following century political and economic arguments for a
closer union were making themselves heard in both countries. Eventually,
in 1707, both sides agreed on the formation of a single parliament for Great
Britain although Scotland retained its own system of law and church
settlement. The union was put under strain when Queen Anne died in 1714
and George, Elector of Hanover (descended from James I) succeeded the
Stuarts on the British throne. ‘Jacobite’ rebellions on behalf of the exiled
members of the House of Stuart took place in 1715 and 1745 and it was from
the highlands of Scotland that they attracted most of their, in the event,
rather ineffective support.
LAND AND PEOPLE
3
Ireland
In Ireland, out of a patchwork of Celtic and pre-Celtic peoples similar to
that in Britain, a number of kingdoms had emerged before the Christian
era; any supremacy established by one over the others in the following
1,000 years was of a shadowy and temporary nature. In cultural matters
Ireland was to compare favourably with the remainder of Europe during
the Dark Ages and, in particular, Christianity survived in Ireland when it
had been swamped for the time being in England by pagan Anglo-Saxon
invaders. Ireland, however, did not escape the incursions of the Vikings,
who were to dominate the country during the tenth century.
In 1169 Henry II of England launched an invasion of Ireland, the over¬
lordship of which he had been granted by the Pope who was anxious to
bring the Irish church into full obedience to Rome. A large part of the
country came under the control of Anglo-Norman magnates but their
descendants tended to assimilate to their new country and little direct
authority was exercised from England during the Middle Ages.
The Tudor monarchs showed a much greater tendency to intervene in
Ireland. Henry VIII’s assumption of the title of King of Ireland in 1541
arose from his desire to apply the reformation settlement and from this time
on the religious issue was to produce far-reaching and often tragic con¬
sequences. The determination to establish royal authority in Ireland was
strengthened during the reign of Elizabeth I by the fear that the country
might be used by Philip of Spain in his efforts to subjugate England, and a
series of bitterly fought campaigns were waged against Irish insurgents.
The main focus of the resistance was the northern province of Ulster and,
with its collapse in 1607, Ulster became an area of settlement by immigrants
from Scotland and England. (There was settlement by immigrants else¬
where in Ireland though on a lesser scale.)
The English civil war of 1642-52 led to further risings in Ireland which
were ruthlessly crushed by Cromwell. The restoration of the monarchy in
1660 was followed by the accession of the Roman Catholic James II to the
throne in 1685, and there was more fighting after his deposition three years
later in favour of the Protestant William of Orange and his wife Mary.
During most of the eighteenth century there was an uneasy peace and
towards its end various efforts were made by British governments to
achieve stability. In 1782 the Irish Parliament (dating from medieval
times) was given legislative independence; the only constitutional tie with
England was the Crown. The Parliament represented, however, only the
privileged Anglo-Irish minority, who had obtained possession of most of
the agricultural land, and Catholics were excluded from it. Against the
background of an abortive rebellion in 1798 and the prospect of inter¬
vention by France (with which England was at war between 1793 and 1800)
the Irish Parliament was induced to vote for union with what, from 1801,
was to be the Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland.
The ‘Irish question’ continued as one of the major problems of British
politics during the nineteenth century. In 1886 the Liberal Government
under Gladstone introduced a Home Rule Bill which would have given an
Irish Parliament authority over most internal matters while reserving to
Britain control over external affairs. This led to a split in the Liberal Party
and the failure of the Bill. It was not until 1914 that Home Rule was en¬
acted by the Government of Ireland Act. Its implementation was, how¬
ever, prevented both by the threat of armed resistance on the part of the
Protestant majority in Ulster and by the outbreak of the first world war.
4
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Channel Islands
and Isle of Man
ENGLAND
Government
A nationalist uprising in Dublin in 1916 was suppressed, but with the
end of the first world war a guerrilla force known as the Irish Republican
Army (IRA) began operations against the British administration. In 1921 a
settlement was reached under which six of the nine counties of the province
of Ulster received their own Parliament, but remained represented in and
subject to the supreme authority of the British Parliament, while the
remainder of Ireland as the Irish Free State (later to become the Irish
Republic) became a self-governing state outside the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Although the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man are not part of the
United Kingdom, they have a special relationship with it because of the
antiquity of their connection with the Crown. The Channel Islands were
integrated into the Duchy of Normandy in the tenth and eleventh centuries
and have been territories of the Crown ever since the Conquest. The Isle of
Man was under the nominal sovereignty of Norway until 1266 when it was
ceded to Scotland, subsequently passing to the Earls of Derby for a period
but eventually coming under the direct administration of the Crown in
i?65- Today the territories are Crown dependencies, with their own
legislative assemblies and systems of local administration and of law, and
their own courts. The British Government is responsible for their defence,
their international relations and, ultimately, their good government.
THE FOUR LANDS
In the following pages, brief descriptions of England, Wales, Scotland and
Northern Ireland bring together, for each of the countries, a number of
topics which are dealt with more fully in later chapters. For Northern
Ireland, some background to the present political position is included.
England is predominantly a lowland country. There are upland regions in
the north (the Pennine Chain, the Cumbrian mountains and the Yorkshire
moorlands) and in the south-west in Devon and Cornwall. For the most
part, however, the country is undulating or flat and, in the south, crossed by
low ranges of hills including the Cotswolds and the Kent and Sussex
Downs. The greatest concentrations of population are in the London and
Thames estuary areas, the west Yorkshire and north-west industrial cities,
the midlands conurbation around Birmingham, the north-east conurbation
on the rivers Tyne and Fees, and along the Channel coast. (For main urban
districts, see Table 2, p 23). Immigration from Europe over the centuries
has led to the establishment of Irish and Jewish communities in many of the
larger cities. In the latter part of the twentieth century immigrants from the
South Asian subcontinent and the Caribbean have also formed distinctive
urban communities.
England has no government minister or department exclusively respon¬
sible for its central administration of domestic affairs, in contrast to Wales,
Scotland and Northern Ireland. Instead responsibility is shared among a
number of government departments, whose responsibilities in some cases
also cover aspects of affairs in Wales and Scotland. There are 516 members
of Parliament for England in the House of Commons, and arrangements are
made for the discussion of English affairs. Traditionally, of the two major
political parties, the Conservatives find their support chiefly in rural areas,
FRANCE
6
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
while the Labour Party derives its main support from urban industrialised
areas. In the 1979 election England returned 306 Conservative members of
Parliament, 203 Labour and 7 Liberal. (A section on the Party System can
be found in Chapter 2.) Local government outside London is administered
through a two-tier system of 45 counties subdivided into districts. Apart
from six metropolitan counties created in 1974 and based on the largest
conurbations, the counties’ histories can for the most part be traced back a
thousand years to the administrative units, or ‘shires’, of the Saxon period.
The two-tier system was introduced among the local government reforms
of 19745 in response to the gradual expansion of local authority responsi¬
bilities. London is administered, under reforms introduced in 1965, by a
central council and 33 bodies responsible for particular areas.
Table 1: General Statistics
England Wales Scotland Northern United
Ireland Kingdom
Population
(’ooo, April 1981)
Area
(sq km)
(sq miles)
Population density
(persons per sq km, April 1981)
(persons per sq mile, April 1981)
Gross domestic
product
(£ per head, 1980)
Employees in
employment
(’000, mid-1981)
Percentage of
employees in:
(June 1981, provisional)
agriculture, forestry and fishing
engineering and allied industries
all other manufacturing
construction
mining, quarrying, gas,
electricity and water
service industries
Unemployment rate
(percent, June 1981)
Average gross weekly
earnings
(£, all full-time men, April 1981)
Identifiable public
expenditure
(£ per head, 1980-81)
46,221 2,790
I3°i439 20,768
50,363 8,018
354
915
1-6
i3'5
15-6
5-0
30
61-3
io-6
134
343
3>43i 2,937
17,890 914
25
to-5
158
65
6-2
586
139
1410 132-7
L339 L759
5,H7
78,772
30,414
65
168
3,229
1,927
23
10-4
150
7'5
34
61 5
i3'5
1400
1,696
i,547
14,121
5,452
no
284
2,518
467
1- 9
80
16-2
61
2- 3
660
129-7
1,946
55,676
244,100
94,247
228
591
3,363
21,198
i-7
12-9
15-6
5'3
3'2
6i'3
140-5
Sources: See Appendix 2
aGreat Britain only
Eight ‘standard’ regions in England are delimited principally for
statistical purposes: South East, East Anglia, South West, West Midlands,
East Midlands, Yorkshire and Humberside, North West and North. They
LAND AND PEOPLE
7
The Economy
play no part in local government and do not always coincide with the
regional units adopted by central government departments. (Standard
regions are shown on p 169.)
The legal system of England comprises on the one hand a historic body
of conventions, known as ‘common law’ and ‘equity’, and on the other
parliamentary and European Community legislation. Common law stems
from the work of the king’s judges after the Norman conquest of 1066 who
sought to bring together into a single body of legal principles the various
local customs of the Anglo-Saxons. Great reliance was placed on precedent,
and the practice of reporting on cases commenced in the thirteenth century.
Equity law derives from the practice of petitioning the king’s Chancellor in
cases not covered by common law. The English legal system is therefore
distinct from many of those of Western Europe which have codes deriving
from Roman Law. The Habeas Corpus Act 1679 is a fundamental statute
forbidding imprisonment without trial.
Up to the eighteenth century the English economy was mainly agrarian
and the chief manufacture was wool cloth. Trade, particularly following
voyages of exploration, developed rapidly. London as the capital city, and a
major port and mercantile centre, and the textile areas (East Anglia, south¬
western England and west Yorkshire) were the most populous and pros¬
perous regions. In the late eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, however,
rapid growth took place in the midlands, the north-west, west Yorkshire
and the north-east, where the coalfields, iron ore deposits and ports
permitted Britain to become the first industrialised nation, basing its
wealth on coal mining, on the manufacture of iron and steel, heavy
machinery and textiles, on shipbuilding and on trade. London enhanced its
position with the growing strength of the economy but East Anglia and the
west country, remote from areas of industrial development, were affected
by agricultural depression, and entered a period of relative decline.
In the twentieth century, the second period of industrialisation, based on
new sources of energy, new manufacturing industries and new forms of
transport, has continued to change the broad pattern of regional and
industrial development in England. In the 1920s and 1930s the northern
industrial centres saw their traditional industries weakened owing to
fluctuations in world trade and competition from other industrialising
countries and, in some cases, from substitute products. London, its sur¬
rounding counties and the West Midlands generally benefited from the
newer, more mobile, industries. These included chemicals (such as phar¬
maceuticals, dyes, plastics and artificial fibres), electrical and electronic
engineering, vehicle manufacture, aircraft building, instrument engineer¬
ing, aluminium and rubber manufacture and a wide range of consumer
goods, including processed food, drink and tobacco products as well as
durables. In the latter half of the century, the continued expansion of the
newer industries has combined with the effects of new and expanding
towns programmes, aimed at reducing overcrowding in the older urban
centres, to produce further economic growth in the counties around
London (especially to the north of it), and expansion in East Anglia and
in the South West. At the same time successive governments have sup¬
ported measures to make the older industrial regions attractive to new
industries and more recently to revive economic activity in inner urban
areas. Rationalisation programmes for the steel, coal and shipbuilding
industries have been implemented.
8
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
East Anglia, still largely agricultural, was the fastest growing English
region in both population and industrial activity in the 1960s and 1970s.
Particular growth points have been Peterborough, the east coast ports
(which, besides benefiting from relative proximity to the northern Euro¬
pean Community countries, have in some cases become important bases for
the development of gas resources in the southern North Sea) and nine
towns receiving population overspill from London. Food processing,
agricultural machinery, vehicle engines and electronic and instrument
engineering are the strongest industries, and the service sector has been
growing in Cambridge, Ipswich and Norwich.
Greater London and the industrial cities of the West Midlands, the
North West, Yorkshire and Humberside and the North continue to repre¬
sent the largest concentrations of manufacturing industry. London is an
important area for products of all kinds including food and drink (especially
brewing), instrument engineering, electrical and electronic engineering,
clothing, furniture and printing. Of importance in the surrounding south¬
eastern counties are oil refining (along the Thames and near Southampton),
pharmaceuticals, pumps, valves and compressors, instrument engineering,
electronics (particularly in Berkshire and Hertfordshire, and around
Chelmsford), motor vehicles, aerospace, building materials, timber, paper
and plastics products. There is diversity, too, in the North West, with
significant activity in food processing (especially grain milling, bread and
flour confectionery and biscuits), chemicals of all kinds, textile machinery,
insulated wires and cables, computers (Manchester being one of the largest
centres in the country), motor vehicles, aerospace, clothing, glass making
(with the world’s largest flat glass maker, Pilkington’s, in St Helens), paper
and rubber products. Lancashire is the centre of the cotton and allied textile
industries.
The characteristic manufactures of the West Midlands are metals (steel
tubes, iron castings and non-ferrous metals), machine tools, electrical
engineering, motor vehicles, carpets, pottery (with over 80 per cent of
Britain s ceramic industry located in Staffordshire) and rubber production.
Of the other regions, Yorkshire and Humberside has important shares of
cocoa, chocolate and confectionery production, iron and steel, machine
tools, textile machinery, woollen and worsted goods (producing about two-
thirds of Britain’s wool textiles), carpets, clothing and glass containers.
The North has general chemicals, iron and steel, process plant, shipbuild¬
ing and marine engineering, and clothing; the East Midlands has steel
tubes, iron castings, over two-thirds of Britain’s hosiery and knitted goods
industry, and footwear; and the South West has food processing (especially
dairy products), aerospace, pumps, valves and compressors, and paper
products.
In agriculture, large and medium-sized holdings are proportionately
more important in England than elsewhere in Britain, and the proportion of
mixed holdings has been falling, as part of a general tendency towards
greater specialisation. Dairying is most common in the west of England,
where the wetter climate encourages the growth of good grass; sheep and
cattle are reared in the hilly and moorland areas of northern and south¬
western England; and arable farming, pig and poultry farming and horti¬
culture are concentrated in the east and south. Horticulture is also im¬
portant in the West Midlands. Forestry is mainly found in the North,
South East and South West regions. The principal fishing ports are in the
South West and on the east coast.
LAND AND PEOPLE
9
Cultural and
Social Life
England has plentiful energy resources in its coalfields and from nuclear
power stations and has access to offshore oil and gas reserves. (The elec¬
tricity grid of England and Wales is the largest interconnected power
network under unified control in the Western world.) About 60 per cent of
Britain’s deepmined coal is produced in the East Midlands and Yorkshire
coalfields, the former being the most productive in the country. There
are seven nuclear power stations around the coasts of southern England,
and projects to construct two more in the north and one on the south
coast are nearing completion. The world’s first large-scale nuclear power
station was established at Calder Hall in Cumbria in 19565 while sub¬
stantial investment in reprocessing capacity is being undertaken nearby.
Important mineral deposits in England include aggregates for the con¬
struction industry (sand, gravel and crushed rock), industrial minerals
(including clay, salt from the North West and china clay from Cornwall),
tin ore, also from Cornwall, and iron ore from the East Midlands and
Humberside. Investment in water resources includes the construction of
the Kielder Reservoir in Northumbria, completed in 1980; when filled, in
1982, it became one of Europe’s largest man-made lakes.
A motorway network has been constructed in England since the 1950s
and at present comprises four long-distance arterial routes linking London
and the cities of the midlands, the north and north-west and the south-west,
and over 30 shorter motorways, mainly near London and Manchester.
Priority is being given to the London orbital route and schemes of in¬
dustrial importance. Inter-city travel has been improved by the introduc¬
tion of high-speed rail services which are among the fastest in the world.
Many ports have been equipped to deal with new developments in shipping
(such as container ships) and to take account of changes in the nature of
trade brought about by the increase in oil traffic through North Sea ports.
The major airports are Heathrow (the largest international airport in the
world) and Gatwick, both serving London, and Manchester and Luton.
Employment in service industries has accounted for an increasing share
of total employment in recent years, expansion being particularly marked
in financial and business services. London is one of the world’s leading
centres of banking, insurance and other financial services. Decentralisation
of some office services from the capital has led to a growth in office
employment in the South West and East Anglia in particular. London and
the surrounding counties account for two-thirds of advertising and market
research activity, more than half of all services offered by research estab¬
lishments (other than those attached to businesses), half of central govern¬
ment services and nearly half of non-food wholesale distribution in England.
After London and the South East, the North West, with its main centre in
Manchester, is the next most important concentration of service industries.
Tourism and catering have also expanded: overseas visitors spent about
£2,725 million in England in 1981, two-thirds of it in London. They are,
however, tending to spend more time in areas outside London in the south¬
east, the south-west and the midlands. The south-west is the most popular
region for domestic tourism, accounting for more than a fifth of main
holidays. The Lake District, with 11 major lakes, and peaks including
Scafell (England’s highest point, at 978 metres, 3,210 feet), is also very
popular with walkers and climbers.
Cultural life in England takes so many forms that a brief summary can only
attempt to suggest its variety. London alone has about 40 main ‘West End’
WALES
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
theatres, a similar number of small ‘fringe’ theatres, about a dozen major
centres for music concerts, ballet and opera, seven major art galleries, a
dozen major museums (with over 80 smaller galleries and museums), some
400 public libraries, and over 140 West End, local and independent cine¬
mas. In a typical week there are some 50 lectures, 30 poetry readings, and
over 500 jazz, rock or folk music performances, as well as discotheques, bingo
halls, amusement arcades, ice and roller skating rinks and swimming pools.
With its ceremonial occasions, palaces, other historic buildings and shops,
London is also one of the world’s leading tourist centres. About 15 attrac¬
tions (Westminster Abbey, the Tower of London, Madame Tussaud’s, the
London Zoo and the museums and art galleries) each receive more than a
million visitors a year.
Because of its size and its position as the capital city, London is not
representative of the rest of England, but much the same broad range of
cultural interests is reflected in most other cities and towns. There are, for
example, about 280 theatre centres and no fringe theatres elsewhere in
England, the combined total representing an increase of over 20 theatres
between 1975 and 1981. The English Tourist Board lists some 1,130 art
galleries, museums, and similar institutions in the rest of England. A recent
development has been the growth of leisure centres where a wide range of
recreations is offered. Distinctive features of the northern industrial cities
are special social clubs, working men’s clubs, which attract major inter¬
national entertainers. In addition to urban cultural activities there are many
rural or outdoor recreations which are strongly supported and there is
active interest in numerous games and sports, many of them having been
devised in England.
The English love of gardens and landscapes is associated with a tradition
of sightseeing visits to the numerous country houses, gardens and unspoilt
rural and coastal areas. There are seven national parks, two forest parks,
some 30 designated ‘areas of outstanding natural beauty’, about 140 country
parks approved by the Countryside Commission, 550 ‘outstanding con¬
servation areas’, 620 km (385 miles) of designated heritage coastline and
1,550 historic buildings and gardens listed by the English Tourist Board.
New developments include the opening of safari and wildlife parks and of
‘theme’ parks devoted, for example, to maritime history, which offer a diver¬
sity of entertainments as well. Many regions and towns have associations
with the great English writers and artists, such as William Shakespeare,
William Wordsworth, Jane Austen, Charles Dickens, the Bronte sisters,
Thomas Hardy, Thomas Gainsborough and John Constable.
Wales is a country of hills and mountains with extensive tracts of high
plateau and shorter stretches of mountain ranges deeply dissected by river
valleys. The highest mountains are in Snowdonia in the north-west; the
highest peak is Snowdon (1,085 metres, 3,560 feet). The lower-lying
ground is largely confined to the relatively narrow coastal belt and the lower
parts of the river valleys. The main areas of settlement are in the southern
valleys and coastal areas where two-thirds of the population live. The chief
urban centres are Cardiff, Swansea and Newport. Wales is a principality;
Prince Charles, the heir to the throne, was invested by the Queen with the
title of Prince of Wales at a special ceremony at Caernarfon Castle in 1969
when he was 21.
The country has its own Welsh language, spoken (according to the 1981
census) by 19 per cent of the population, chiefly in the rural north and west.
Government
The Economy
LAND AND PEOPLE 1 1
The Welsh name of the country is Cymru. Measures have been adopted
since the 1960s to revive the use of the language, which is of Celtic origin,
and closely resembles Breton, spoken in Brittany in France. They include
recognising the equal validity of Welsh with English in law courts, the
encouragement of bilingual education in schools, and the extended use of
Welsh for official purposes and in broadcasting. A fourth television chan¬
nel is being established which will transmit Welsh-language television
programmes.
There is no established church in Wales, the Anglican church having
been disestablished in 1920 following decades of pressure from adherents
of the more evangelical Methodist and Baptist persuasions. Methodism in
particular had spread rapidly in Wales in the eighteenth century, assuming
the nature of a popular movement among Welsh speakers and finding
strong support later in industrial communities.
The country returns 36 of the 635 elected members of Parliament and there
are special arrangements for the discussion of Welsh affairs. For the last 60
years the industrial communities of Wales have always supported the
Labour Party in elections, ensuring a Labour majority in Wales. In the
1979 election 21 Labour, 11 Conservative, 2 Plaid Cymru (Welsh National¬
ist) and 1 Liberal members were returned. The remaining Welsh seat is
held by the Speaker. Substantial administrative autonomy is Centred on
the Secretary of State for Wales, who is a member of the Cabinet, and has
wide-ranging responsibilities relating to the economy, welfare services and
the provision of amenities. The headquarters of the administration is the
Welsh Office in Cardiff, which also has an office in London. In 1979
proposals for the establishment of an elected Welsh assembly in Cardiff to
take over policymaking and executive powers from central government
were rejected in a referendum held in Wales. Local government is exercised
through a system of elected authorities similar to that of the English
counties, and the legal system is identical with that of England.
The south Wales coalfield was developed during the latter part of the
industrial revolution in the second half of the nineteenth century creating
populous urban centres which drew labour from the rural areas and from
England and Ireland. However, the economy was narrowly based, mainly
on coal, iron, steel and tinplate, and contracted sharply during the 1920s
and 1930s, resulting in severe employment problems and substantial emi¬
gration. Since 1945 the Government’s regional policies have introduced a
diverse spread of manufacturing firms to help to offset the contraction in the
traditional basic industries. These new firms have included investment by a
growing number of overseas firms, most recently, for example, by the Ford
Motor Company and Japanese and American electronics concerns. (Wales
is now developing as an important centre for electronics in Britain.) In
addition, there is a range of modern light engineering concerns as well as
chemical and plastics plants, while the Royal Mint was transferred to
Llantrisant from London in 1968. South Wales remains the principal
industrial area but new manufacturing firms have also been introduced on
the smaller coalfield in north-east Wales, around Wrexham and Deesside,
again to offset the decline in the older, basic industries which previously
dominated the area. Light industry has also been attracted to the towns
in the rural areas in mid- and north Wales and an important refinery com¬
plex has developed around Milford Haven which is one of Britain s major
oil ports.
12
Cultural and
Social Life
SCOTLAND
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Agriculture occupies about 72 per cent of the land area, the main
activities being sheep and cattle rearing in the hill regions and dairy farm¬
ing in the lowlands. Wales accounts for about 11 per cent of forest area in
Britain and about 20 per cent of public sector (Forestry Commission)
timber production.
Wales produces about 9 per cent of Britain’s coal, including all of its
anthracite, and 9 per cent of its electricity; one of the biggest pumped
storage power stations in the world is under construction at Dinorwic.
There are nuclear power stations at Wylfa and Trawsfynydd. Wales
exports about a third of its water supply to England.
Communications in the south have been greatly improved, with the
building of the Severn Bridge and the completion of motorway and high¬
speed rail links with England.
There has been expansion in financial and professional services and in
the tourism and catering trades. With its north coast resorts, and the
attractions of three national parks (Snowdonia, the Brecon Beacons and the
Pembrokeshire Coast), Wales accounts for 15 per cent of Britain’s domestic
tourism.
There is much literary, musical and dramatic activity in Wales and there is a
National Library and National Museum. Welsh literature is one of the
oldest in Europe. The country is well known for its choral singing and the
Welsh National Opera has achieved an international reputation. The
special festivals of Wales, known as eisteddfodau, encourage Welsh litera¬
ture and music. The greatest of these is the Royal National Eisteddfod of
Wales, held annually, entirely in Welsh, and consisting of competitions in
music, singing, prose and poetry. The small town of Llangollen has
extended its eisteddfod to include artists from all over the world in the
annual International Eisteddfod. Famous modern Welsh artists have in¬
cluded the opera singer Sir Geraint Evans and the poet Dylan Thomas.
The politicians David Lloyd George (former Prime Minister) and Aneurin
Bevan were noted orators in a strong Welsh tradition. An active local
press includes a number of Welsh language publications. Great interest is
aroused by the annual rugby football competition in which sides represent¬
ing Wales, England, Scotland, Ireland and France take part.
Health services are provided mainly under the National Health Service,
administered by the Welsh Office, while personal social services, and
education (except at university level), are provided mainly through the
local authorities. Educational provision is similar to that in England except
for the use of Welsh in some schools. The collegiate University of Wales,
founded in 1893, comprises seven member institutions. Wales has more old
houses than other regions of Britain, a situation which is being tackled by
substantial programmes of improvement and rehabilitation.
Scotland may be divided broadly into three areas: the sparsely populated
highlands and islands in the north, accounting for just over half the total
area of the country; the central lowlands, an area of undulating country,
with some hill ranges and containing three-quarters of the population and
most of the industrial centres and cultivated farmland; and the southern
uplands, containing a number of hill ranges, which border on England. The
highest mountains are the Grampians in the central highlands, with Ben
Nevis (1,342 metres, 4,406 feet) the highest peak. The chief urban centres
are the capital, Edinburgh, the main industrial centre, Glasgow, Aberdeen
and Dundee.
LAND AND PEOPLE
13
Government
Economy
The period from 1750 onwards has been one of considerable and con¬
tinuous emigration of Scots to England and overseas. The rate slowed
markedly in the 1970s as the offshore oil and gas industries developed and
there was inward migration to the north-east of Scotland. The large outflow
of people from Strathclyde has continued, however, though at a lower level
than before. In the mid-nineteenth century, as Scotland industrialised
rapidly, there was large-scale immigration from Ireland, which led to the
establishment of sizeable Roman Catholic communities.
The period from 1750 until the beginning of the twentieth century was
also one of stability and economic progress and of remarkable achievements
in many fields. Among the famous men to emerge were David Hume, Adam
Smith, Robert Adam, James Watt, John MacAdam, Lord Kelvin and
James Clerk-Maxwell.
The Church of Scotland, which became the established church in 1690,
has complete freedom in all matters of doctrine, order and discipline. It is a
Protestant church which is Presbyterian in form—that is, governed by a
hierarchy of church courts, each of which includes laymen.
There are special arrangements for the conduct of Scottish affairs within
the British system of government and separate Acts of Parliament are
passed for Scotland where appropriate. In the 1979 general election the 71
Scottish seats in the House of Commons were apportioned as follows:
Labour 44, Conservative 22, Liberal 3 and Scottish National 2. Since 1959
Scotland, like Wales, has had a majority of Labour members of Parliament.
Administrative tasks relating to a wide range of economic and social func¬
tions are the responsibility of the Secretary of State for Scotland, a member
of the Cabinet, working through the Scottish Office, with its administra¬
tive headquarters in Edinburgh, and an office in London. As in Wales, a
referendum held in Scotland in 1979 revealed insufficient support for an
elected assembly in Scotland.
Local government generally operates on a two-tier basis broadly similar
to that in England and Wales but established by separate legislation.
The principles and procedures of the Scottish legal system (particularly
in civil law) differ in many respects from those of England and Wales,
stemming from the adoption of elements of other European legal systems,
based on Roman law, during the sixteenth century.
In the first half of the twentieth century Scotland experienced the same
pressure on its chief industries as did the north of England and Wales, but
there has been considerable transition in the economy since 1945-
The most important development has been the expansion of offshore-
related industries following the discovery of oil and gas under the North
Sea. Some 80,000 to 95,000 jobs have arisen directly or indirectly as a result
of North Sea activities. While some traditional industries (coal, steel,
shipbuilding, textiles) have been in decline for a number of decades, oil-
related expansion has helped other traditional industries such as engineer¬
ing, and has combined with growth in newer industries, government
regional aid, and a high level of investment by overseas companies (especi¬
ally from the United States), to produce new areas of growth. The north
and north-east of Scotland have benefited most from the offshore develop¬
ments, with Aberdeen as the administrative centre.
Prominent among other newer industries is electronic engineering which
has developed greatly in the industrial centres of the Strathclyde, Lothian
14
Cultural and
Social Life
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and Tayside regions. Scotland is now an important electronics and high
technology centre. Employment has also grown in chemicals, especially
petrochemicals, food and drink industries and light engineering. The five
new towns (East Kilbride, Glenrothes, Livingston, Irvine and Cumber¬
nauld) have been notable growth areas.
The traditional Scottish manufactures—shipbuilding, textiles (high
quality tweeds, Harris tweed being especially well known, woollens and
knitwear) and whisky distilling—remain important.
Scotland has one-third of Britain’s total agricultural land, but 70 per cent
of it consists of hill grazing for cattle and sheep. About 10 per cent of the
agricultural area is used for crops, and 70 per cent of this is under barley.
Scotland accounts for half of Britain’s forest area and for 40 per cent of
public sector timber production. Fishing remains an important activity:
more than 60 per cent of total landings of fish in Britain are made by
Scottish vessels.
Despite the advent of oil, Scotland remains heavily dependent on elec¬
tricity and gas. Nuclear and hydro-electric generation supply a higher
proportion of energy than in any other part of Britain. Large supplies of
unpolluted water form a major resource.
Communications, both domestic and international, have improved in
many central and coastal areas, particularly in the north and north-east,
owing to the stimulus of the offshore oil industry and road and bridge¬
building programmes.
The offshore oil industry has also encouraged expansion in financial
and business services which have been traditionally strong in Scotland.
Tourism is of major importance and accounts for 10 per cent of domestic
tourism in Britain. Scotland’s cultural and historic associations, its varied
scenic beauty, and the opportunities for sport and recreation are particular
attractions. Scotland is the home of golf and courses at St Andrews,
Gleneagles, Turnberry and Prestwick are internationally renowned. Ski¬
ing is growing in importance, with centres at Aviemore, Glenshee, Glencoe
and Lecht.
A vigorous cultural life in Scotland has as its highlight the annual
Edinburgh International Festival. The Scottish Arts Council (a committee
of the Arts Council of Great Britain with a large degree of autonomy)
supports a wide range of activities. Notable performing arts bodies are the
Scottish National Orchestra, Scottish Opera, Scottish Ballet, Scottish
Chamber Orchestra, Scottish Baroque Ensemble and the BBC Scottish
Symphony Orchestra. Scotland possesses excellent collections of the fine
and applied arts, notably in the National Galleries of Scotland, the Royal
Scottish Museum and the National Museum of Antiquities in Edinburgh,
and the City of Glasgow Museums and Art Galleries.
A language of ancient Celtic origin, Scots Gaelic, is spoken by some
80,000 people mainly in the islands and north-west of Scotland. It is the
indigenous language, with its own literary background. Scottish people in
the lowlands have for centuries spoken a dialect of English known as ‘Scots’
or ‘Lallans’, which has its own recognised literary tradition and has seen a
revival in recent times.
An active press includes two daily newspapers based in Edinburgh and
Glasgow which have circulation outside Scotland. There are ten other
dailies and four Sunday newspapers. Articles in some papers are printed in
Gaelic. Television programmes are produced by BBC (Scotland) and by
LAND AND PEOPLE
15
NORTHERN
IRELAND
Government:
Background to
Civil
Disturbances
three independent companies, covering the highland, lowland and border
regions. BBC Radio Scotland covers most of the population and there are
five ‘community’ services in the highlands and islands, two of them mainly
in Gaelic. Independent radio stations provide services for Edinburgh,
Glasgow, Dundee/Perth, Aberdeen, Ayr and Inverness.
As in the rest of Britain the National Health Service, and local authority
social service, education and housing programmes provide for the welfare
of the community.
Local authorities are responsible for the provision of most education,
except at university level. Secondary education in Scotland is almost com¬
pletely organised on comprehensive lines. Independent bodies admini¬
ster vocational further education institutions and colleges of education.
There are eight universities, of which four (St Andrews, Glasgow, Aber¬
deen and Edinburgh) were established in the fifteenth and sixteenth
centuries, while the other four have been established since 1964- The
educational tradition has been particularly strong in Scotland, helping
many Scots to positions of eminence in the arts and sciences.
Over 50 per cent of Scotland’s housing has been built since 19455 only
Northern Ireland having a larger percentage. Scotland has a high propor¬
tion of housing rented from public authorities—over 50 per cent compared
with a national average of just over 30 per cent.
Northern Ireland is at its nearest point only 21 kilometres (13 miles) from
Scotland. It has a 412-kilometre (256-mile) border in the south and west
with the Irish Republic. At its centre lies Lough Neagh, Britain’s largest
freshwater lake (368 square km, 142 square miles). Many of the principal
towns lie in valleys leading from the Lough, including the capital, Belfast,
which stands at the mouth of the river Lagan. The Mourne Mountains
rising sharply in the south-east include Slieve Donard, Northern Ireland s
highest peak (852 metres, 2,796 feet).
Just under two-thirds of Northern Ireland’s population are descendants
of Scots or English settlers who crossed to north-eastern Ireland mainly in
the seventeenth century; most belong to the Protestant faith, and have a
traditional loyalty to the maintenance of the union with Great Britain. The
remainder, over a third, are Irish in origin, mainly Roman Catholic and, in
varying degrees, nationalist in political opinion, favouring union with the
Irish Republic. Deeply divided for generations, both sides of the com¬
munity have tended to see themselves as besieged minorities—Protestants
as a minority in the whole of Ireland, Roman Catholics as a minority within
Northern Ireland.
From 1921 Northern Ireland had its own Parliament in which the mainly
Protestant ‘Unionists’ formed the Government after successive elections.
Roman Catholics in the community resented this continuing domination,
and their exclusion from political office was accompanied by discrimination
in such matters as housing, employment and local voting rights. Although
substantial advances for the whole population were achieved in social
welfare and economic development, in some respects provision for the
Roman Catholics lagged behind that for the Protestants, and during the late
1960s an active and articulate civil rights movement emerged.
The sectarian disturbances which followed and the introduction of the
Army in 1969 in a peace-keeping role were exploited by extremists from
both sections of the community, notably the Provisional Irish Republican
Direct Rule and
Political
Initiatives
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Army (which broke away from the Official IRA in 1970, claiming to protect
the Roman Catholic minority). Subsequently, sectarian divisions have
been exacerbated by the actions of terrorists from both sides.
The demands of the civil rights movement were met by a series of
reforms. Among the most important were measures to ensure the proper
representation of minorities in local government and fairer housing allo¬
cations in the public sector.
More recent measures include the outlawing of religious and political
discrimination in employment, and the establishment of an independent
police complaints board. Commissioners have been appointed to look into
complaints of maladministration, including discrimination, by central or
local government; actions by official bodies have been made illegal if they
discriminate on religious or political grounds; a human rights commission
has been set up; and a law against sex discrimination has been imple¬
mented. While terrorism continues, certain emergency powers are in force
(see p 102), but there has been much concern to reconcile them as far as
possible with respect for individual liberties; the measures are temporary,
need regular renewal by Parliament and are subject to independent review.
Most traditional rights, including the freedom of the communications
media and the right to prosecute the security forces if they exceed their
authority, remain in force. Northern Ireland’s legal system, and the safe¬
guards it enshrines, is broadly similar to that in England and Wales.
The activities of many groups and individuals have indicated a wish in
both parts of the community to overcome intimidation by armed terrorists
and to resolve sectarian conflict by peaceful means, and, although terrorism
continues, the level of violence is much lower than some years ago. The
police take the primary role of maintaining order; the Army’s task is one of
assisting the civil authorities, and the number of soldiers on service has
been considerably reduced. Security policy rests on the principle of fair and
effective enforcement of the law by bringing terrorists to justice through the
courts. They are tried for criminal offences and not for political beliefs. At
the heart of the policy is a determination to develop the effectiveness of the
police to the point where military involvement in the maintenance of law
and order is no longer needed.
When, despite the Northern Ireland Government’s substantial reform
programme, the intercommunal violence continued, the United Kingdom
Government concluded that the best hope of ending terrorism and achiev¬
ing political progress would be for the United Kingdom Parliament and
Government to take over the responsibilities for law and order in Northern
Ireland. The Northern Ireland Government felt unable to accept this and
resigned, and in 1972 a period of ‘direct rule’ began, with a United
Kingdom Cabinet minister responsible for functions previously exercised
by the Northern Ireland Government and for the Northern Ireland depart¬
ments (see p 57).
Several major but unsuccessful initiatives towards stable and effec¬
tive devolved government supported by both sides of the community have
since been made. A new constitution which devolved powers to an elected
legislative assembly, and a ‘power-sharing’ executive representing all sec¬
tions of the community, encountered Protestant ‘Loyalist’ opposition
culminating in a general strike in 1974; in 1976 an elected constitutional
convention failed to agree on a system of government that would com¬
mand widespread acceptance; in 1978 a planned framework for a form of
LAND AND PEOPLE
I?
The Economy
devolution to consolidate common ground among the political parties was
rejected; and in 1980 there was a political conference and extensive dis¬
cussions. In 1981 the appointment of a Northern Ireland Council to advise
the Secretary of State was proposed but the political parties in Northern
Ireland were not prepared to accept this.
In 1982 the Government’s policy continued to rest on the two funda¬
mental principles that, first, there would be no change in Northern
Ireland’s status as part of the United Kingdom without the consent of the
majority of people of Northern Ireland, and second, any form of devolved
government must be acceptable to both sides of the community. In April,
the Government published proposals for the establishment of an elected,
78-seat, Northern Ireland Assembly with scrutinising, deliberative and
consultative functions and with a remit to recommend arrangements for
partial or full devolution of powers. The necessary legislation was enacted
and elections to the Assembly are to be held in October. The Government
believes that political progress is essential if peace and stability are to be
restored and a sounder economy promoted.
The future of Northern Ireland is a matter for the United Kingdom
Government and Parliament and the people of Northern Ireland, and the
principle of self-determination is enshrined in law. A 1973 ‘border poll’
showed clearly that the majority of people in Northern Ireland wished to
remain part of the United Kingdom. At the same time, the Government
attaches importance to co-operation with the Irish Republic, particularly
in security matters.
Northern Ireland at present returns 12 representatives to the United
Kingdom Parliament but the number is to be increased to 17.
Northern Ireland’s geographical position on the western edge of Europe,
its lack of many mineral or energy resources (both coal and oil have to be
imported), and the small size of the local market have all tended to favour
the concentration of industry and population on the eastern seaboard close
to trading links with the rest of the United Kingdom. Most of Northern
Ireland’s trade is with, or through, Great Britain. With certain exceptions,
the parts of the region beyond the immediate influence of the industrialised
area around Belfast have stayed mainly rural, with generally small and often
scattered communities relying mainly on farming.
Much of the nineteenth and early twentieth century growth of the
economy derived from important linen and shipbuilding industries sup¬
ported by a large agricultural sector. Since the mid-1950s major changes
have taken place, and the former dependence on a few traditional industries
has given way to a far more diversified industrial structure—to a consider¬
able extent as a result of policies to encourage industrial development in
order to broaden the region’s economic base. At the same time there has
been a marked growth in the service sector.
Belfast has Britain’s largest shipyard; and other well-established indus¬
trial activities include the manufacture of aircraft, textile machinery and a
wide range of engineering products, tobacco and clothing. There has also
been extensive development in vehicle components, oil-well equipment,
electronic instruments, telecommunications equipment, carpets and syn¬
thetic rubber.
Agriculture (predominantly livestock and products) is still the single
most important industry, and accounts directly for almost a tenth of total
civil employment, over three times the proportion in Britain as a whole.
Cultural and
Social Life
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Government’s economic measures have helped to promote major
industrial development in Northern Ireland despite the effects of terror¬
ism. However, the world recession has led to rising unemployment as in the
rest of the country; the Northern Ireland unemployment rate is persistently
the highest of any of the standard regions. To meet this special problem
successive governments have offered higher incentives than are available in
the rest of the country to encourage new investment both from within
Britain and from overseas, and assistance to mitigate high energy costs.
Between 1945 and the end of 1981 more than 300 industrial establishments
were set up with government help; together they employed almost half the
total manufacturing workforce. Northern Ireland’s productivity and in¬
dustrial relations records for some years have been better than those in the
country as a whole.
The modern diversification of the economy has helped to stimulate
output, productivity and incomes, and has assisted in narrowing the gap
between living standards in Northern Ireland and those in the rest of the
United Kingdom. Gross domestic product per person, which tends to be
depressed in Northern Ireland relative to the country as a whole as a result
of higher unemployment, lower activity rates and larger family sizes, has
nonetheless risen from just under two-thirds of the British average in 1963
to about four-fifths. Average earnings are more than nine-tenths of the
national average.
The principle underlying Northern Ireland’s financial relations with the
rest of the country is that it has parity, both of taxation and services, with
England, Scotland and Wales. To maintain social services at the level of
those in Great Britain, to meet the cost of security measures, and to
compensate for the natural disadvantages of geography and lack of re¬
sources, the United Kingdom Government made transfers to Northern
Ireland amounting to £1,001 million in 1981-82.
Despite the civil unrest and economic recession, for thousands of visitors
(59,000 in 1981), as well as for local people, Northern Ireland’s landscape
and natural features, its cultural tradit ons and its festivals continue to offer
special attractions. For many North Americans the land from which their
forebears emigrated (a number of United States presidents have been
descended from Northern Ireland families) has a unique interest. The story
of this contribution to American life, the history of Northern Ireland, and
aspects of its culture—from the dialects and strong literary tradition (poets
Louis MacNeice and Seamus Heaney have international reputations) to the
songs and dances and folk art—are recorded in the Ulster-American Folk
Park, the Ulster Museum and the Ulster Folk and Transport Museum
respectively.
With its own Arts Council, Northern Ireland has orchestras, much
theatre and ballet and the restored Belfast Grand Opera House. The
Queen’s Festival, one of several annual events, is a major international
occasion. The strong arts tradition has produced such soloists as flautist
James Galway and soprano Heather Harper.
In day-to-day social life Northern Ireland is in many ways similar to the
rest of the United Kingdom. The National Health Service provides both
hospital and practitioner services, and health and personal social services
correspond fairly closely although the administrative framework is differ¬
ent. Education, too, is much the same, from school to university level;
emphasis on the comprehensive principle in secondary schools has,
LAND AND PEOPLE x9
however, been very small. Housing and the improvement of the urban
environment present significant, though not unique, problems for the
authorities, notably in Belfast where a continuing rehabilitation pro¬
gramme is being carried out, but planning and conservation arrangements
are much like those in the rest of the country.
Distinctive local programmes are broadcast and there is a local press;
national radio and television networks are received, however, and the
national press is sold widely. Sport plays an important role in the com¬
munity, and many world-class sportsmen and women have come from
Northern Ireland.
PHYSICAL FEATURES
Britain constitutes the greater part of the British Isles, a geographical term
for a group of islands lying off the north-west coast of mainland Europe.
The largest of the islands is Great Britain (the mainlands of England, Wales
and Scotland). The next largest comprises Northern Ireland and the Irish
Republic. Off the southern coast of England is the Isle of Wight and off the
extreme south-west are the Isles of Scilly; off north Wales is Anglesey.
Western Scotland is fringed by small islands and to the north-east are the
Orkneys and Shetlands. All these have administrative ties with the main¬
land, but the Isle of Man in the Irish Sea and the Channel Islands between
Great Britain and France are largely self-governing, and are not part of
England, Wales, Scotland or Northern Ireland.
Britain’s area is some 244,100 square km (94,200 square miles), of which
nearly 99 per cent is land and the remainder inland water. This is about the
same size as the Federal Republic of Germany, New Zealand or Uganda,
and half the size of France. It is just under 1,000 km (some 600 miles) from
the south coast to the extreme north of Scotland and just under 500 km
(some 300 miles) across in the widest part. There are numerous bays and
inlets and no place in Britain is as much as 120 km (75 miles) from tidal
water. The prime meridian of o passes through the old observatory at
Greenwich (London).
The seas surrounding the British Isles are shallow—usually less than 90
metres (50 fathoms or 300 feet)—because the islands lie on the continental
shelf. To the north-west along the edge of the shelf the sea floor plunges
abruptly from 180 metres (some 600 feet) to 900 metres (about 3,000 feet).
The shallow waters are important because they provide breeding grounds
for fish. The North Atlantic current, the drift of warm water which reaches
the islands from across the Atlantic, spreads out over the shelf magnifying
its ameliorating effect on the air.
Britain has a generally mild and temperate climate. The prevailing winds
are south-westerly and the weather from day to day is mainly influenced by
depressions moving eastwards across the Atlantic. The weather is subject
to frequent changes but to few extremes of temperature. It is rarely above
32°C (90°F) or below - iocC (i4°F). Near sea level in the west the mean
annual temperature ranges from 8 C (46 F) in the Hebrides to 11 C(52 F)
in the extreme south-west of England; latitude for latitude it is slightly
lower in the east. The mean monthly temperature in the extreme north, at
Lerwick (Shetland), ranges from 3°C (37°F) during the winter (December,
January and February) to i2°C (54°F) during the summer (June, July and
August): the corresponding figures for the Isle of Wight, in the extreme
south, are 5°C (4i°F) and i6°C (6i°F). The annual rainfall is about 1,100
20
POPULATION
Birth Rates
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
millimetres (over 40 inches), the mountainous areas of the west and north
having far more rain than the lowlands of the south and east. Rain is fairly
well distributed throughout the year, but, on average, March to June are
the driest months and September to January the wettest. The distribution
of sunshine shows a general decrease from south to north, a decrease from
the coast inland, and a decrease with altitude. During May, June and July
(the months of longest daylight) the mean daily duration of sunshine varies
from five hours in northern Scotland to eight hours in the Isle of Wight;
during the months of shortest daylight (November, December and January)
sunshine is at a minimum, with an average of half an hour a day in northern
Scotland and two hours a day on the south coast of England.
THE SOCIAL FRAMEWORK
The way of life of the people of Britain has been changing rapidly in the
twentieth century. As in many other countries underlying causes include
two major wars, a lower birth rate, longer expectation of life, a higher
divorce rate, widening educational opportunities, technical progress, and a
better standard of living.
This section deals with the social framework in very broad and informal
terms as a background to the information given in later chapters.
With nearly 56 million people, Britain ranks about fourteenth in the world
in terms of population. The estimated home population in April 1981 was
55)676,000 compared with 38-2 million in 1901, about 6-5 million at the end
of the seventeenth century and some 2 million at the end of the eleventh
century. Early figures are based on contemporary estimates, but from the
beginning of the nineteenth century relatively plentiful and reliable infor¬
mation is available. Most of it comes from two main sources: the regular
flow of statistical information based on compulsory registration of births,
marriages and deaths, and the censuses taken regularly every ten years since
1801 (because of war there was no census in 1941). The most recent was in
April 1981. In the period 1975-78 for the first years since records began
(other than in war) the population fell slightly, reflecting a temporary
decline in the birth rate. The upward trend was resumed in 1979. Pro¬
jections for the future suggest that population growth will take place at a
much slower rate than was expected a few years ago. Britain’s total popu¬
lation is expected, on 1979 estimates, to be 56 4 million in 1986,58 4 million
in 2001 and 59-6 million in 2016.
In 1981 there were 730,000 live births (25 per cent less than in 1966) which
outnumbered deaths (657,000) by 73,000. The birth rate declined from 18
live births per 1,000 people in 1966 to an unprecedentedly low figure of 11 • 8
in 1977, but by 1981 had recovered to 13-1. Most of the recent rise
represents an increase in the rate of childbearing, only a small part being
attributable to increasing numbers of women of childbearing age. Never¬
theless, as in many other developed countries, the fertility rate (63 births
per 1,000 women of childbearing age) is low compared with past rates and
remains below the level required for the long-term replacement of the
population.
Several factors may have contributed to the relatively low birth rate.
Contraception has become more widespread and effective, making it easier
to plan families, and sterilisation of men and women has also become more
LAND AND PEOPLE
21
Mortality
Marriage and
Divorce
common. An appreciable proportion of pregnancies (about 40 per cent of
those conceived outside marriage and 8 per cent of those conceived within
marriage) are ended by legal abortion.
The postponement of conception within marriage coupled with a trend
towards later marriage has led to an increase, to 25, in the average age at
which women have their first child in marriage. Another feature is the
current preference for smaller families, especially two-children families,
than in the past, which has led to a significant decline in the proportion of
families with four or more children.
At birth the expectation of life for a man is about 70 years and for a woman
76 years compared with 49 years for men and 52 years for women in 1901.
The improving health of the population has mainly had the effect of
increasing young people’s chances of reaching the older age groups. Life
expectancy in the older age groups has increased relatively little.
The general death rate has remained about the same for the past 50 years,
at about 12 per 1,000 population, reflecting the gradual ageing of the
population since there has been a considerable decline in mortality at most
ages, particularly among children and young adults. The infant mortality
rate (deaths of infants under one year old per 1,000 live births) was 12-1 in
1980; neonatal mortality (deaths of infants under four weeks old per 1,000
live births) was 7-7; and maternal mortality was o-1 per 1,000 live births.
The causes of the decline in mortality include better nutrition, rising
standards of living, the advance of medical science, the growth of medical
facilities, improved health measures, better working conditions, education
in personal hygiene, and the smaller size of families. Major changes since
1951 in the causes of death have included the virtual disappearance of
deaths resulting from infectious diseases (notably tuberculosis) and an in¬
crease in the proportion of deaths caused by circulatory diseases (including
heart attacks and strokes) and by cancer.
During the last decade there has been a marked change in the pattern of
marriage. In 1972 there were 480,300 marriages in Britain, but the number
declined to 404,000 in 1977, before recovering to 418,000 in 1980. The
proportion of the population of England and Wales who were or had been
married has remained at around 60 per cent. Of the population aged 16 or
over in England and Wales in 1980, 65 per cent were married, 23 per cent
single, over 9 per cent widowed and 3 per cent divorced (more than three
times the proportion in 1961). The trend of the 1960s towards earlier
marriage was reversed at the beginning of the 1970s, since when there has
been a slow increase in the average age for first marriages, which in England
and Wales is now just over 25 for men and 23 for women. Remarriages (of
one or both parties) account for about one-third of all marriages in Great
Britain, compared with 20 per cent in 1971 and 15 per cent in 1961, and
about 10 per cent of all marriages are remarriages where both partners had
previously been divorced.
The divorce rate has been increasing steadily and in 1980 about 12
decrees of divorce were made absolute for every 1,000 married couples in
England and Wales, compared with 2 in 1961. The rates are much lower in
Scotland and Northern Ireland. In 1980 about 158,000 divorces were
granted in Britain; the proportion granted to wives was about 70 per cent.
The average age of people at the time of divorce in England and Wales has
been falling and is now about 38 for men and 35 for women.
Age and Sex
Structure
Distribution of
Population
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Another feature, common to many other Western European countries,
has been a considerable increase in cohabitation. It was reported in the 1979
General Household Survey that nearly 20 per cent of women in Great Britain
marrying in the late 1970s where the marriage was the first for both parties
had lived with their husbands before marriage (compared with 7 per cent in
the early 1970s) and about 1 o per cent of women not currently married w7ere
cohabiting. Cohabitation occurs more frequently for separated or divorced
women than for single women. There is some evidence of a growing
number of stable non-married relationships and in the proportion of
illegitimate births (which now account for about 11 per cent of live births in
Britain compared with 6 per cent in 1961) registered by both parents.
Although the total population has remained relatively stable in the last
decade, there have been noticeable changes in the age and sex structure,
including a decline in the proportion of young people under 16 and an
increase in the proportion of elderly people, especially those aged 85 and
over. The estimated age distribution of the British population in mid-1981
was roughly as follows: under 16 years, about 22 per cent; 16-64, 63 per
cent; and 65 and over, 15 per cent. Some 18 per cent of the population were
over the normal retirement ages (65 for men and 60 for women), compared
with 15 per cent in 1961.
In April 1981 there were 28 6 million females and 27 million males in
Britain, representing a ratio of nearly 106 females to every 100 males. There
are about 6 per cent more male than female births every year. Because of the
higher mortality of men at all ages, however, there is a turning point, at
about 50 years of age, at which the number of women exceeds the number of
men. This imbalance increases with age so that there is a preponderance of
women among the elderly.
The population density is about 229 per square km which is relatively high
in comparison with most other countries. England is the most densely
populated with 354 people per square km (with Greater London having a
density of 4,238 people per square km), and Scotland the least densely
populated with 65 people per square km, while Wales and Northern Ireland
have 134 and no people per square km respectively.
Table 2 gives figures for some of Britain’s largest urban areas. About half
the population lives in a belt across England with south Lancashire and
West Yorkshire at one end, and the London area at the other, having the
industrialised Midlands at its centre. Other areas with large populations
are: the central lowlands of Scotland; north-east England from north of the
river Tyne down to the river Tees; south-east Wales; the Bristol area; and
the English Channel coast from Poole, in Dorset, eastwards. Less-densely
populated areas are the eastern fringes of England between the Wash and
the Thames estuary, and the far south-west. The eight major metropolitan
areas which have been denoted as ‘conurbations’ in successive population
censuses accommodate a third of Great Britain’s people while comprising
less than 3 per cent of the total land area. They are: Greater London,
Central Clydeside, Greater Manchester, Merseyside, South Yorkshire,
Tyne and Wear, the West Midlands and West Yorkshire. Most of the
mountainous parts, including much of Scotland, Wales and Northern
Ireland and the central Pennines, are very sparsely populated.
As in many other developed countries the recent trend (brought out by
the 1981 Census) has been a movement of people away from the main
LAND AND PEOPLE
23
Migration
Nationality
conurbations (particularly their centres) to the surrounding suburbs. This
is reflected in the declining population in Greater London (which was the
world’s third city in terms of population in the mid-1960s but is now
eleventh) and in falls in the proportion of people resident in most of the
metropolitan counties. There has also been a geographical redistribution of
the population from Scotland and the northern regions of England to East
Anglia, the South West and the East Midlands. Another feature has been an
increase in the rate of retirement migration, the main recipient areas (where
in some towns the elderly can form over one-third of the population) being
the south coast of England and East Anglia.
Table 2: Size and Population of the Main Urban Districts, April 1981
Area
square
km
square
miles
Population
thousands
Greater London
Birmingham
Glasgow
Leeds
Sheffield
Liverpool
BradfOrd
Manchester
Edinburgh
Bristol
Coventry
Belfast
Cardiff
1,580
264
198
562
368
H3
370
116
261
no
97
140
120
609-7
1020
763
2170
I4I-9
43-6
142 9
449
ioo-6
42-3
37'3
54-0
46-3
6,6960
1,006-9
762-2
705-0
536 8
510-3
4577
449-2
419-2
3880
3M 1
297-9
273-9
Traditionally Britain has had a net outflow of people to the rest of the world,
but in 1979 for the first time for many years there was a small net inflow of
some 6,000 people.1 Subsequently the traditional pattern has been re¬
stored, with a net outflow of 79,000 people in 1981. Between 1972 and 1981
some 2-25 million people left Britain to live abroad and nearly 1-9 million
came from overseas to live in Britain, so that net emigration reduced the
population by about 387,000. Of the emigrants in 1981, 34 per cent left for
Australia, Canada or New Zealand, 12 per cent for other European Com¬
munity countries and 11 per cent for the United States. Of the 153,000
immigrants in 1981, 13 per cent came from Australia, Canada or New
Zealand, 31 per cent from other Commonwealth countries and 15 per cent
from other European Community countries. A significant number of those
leaving or entering Britain were returning migrants.
New nationality legislation embodied in the British Nationality Act 1981
takes effect from 1 January 1983. Under this the former citizenship of the
United Kingdom and Colonies is replaced by three citizenships: British
Citizenship for people closely connected with the United Kingdom, the
’International migration statistics exclude movements to and from the Irish Republic.
24
Immigration
Control
THE
ECONOMIC
AND SOCIAL
PATTERN
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Channel Islands and the Isle of Man; British Dependent Territories Citizen¬
ship for people connected with the dependencies; and British Overseas
Citizenship for those citizens of the United Kingdom and Colonies who do
not acquire either of the other citizenships. All those citizens of the United
Kingdom and Colonies who have a right of abode in Britain when the Act
comes into force will become British citizens.1
From that date British Citizenship will be acquired automatically at birth
by a child born in Britain if his or her father or mother is a British citizen or
is settled in Britain. A child adopted in Britain by a British citizen will be a
British citizen. A child born abroad to a British citizen born, adopted,
naturalised or registered in Britain will be a British citizen by descent. The
Act safeguards the citizenship of a child born abroad to a British citizen in
Crown Service, certain related services, or in service under a European
Community institution. British citizenship may also be acquired by regis¬
tration by certain children born in Britain who do not automatically acquire
such citizenship at birth or born abroad to a parent who is a citizen
otherwise than by descent; by British Dependent Territories citizens,
British overseas citizens, British subjects under the Act (three very limited
categories) and British protected persons after five years’ residence in the
United Kingdom (except for people from Gibraltar who may be registered
without residence); and by naturalisation for Commonwealth citizens,
citizens of the Irish Republic, and foreign nationals. For naturalisation,
which is at the Home Secretary’s discretion, five years’ residence, good
character and sufficient knowledge of English, Welsh or Scottish Gaelic are
required except for the spouse of a British citizen who needs only three
years’ residence and no language qualification. Most existing entitlements
to registration (including those for Commonwealth citizens and Irish
citizens settled in Britain since before 1973, and in certain circumstances
that for women married to citizens of the United Kingdom and Colonies
before 1983) are preserved for five years from 1 January 1983. In 1981,
48,600 people acquired citizenship by naturalisation and registration.
Immigration into Britain is controlled by the Immigration Act 1971 and
administered according to rules made under it. The Act confers a right of
abode—and exemption from control—on British citizens, on Common¬
wealth citizens born before 1983 to a parent born in the United Kingdom
and on certain other Commonwealth citizens who had the right of abode
before 1983. In general, others wishing to enter Britain for employment
must hold work permits. Exceptions include Commonwealth citizens with
a grandparent born in Britain, certain permit-free categories, and nationals
of European Community countries. The dependants of work permit holders
and of those who may enter without work permits may also be admitted, as
may the wives and children of men already settled in Britain and certain
other categories.
The majority of people (some 97 per cent) live in private households (in
families or on their own). The remainder include residents in hotels, and
people in the armed services and in educational or other institutions. In
1980 eight out of ten people lived in a unit headed by a married couple.
Among many changes in household and family structure is the con-
‘One small exception will be that a stateless person who has been registered as a citizen of the United
Kingdom and Colonies by virtue of his mother’s citizenship of the United Kingdom and Colonies will
acquire whichever of the three new citizenships his mother does.
LAND AND PEOPLE
25
Housing and
the
Environment
tinuing fall in the average size of households in Great Britain from over
4 persons in 1911 to 31 in 1961 and 2-68 in 1980. The fall reflects a greater
proportion of people living on their own (8 per cent) or in one-parent
families, the increasing number of elderly people (more of whom are living
alone), and the preferences of parents for smaller families. The trend
towards smaller households (22 per cent of households consist of one
person) is expected to continue and the number of one-person households
is forecast to increase from 4 4 million in 1979 to about 6 million by; 1991, of
which 3 6 million would be pensioner households.
Four British households out of five live in houses rather than flats and over
half of all households own or are buying their own homes. Terraced hous¬
ing, most of it built in the early years of the present century, still provides
accommodation for about 30 per cent of all households. In inner urban
areas slum clearance and redevelopment have been major features of post-
1945 public housing programmes, but the modernisation and conversion of
sub-standard housing have increasingly been encouraged as alternatives to
clearing and rebuilding. Emphasis in new building is on low-rise, high
density designs, often incorporating gardens or patios. Nearly half of
Britain’s housing stock has been built since 1945.
The main housing development of the past 50 to 60 years, however, has
been suburban. Many families now live in houses grouped in small terraces,
or semi-detached or detached, usually of two storeys with gardens, and
providing two main ground-floor living rooms, a kitchen, from two to four
bedrooms, a bathroom, and one or two lavatories. Originally many houses
were located in ‘ribbon development’ along main roads, but in recent years
housing estates have nearly always been sited away from main roads.
Housing standards are continually improving; some 96 per cent of
households in Great Britain have exclusive use of a bath or shower, and 95
per cent sole use of an inside lavatory (high percentages by international
standards) while 57 per cent have central heating.
An important influence on the planning of housing and services has been
the growth of car ownership; about 60 per cent of households have the use
of at least one car (or van), including 15 per cent with the use of two or more.
Greater access to motorised transport and the construction of a network of
modern trunk roads and motorways have resulted in a considerable in¬
crease in personal mobility and changed leisure patterns, as well as changes
in the design of housing and shopping areas. Most detached or semi¬
detached houses in new suburban estates have garages, and out-of-town
shopping centres, usually including large supermarkets, are often specially
planned for the motorist and offer an alternative to shopping in the centres
of older towns.
The growth in car ownership has brought very great benefits but also a
number of problems, notably, in many towns and cities, increased con¬
gestion, noise and air pollution. Public transport, too, has been affected,
and many services have been reduced or eliminated, especially in rural
areas. The people without access to a car include those among the poorer
sections of the community, or the elderly or infirm; mobility allowances
help the disabled. Restrictions on bus licensing have been relaxed in order
to make it easier for new services to develop, and car-sharing is being
encouraged for journeys such as those to work.
There has been a steady reduction of the main atmospheric and fresh
water pollutants that have been of concern in the past, producing dramatic
26
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Living
Standards
improvements in, for example, the quality of the air in cities and the
condition of major rivers, although various forms of pollution remain a
problem in some areas. There is a high degree of concern for the natural
environment, as shown by the enormous growth in the past few decades in
the number of organisations (especially voluntary societies) concerned with
conservation.
Marked improvements in the standard of living have taken place during
the twentieth century, but generally at a slower rate than in some other
major industrialised countries. Real personal disposable income in 1981
amounted to £$2,606 million at 1975 prices, 13 per cent higher than in
1976. The volume of consumer spending, after allowing for inflation, has
remained unchanged over the last two years, reflecting the current eco¬
nomic recession. Long-term trends in the pattern of expenditure show a
substantial rise in expenditure on housing, alcohol, motor vehicles, tele¬
visions, telephones, electrical and some other durable goods, and entertain¬
ment, and in expenditure overseas. As real incomes have risen, the share of
expenditure on food has fallen. The share devoted to tobacco has also
declined; an increasing number of people have stopped smoking for health
reasons.
The general level of nutrition remains high. Over the last 20 years there
have been substantial rises in the consumption of poultry, instant coffee,
pork and processed (including frozen) vegetables, while home consumption
per person of mutton and lamb, beef and veal, bread, potatoes, eggs, milk,
butter, sugar, tea and some other foods has fallen. However, another
feature has been an increase in the number of meals eaten away from home,
either at work or in restaurants, and a growth in the consumption of food
from ‘take-away’ and ‘fast food’ shops. In addition, in the 1960s and 1970s
the amount of convenience foods eaten grew as women increasingly went
out to work and had less time to prepare meals, and as the variety of
prepared foods rose in line with the growth in ownership of refrigerators
and freezers. Other features have included the continuing popularity of
health foods and slimming products.
Alcohol consumption has risen substantially since the 1950s, although
the level is well below that of some other European Community countries,
and alcohol abuse has become a growing problem. Beer remains much the
most popular alcoholic drink, but consumption of wines and spirits has
been growing. A high proportion of beer is drunk in public houses (‘pubs’),
which are a traditional social centre for many people, but recent features
have been for more beer to be drunk at home and in clubs; beer consump¬
tion has recently been falling. A notable development has been the arge
increase in consumption of lager, now estimated to account for about 30 per
cent of the beer consumed.
Ownership of many durable goods has been increasing and some goods,
such as televisions, vacuum cleaners and refrigerators, are available in more
than 90 per cent of households. Of durable goods shown in the diagram on
p 27, ownership of telephones and central heating systems is growing most
rapidly; other durable goods growing in popularity include freezers (avail¬
able in some 47 per cent of households), music centres and other audio
equipment, and video recorders.
Alterations in the pattern of income distribution have included a fall in
the share of the top 10 per cent from 33 2 per cent of total pre-tax income in
1949 to 26• 1 per cent in 1978-79, although successive falls have been mainly
LAND AND PEOPLE
2?
Women
Availability of Certain Durable Goods
Per cent of households with goods
retained in the top half of the distribution. Income before tax of the self-
employed is more unevenly distributed than total income, largely because
of the very large incomes of a small number of people, mainly professionals
such as lawyers, accountants and doctors. The combined effect of the tax
system and the receipt of transfer payments and direct and indirect benefits
in kind is to redistribute incomes on a more equal basis.
Wealth is much more unevenly distributed, with the top 1 per cent of the
population aged 18 or over owning about 24 per cent of marketable wealth,
the top 10 per cent having 59 per cent and the top 50 per cent having 95 per
cent. The inclusion of non-marketable rights in occupational and state
pension schemes reduces these shares substantially to around 13, 37 and 80
per cent respectively. There has been little change in the distribution of
marketable wealth, but the trend for marketable wealth plus occupational
and state pension rights shows a fairly continuous movement towards
greater equality after 1974, indicating the growing significance of pension
rights as part of total wealth.
Probably the greatest changes in society have occurred in the economic
and domestic lives of women, due, in part, to the removal of almost all
theoretical sex discrimination in political and legal rights. At the heart of
women’s changed role has been the rise in the number of women, particu¬
larly married women, at work. With the availability of effective methods of
family planning there has been a decline in family size. Women as a result
are involved in child-bearing for a much shorter time and this, together
with a variety of other factors which have made housework less burden-
28
Equal
Opportunities
Ethnic and
National
Minorities
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
some, has made it possible for women with even young children to try to
return to work.
Since 1951 the proportion of married women who work has grown to
more than half of those under 45 and three-fifths of those between 45 and
60. The proportion of the total workforce accounted for by married women
increased from 4 per cent in 1921 to just over 25 per cent in 1982, and
families have come to rely on married women’s earnings as an essential part
of their income. Compared with their counterparts elsewhere in the Euro¬
pean Community, British women comprise a relatively high proportion of
the workforce, about two-fifths (only Denmark has a comparable percent¬
age). There is still a significant difference between women’s and men’s
earnings but the equal pay legislation which came into force at the end of
I975 appears to have narrowed the gap.
Women’s average hourly earnings, exclusive of overtime (for full-time
employees), increased from just under two-thirds of those of men in 1970,
to about three-quarters in 1981. Nevertheless, women’s wages remain
relatively low because women tend to work in lowly paid sectors of the
economy, and they work less overtime than men.
The changes have been significant but, because tradition and prejudice can
still handicap women in their careers and personal lives, major legislation to
help to promote equality was passed in the 1970s.
Under the Equal Pay Act 1970 (and corresponding legislation in
Northern Ireland), women in Great Britain are entitled to equal pay with
men when doing work that is the same or broadly similar, or work which
has been given an equal value under a job evaluation scheme. The Sex
Discrimination Act 1975 makes discrimination between men and women
unlawful in employment, education, training and the provision of housing,
goods, facilities and services. Discriminatory advertisements which breach
the Act are also unlawful. (Northern Ireland has similar legislation.) In
most cases complaints of discrimination may be taken before the county
courts in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, or the sheriff- courts in
Scotland; complaints concerning employment are dealt with by industrial
tribunals. The Equal Opportunities Commission was set up in 1975 (1976
in Northern Ireland under separate legislation) to enforce the Sex
Discrimination Act and the Equal Pay Act. Its aims are to eliminate sex
discrimination and promote equal opportunities. The Commission advises
people of their rights under both Acts and may give financial or other
assistance to help individuals to conduct a case before a court or tribunal.
It also has power to conduct investigations and to issue notices requir¬
ing discriminatory practices to stop. In addition, it keeps legislation under
review and may submit proposals for amending it to the ministers concerned.
Britain has a long history of accommodating minority groups and in the last
hundred years or so a variety of people have settled in the country, some to
avoid political or religious persecution, others seeking a better way of life or
an escape from poverty.
The Irish have long made homes in Britain, and comprise the largest
single minority group. Many Jewish refugees started a new life in the
country towards the end of the nineteenth century and in the 1930s, and
after 1945 large numbers of other European refugees settled in Britain.
The large communities from the West Indies and the South Asian sub¬
continent date from the 1950s and early 1960s. There are also sizeable
LAND AND PEOPLE
29
Race Relations
Act
Commission for
Racial Equality
groups of Americans, Australians, Chinese and various European com¬
munities such as Greek and Turkish Cypriots, Italians and Spaniards.
Most recently, refugees from Indo-China have settled in Britain.
In 1981 the population of New Commonwealth1 and Pakistani ethnic
origin was estimated at 2 2 million (just over 4 per cent of the total
population of Great Britain) of whom over 40 per cent were born in Britain.
Most of them share aspirations that are broadly similar to those of the
British community as a whole and they enjoy full political and civic rights.
Although the circumstances of many members of the ethnic minority com¬
munities are less fortunate than those of other groups (for example, they
suffer disproportionately from unemployment and often live in poor hous¬
ing in the older urban areas) there have been important advances over the
last 20 years in employment and housing conditions, and many individuals
have achieved distinction in their careers and in public life.
The difficulties minorities face are being alleviated by continuous social
programmes, some of which benefit the whole community, while other
projects are directed towards meeting the minorities’ special needs.
Although fewer children than formerly go to school with no knowledge of
English, there are still many who have an insufficient grasp of the language.
Language teaching is recognised to be of prime importance and additional
teachers are appointed to schools with ethnic minorities. For adults, classes
at or outside their place of work are run by local authorities and voluntary
organisations. Government grants are available to authorities with sub¬
stantial ethnic minority groups towards the salaries of extra staff such as
teachers, health visitors and interpreters.
The welfare of ethnic minorities and good relations between minorities
and the local community are promoted by community relations councils
and other voluntary bodies. In recognition of the special problems and
tensions that can arise between the police and ethnic minorities, consulta¬
tion between the police and the community is seen as having particular
importance. Policies for promoting equality of opportunity in a multi¬
racial society in which all citizens receive equal respect are pursued against
a background of legislation against discrimination.
The Race Relations Act 1976 makes discrimination unlawful on grounds of
colour, race or ethnic or national origin in the provision of goods, facilities
and services, in employment, training and related matters, in education, in
housing and in advertising. It strengthened legislation passed in 1968
which, in turn, widened the scope of the first race relations legislation
enacted in 1965; it also strengthened the criminal law on incitement to
racial hatred.
The 1976 Act brought the law against racial discrimination into line with
that against sex discrimination (see above), and gave complainants direct
access to civil courts and, in the case of employment complaints, to indus¬
trial tribunals.
The Commission for Racial Equality was established by the Race Relations
Act 1976 with statutory duties to work towards the elimination of dis¬
crimination and to promote equality of opportunity and good relations
between people of different racial groups. It has power to investigate un¬
lawful discriminatory practices and to issue non-discrimination notices,
‘All other Commonwealth countries except Canada, Australia and New Zealand.
30
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
enforceable in the courts, requiring that such practices should cease. It has
an important educational role and may issue codes of practice in employ¬
ment. It is also the principal source of advice for the general public about
the Race Relations Act and has discretion to assist individuals with their
complaints.
The Commission supports the work of the 100 or so community relations
councils, which are independent, voluntary bodies set up in most areas with
a significant ethnic minority population to promote harmonious community
relations at the local level. It makes grants towards the salaries of the
community relations officers employed by the councils, most of whom
also receive funds from their local authorities, and gives grants to ethnic
minority self-help groups and to other projects run by or for the benefit
of the minority communities.
Leisure Trends Most people have considerably more free time, more ways in which to
spend it and higher real incomes than had previous generations. Agreed
hours of full-time work are usually from 35 to 40 hours a week, although
many people actually work somewhat longer because of voluntary over¬
time. A large majority of employees work a five-day week.
The most common leisure activities are home based, or social, with
visiting or entertaining relatives or friends and television watching among
the most popular. Watching television is the main evening pastime for all
except young men. Nearly all households have a television set and in winter
the population aged five and over spend on average 20 hours a week
watching programmes. Growing numbers are using video recorders to
provide television viewing suited to their individual taste. Other popular
pursuits include: listening to the radio, records or cassettes; reading; do-
it-yourself home improvements such as house painting and decorating;
going out for a meal or for a drink or to the cinema or to watch a sporting
event; gardening; outings (such as visits to the countryside, seaside or to
museums); photography; visits to social clubs and leisure centres; and
social and voluntary work. About half the households in Britain have a pet,
the most common being dogs (of which there are thought to be more than
5 million in Britain) and cats (nearly 5 million).
Sports and other pastimes have grown in popularity, reflected by in¬
creasing membership of the main organisations concerned with outdoor
activities, although for some sports, such as football, attendances have been
declining. Sporting activities in which people participate include, in order
of popularity, walking, darts, and billiards and snooker.
Almost all full-time employees are entitled to a paid holiday each year in
addition to public holidays and by the end of 1981 over four-fifths of
manual workers had a basic holiday entitlement of four weeks or more.
The number of holidays (of four or more nights) taken in Great Britain
by British residents was 36 5 million in 1981 compared with 34 million in
1971. Holidays abroad in 1981 numbered 13 3 million, compared with 7
million in 1971, and well over half involved ‘package’ arrangements. More
than four-fifths of overseas holidays are taken in other European countries,
with Spain being the most popular destination; it receives over one-fifth of
all British holiday-makers abroad. The next most popular destinations are
France, Italy, Greece, and the United States. The main holiday period is
May to September when over 80 per cent of holidays in Britain and 70 per
cent of holidays abroad are taken. A third of the population each year,
however, takes no holiday away from home.
2 Government
Succession,
Accession and
Coronation
The United Kingdom constitution, unlike that of most other countries, is
not contained in any single document. Formed partly by statute, partly by
common law and partly by convention, it can be altered by Act of Parlia¬
ment, or by general agreement to create, vary or abolish a convention. The
constitution thus adapts readily to changing political conditions and ideas.
The organs of government are clearly distinguishable although their
functions often intermingle and overlap. The legislature, Parliament, is
the supreme authority. The executive consists of: (a) the Government—
Cabinet and other ministers who are responsible for initiating and directing
national policy, (b) government departments, which are responsible for
national administration, (c) local authorities, which administer and manage
many local services, and (d) public corporations responsible for the oper¬
ation of particular nationalised industries or, for example, of a social or
cultural service, subject to ministerial control in varying degrees. The
judiciary determines common law and interprets statutes, and is indepen¬
dent of both the legislature and the executive.
THE MONARCHY
The British people look to the Queen not only as their head of State, but also
as the symbol of their nation’s unity. The monarchy is the most ancient
secular institution in the United Kingdom. During the last thousand years
its continuity has only once been broken (by the establishment of a republic
which lasted from 1649 to 1660) and, despite interruptions in the direct
line of succession, the hereditary principle upon which it was founded
has always been preserved. The royal title in the United Kingdom is:
‘Elizabeth the Second, by the Grace of God of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and of Her other Realms and Terri¬
tories Queen, Head of the Commonwealth, Defender of the Faith.’ The
form of the royal title is varied for those other member states of the
Commonwealth of which the Queen is head of State,1 to suit the particular
circumstances of each. (For a full list of members states see p 76.)
The seat of the monarchy is in the United Kingdom. In the Channel
Islands and the Isle of Man the Queen is represented by a Lieutenant-
Governor. In the other member nations of the Commonwealth of which
the Queen is head of State, her representative is the Governor-General
appointed by her on the advice of the ministers of the country concerned
and completely independent of the United Kingdom Government.
In the United Kingdom dependencies the Queen is usually represented
by governors, who are responsible to the British Government for the good
government of the countries concerned.
The title to the Crown derives partly from statute and partly from common
law rules of descent. Lineal Protestant descendants of Princess Sophia (the
Electress of Hanover, granddaughter of James I of England and VI of
1The other Commonwealth countries of which the Queen is head of State are: Antigua and Barbuda,
Australia, The Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Canada, Fiji, Grenada, Jamaica, Mauritius, New Zealand,
Papua New Guinea, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Solomon Islands and Tuvalu.
32
Acts of
Government
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Scotland) are alone eligible to succeed, and although succession is not
bound to continue in its present line, it can be altered only by common
consent of the member nations of the Commonwealth of which the Queen is
Sovereign.
The sons of the Sovereign have precedence over the daughters in
succeeding to the throne. When a daughter succeeds, she becomes Queen-
Regnant, and the powers of the Crown are vested in her as though she were
a king. While the consort of a king takes her husband’s rank and style, the
constitution has never given any special rank or privileges to the husband of
a Queen-Regnant although in practice he fills an important role in the life of
the nation, as does the Duke of Edinburgh.
The Sovereign succeeds to the throne as soon as his or her predecessor
dies and there is no interregnum. He or she is at once proclaimed at an
Accession Council to which all members of the Privy Council are sum¬
moned. The Lords Spiritual and Temporal (see p 36), the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen and other leading citizens of the City of London are also invited.
The Sovereign’s coronation follows the accession after a convenient
interval. It is a ceremony which has remained essentially the same for over a
thousand years, even if details have often been modified to conform to the
customs of the time. It takes place at Westminster Abbey in London in the
presence of representatives of the Houses of Parliament and of all the great
public interests of the United Kingdom, of the Prime Ministers and leading
members of the other Commonwealth nations, and of representatives of
other countries.
The Queen personifies the State. In law, she is head of the executive, an
integral part of the legislature, head of the judiciary, the commander-in-
chief of all armed forces of the Crown and the ‘supreme governor’ of the
established Church of England. As a result of a long process of evolution,
during which the monarchy’s absolute power has been progressively re¬
duced, the Queen acts on the advice of her ministers, which she cannot
ignore. The United Kingdom is governed by Her Majesty’s Government
in the name of the Queen.
Within this framework, and in spite of a trend during the past hundred
years towards assigning powers directly to ministers, there are still import¬
ant acts of government which require the participation of the Queen. These
include summoning, proroguing (discontinuing until the next session
without dissolution) and dissolving Parliament; giving royal assent to Bills
passed by both Houses of Parliament; appointing many important office
holders, including government ministers, judges, officers in the armed
forces, governors, diplomats and bishops and some other senior clergy
of the Church of England; conferring peerages, knighthoods and other
honours;1 and remitting all or part of the penalty imposed on a person
convicted of a crime. An important function is appointing the Prime
Minister and by convention the Queen invites the leader of the political
party which commands a majority in the House of Commons to form a
government. In international affairs, the Queen as head of State has the
power to declare war and make peace, to recognise foreign states and
governments, to conclude treaties and to annexe or cede territory.
With rare exceptions (as when appointing the Prime Minister), acts
Although most honours are conferred by the Queen on the advice of the Prime Minister, a few are conferred
on her personal selection—the Order of the Garter, the Order of the Thistle, the Order of Merit and the
Royal Victorian Order.
QUEEN VICTORIA, 1819-1901,
l. Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha (Prince Consort)
- OO
? t, T3
• "§ 5^ ■£
: c oi-c —
: a; -o O <
! ^ ^ « J.
;k£0 £
: C 4) 2 c 0-5*.* —U'S £
Z'C Hi ca 'Cas 3 e3 c« as 3 ^ ^ r*
ufl,CL,NQ,>jQWJJQ{
1 £*
« E 4
I c 3
M «U ^
M
00 ^
IH t« «
. o<
a aC6
>-SQ
1_Q |5 -
slS
Q S<
M U
w CZ
0£W
z^w
26g
u <u
<u
’•S-r
o ^
u. rn
>> C 00
T3^ os
CQ S M
^ UJ3
o
_
1- "
u S’
fil-, o
4-* *-•
’ X o .
. JD
< OS
W
#. % ^VO ° O
qj 0\wr-’ O
^ ^ m « I
-I.So.Lw^
^ Oh Cs .OS
^ “ SK
\o><
sw
"w
>w
w§
'OS'
o a
Wh
o^,
ft
2i
>■€ ,
w j |
o . I
Sm
SC
H'„
w 5
ca-s
.nS
O mS3 S.J c
O ^xi
0 4-S
S«3
X w
Zry
w
Sap
O'
o ^ ^ o
rjn \D W
»rt •'U ro D-
c fl«
^ 4^ S-2
o3:q^
■< "O
o-e .
5”e
ut
■XI c
« - c t
i« c o ••'-^
« m.2'§ a~
cq .2 c "O w
Qfeo£||
,2 o c.irar
• .2 Os
34
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Ceremonial and
Royal Visits
Royal Income
and
Expenditure
involving the use of ‘royal prerogative’ powers are nowadays performed
by government ministers who are responsible to Parliament and can be
questioned about a particular policy. It is not necessary to have Parliament’s
authority to exercise these powers, although Parliament has the power to
restrict or abolish a prerogative right.
Ministerial responsibility in no way detracts from the importance of the
Queen’s role in the smooth working of government. She holds meetings of
the Privy Council, gives audiences to her ministers and other officials at
home and overseas, receives accounts of Cabinet decisions, reads dispatches
and signs innumerable state papers; she must be informed and consulted on
every aspect of national life; and she must show complete impartiality.
Such is the significance attached to these royal functions that provision
has been made for a regent to be appointed to perform them should the
Queen be totally incapacitated. The regent would be the Queen’s eldest
son, the Prince of Wales, then those in succession to the throne who are of
age. In the event of the Queen’s partial incapacity or absence abroad, there
is provision for appointing Counsellors of State (the Duke of Edinburgh,
the four adult persons next in line of succession, and the Queen Mother)
to whom the Queen may delegate certain royal functions. However,
Counsellors of State may not, for instance, dissolve Parliament (except on
the Queen’s express instructions), or create peers.
Ceremonial has always been associated with British kings and queens, and,
in spite of the change in the outlook of both the Sovereign and the people,
many traditional customs and ceremonies are retained. Royal marriages
and royal funerals are marked by public ceremony, and the Sovereign’s
birthday is officially celebrated early in June by Trooping the Colour on
Horse Guards Parade. State banquets take place when a foreign monarch or
head of State visits Britain; investitures are held at Buckingham Palace to
bestow honours; and royal processions add significance to such occasions
as a State opening of Parliament, when the Queen drives from Buckingham
Palace to Westminster. Each year the Queen and other members of the
royal family visit many parts of the United Kingdom. Their presence at
scientific, artistic, industrial and charitable events of national and local
importance encourages nationwide interest and publicity. The Queen pays
state visits to foreign governments, accompanied by the Duke of Edinburgh.
She also undertakes lengthy tours in the other countries of the Common¬
wealth. Other members of the royal family pay official visits overseas,
occasionally representing the Queen, and often in connection with an
organisation or a cause with which they are associated.
More than three-quarters of all expenditure arising from the royal family’s
official duties is met by public departments. This includes the costs of the
royal yacht, the Queen’s Flight, travel by train and the upkeep of the royal
palaces. Apart from this the Queen’s public expenditure on staff and
expenses incurred in carrying out official duties as head of State is financed
from the Civil List, approved by Parliament. Her private expenditure as
Sovereign is met from the Privy Purse, which is supplied mainly from the
revenues of the Duchy of Lancaster;1 and her personal expenditure as a
‘The Duchy of Lancaster is an inheritance which, since 1399, has always been enjoyed by the reigning
Sovereign; it is kept quite apart from his or her other possessions and is separately administered by the
Chancellor of the Duchy.
GOVERNMENT
35
The Functions
of Parliament
private individual from her own personal resources. There are annual
allowances approved by Parliament to other members of the royal family,
though not to the Prince of Wales, who as Duke of Cornwall is entitled to
the net revenue of the estate of the Duchy of Cornwall (he has voluntarily
surrended a proportion of the revenue to the nation). The Queen pays into
the Exchequer a sum equivalent to that provided by Parliament in respect
of certain members of the royal family.
PARLIAMENT
Parliament is the supreme legislative authority. Its three elements, the
Queen, the House of Lords and the elected House of Commons, are out¬
wardly separate, are constituted on different principles, and meet together
only on occasions of symbolic significance such as the State opening of
Parliament when the Commons are summoned by the Queen to the House
of Lords. As a law-making body, however, Parliament as a rule needs the
concurrence of all its parts.
Parliament can legislate for the United Kingdom as a whole, for any of
the constituent parts of the country separately, or for any combination of
them. It can also legislate for the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man,
which are Crown dependencies and not part of the United Kingdom,
having subordinate legislatures which make laws on island affairs.1
Free from any legal restraints imposed by a written constitution,
Parliament is able to legislate as it pleases: generally to make, unmake, or
alter any law; to legalise past illegalities and make void and punishable what
was lawful when done and thus reverse the decisions of the ordinary courts;
and to destroy established conventions or turn a convention into binding
law. It can prolong its own life beyond the normal period without con¬
sulting the electorate.
In practice, however, Parliament does not assert its supremacy in this
way. Its members bear in mind the common law and have tended to act in
accordance with precedent and tradition. The validity of an Act of
Parliament which has been duly passed, promulgated and published cannot
be disputed in the law courts, but no Parliament would be likely to pass an
Act which it knew would receive no public support. The system of party
government helps to ensure that Parliament legislates with its responsi¬
bility to the electorate in mind.
As a member of the European Community, the United Kingdom recog¬
nises the various types of Community legislation, and sends 81 elected
members to the European Parliament (see p 73).
The main functions of Parliament are (1) to pass laws, (2) to provide, by
voting taxation, the means of carrying on the work of government, and (3)
to scrutinise government policy and administration, particularly proposals
for expenditure. In discharging these functions Parliament helps to bring
the relevant facts and issues before the electorate. By custom, Parliament is
also consulted before the ratification of all important international treaties
and agreements, the making of treaties being, in theory at least, a royal
'The legislatures of the Channel Islands (the States of Jersey and the States of Guernsey) and the Isle of
Man (the Tynwald Court) consist of the Queen, the Privy Council and the local assemblies. It is the duty of
the Home Secretary, as the member of the Privy Council primarily concerned with island affairs, to
scrutinise each legislative measure before it is submitted to the Queen in Council.
36
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Meeting of
Parliament
The House of
Lords
prerogative exercised on the advice of the Government and not subject to
parliamentary approval.
A Parliament has a maximum duration of five years, but is often dissolved
and a general election held before the end of this term. The maximum life
has been prolonged by legislation in such rare circumstances as the two
world wars. Dissolution and writs for a general election are ordered by the
Queen on the advice of the Prime Minister.
The life of a Parliament is divided into sessions. Each usually lasts for one
year—beginning and ending most often in October or November and inter¬
spersed with ‘adjournments’ at night, at weekends, at Christmas, Easter
and the late (English) Spring Bank Holiday and during a long summer
recess starting in late July or early August. The average number of‘sitting’
days in a session is about 175 in the House of Commons and about 150 in
the House of Lords. At the start of each session the Queen’s speech to
Parliament outlines the Government’s broad policies and proposed legis¬
lative programme. Each session is terminated by prorogation. Parliament
then ‘stands prorogued’ until the new session opens (on rare occasions
Parliament has been dissolved without prorogation). A short speech is
made on behalf of the Queen summarising Parliament’s work during the
past session. An adjournment does not affect uncompleted business, but
prorogation terminates nearly all parliamentary business, so that all public
Bills not completed lapse, and must be reintroduced in the next session
unless they are to be abandoned.
The House of Lords consists of the Lords Spiritual and the Lords
Temporal. The Lords Spiritual are the Archbishops of Canterbury and
York, the Bishops of London, Durham and Winchester, and the 21 senior
diocesan bishops of the Church of England. The Lords Temporal consist
of (1) all hereditary peers and peeresses of England, Scotland, Great Britain
and the United Kingdom who have not disclaimed their peerages, (2) all life
peers and peeresses, and (3) those Lords of Appeal (‘law lords’) created life
peers to assist the House in its judicial duties. Hereditary peerages carry a
right to sit in the House (subject to certain disqualifications), provided the
holder is 21 years of age or over, but anyone succeeding to a peerage may,
within 12 months of succession, disclaim that peerage for his or her
lifetime. Disclaimants lose their right to sit in the House but gain the right
to vote at parliamentary elections and to offer themselves for election to the
House of Commons.
Temporal peerages, both hereditary and life, are conferred on the advice
of the Prime Minister (although no hereditary peerage has been conferred
since 1965). They are usually granted either in recognition of service in
politics or other walks of life or because the Government of the day wishes
to have the recipient in the House of Lords. The House also provides a place
in Parliament for men and women whose advice is useful to the State, but
who do not wish to be involved in party politics.
At the beginning of 1982 there were 1,178 members of the House of
Lords, including the two archbishops and 24 bishops. In order of pre¬
cedence the Lords T emporal consisted of three Peers of the Blood Royal, 25
Dukes, 28 Marquesses, 157 Earls and Countesses, 102 Viscounts and 837
Barons and Baronesses, of whom 349 were life peers. Of the 117 Irish peers
48 were entitled to sit in the House of Lords because they were holders of an
English, Scottish or United Kingdom peerage. Other Irish peerages which
GOVERNMENT
37
The House of
Commons
pre-date the union (see p 3) do not entitle their holders to membership of
the House of Lords.
Not all peers with a right to sit in the House of Lords attend the sittings.
Those who do not wish to attend apply for leave of absence for the duration
of a Parliament.
Peers who frequently attend the House (the average daily attendance is
about 290) include elder statesmen and others who have spent their lives in
public service. They receive no salary for their parliamentary work, but can
recover expenses incurred in attending the House and certain travelling
expenses.
The House is presided over by the Lord Chancellor, who takes his place
on the woolsack as ex officio Speaker of the House. In his absence his place
may be taken by a deputy speaker, a deputy chairman or, if neither is
present, by a speaker chosen by the Lords present. The first of the deputy
speakers is the Lord Chairman of Committees, who is appointed at the
beginning of each session and takes the chair in all committees, unless the
House decides otherwise. The Lord Chairman and the Principal Deputy
Chairman of Committees are salaried officers of the House.
The permanent officers include the Clerk of the Parliaments who is re¬
sponsible for the records of proceedings including judgments and for the
promulgation of Acts of Parliament; the other Clerks at the Table who,
with the Clerk of the Parliaments and the other officers and officials of the
House, are collectively known as the Parliament Office; the Gentleman
Usher of the Black Rod, who is also Serjeant at Arms in attendance upon the
Lord Chancellor and is responsible for security and for accommodation
and services in the House of Lords’ part of the Palace of Westminster; and
the Yeoman Usher who is Deputy Serjeant at Arms and assists Black Rod in
his duties.
The House of Commons is elected by universal adult suffrage and consists
of 635 members of Parliament (MPs), of whom 21 are women. Of the 635
seats, 516 are for England, 36 for Wales, 71 for Scotland, and 12 for
Northern Ireland.1
General elections are held after a Parliament has been dissolved and a
new one summoned by the Queen. When an MP dies or resigns2 or is given
a peerage, a by-election takes place. Members are paid an annual salary of
£14,510 and an allowance of £8,752 for secretarial and research expenses.
They also have a number of other allowances, including travel allowances,
a supplement for London members and, for provincial members, subsis¬
tence allowances. (For ministers’ salaries, see p 49.)
The chief officer of the House of Commons is the Speaker, elected by
MPs to preside over the House. Other officers are the Chairman of Ways
and Means, and two deputy chairmen who act as Deputy Speakers, elected
by the House on the nomination of the Government. They, like the
Speaker, neither speak nor vote other than in their official capacity. The
House is administered by a Commission chaired by the Speaker.
Permanent officers (who are not MPs) include the Clerk of the House of
'The number of Northern Ireland seats is to be increased from 12 to 17.
2 An MP who wishes to resign from the House can do so only by using the technical device of applying for an
office under the Crown (Baililf of the Chiltern Hundreds or Steward of the Manor of Northstead), ancient
offices which disqualify the holder from membership of the House but which carry no salary and have no
responsibilities.
38
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Parliamentary
Electoral
System
Commons, who is the principal adviser to the Speaker of the House on its
privileges and procedures; his department has responsibilities relating to
the conduct of the business of the House and its many committees. The
Clerk is also accounting officer for the House. The Serjeant at Arms, who
waits upon the Speaker, carries out certain orders of the House, is the
official housekeeper of the Commons part of the building, and is responsible
for its security.
For electoral purposes the United Kingdom is divided into constituencies,
each of which returns one member to the House of Commons. To ensure
equitable representation, four permanent Boundary Commissions for
England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland make periodic reviews of
constituencies and recommend any redistribution of seats that may seem
necessary in the light of population movements or for some other reason.
Elections are by secret ballot. British subjects (including Commonwealth
citizens) and citizens of the Irish Republic can vote provided they are
aged 18 or over, resident in the United Kingdom, registered in the annual
register of electors for the constituency and not subject to any disqualifi¬
cation. People not entitled to vote include members of the House of Lords,
sentenced prisoners and people convicted within the previous five years of
corrupt or illegal election practices. Service voters (members of the armed
forces and their spouses, Crown servants and staff of the British Council
employed overseas, together with their wives or husbands if accompany¬
ing them) may be registered for an address in a constituency where they
would live but for their service.
Each elector may cast one vote, normally in person at a polling station.
Service voters resident abroad and merchant seamen may vote by proxy or,
if in the United Kingdom at the time of the election, by post. Electors who
are physically incapacitated or unable to vote in person because of the
nature of their employment are also entitled to vote by post.
Voting is not compulsory; nearly 76 per cent of a total electorate of almost
41 million people voted in the general election of May 1979. The candidate
who polls the most votes in a constituency is elected.
British subjects and citizens of the Irish Republic can stand and be
elected as MPs provided they are aged 21 or over and are not subject to
any disqualification. Those disqualified include undischarged bankrupts,
people sentenced to more than one year’s imprisonment, clergy of the
Church of England, Church of Scotland, Church of Ireland and Roman
Catholic Church, peers, and holders of certain offices listed in the House of
Commons Disqualification Act 1975. The latter include holders of judicial
office, civil servants, some local government officers, members of the
regular armed forces, members of the police forces and some members of
public corporations and government commissions. A candidate’s nomi¬
nation for election must be supported by the signatures of a nominator, a
seconder and eight assentors registered in the constituency. He or she does
not require any party backing. A candidate must also deposit £ 150, which is
forfeited if his or her votes do not exceed 12-5 per cent of those validly cast.
The maximum sum a candidate may spend on an election campaign is
£2,700 plus 2 3 pence for each elector in a borough constituency or 31
pence for each elector in a county constituency. A candidate may post free
of charge an election address to each elector in the constituency. All election
expenses, except the candidate’s personal expenses, are subject to the
statutory limit.
A ROYAL
FAMILY
The Prince and
Princess of Wales
with their son,
Prince William,
after his christening.
The baby is second
in succession to
the throne.
CASTLES
Left: Scotney Castle,
Kent, England.
Below left: Dunluce
Castle, County
Antrim, Northern
Ireland.
Right: Balmoral
Castle,
Aberdeenshire,
Scotland.
Below: Harlech
Castle, Gwynedd,
Wales.
PRISONERS
AID THE
BLIND
Long-term prisoners in the Braille Unit at Saughton Prison,
Edinburgh, transcribe books into braille for blind people
in Britain and overseas. Here they are producing a handbook
for a new ‘talking’ electronic calculator, helped by staff
from the Manpower Services Commission.
GOVERNMENT
39
The Party
System
The party system, existing in one form or another since the seventeenth
century, is an essential element in the working of the constitution.
The present system relies heavily upon the existence of organised
political parties, each laying policies before the electorate for approval. The
parties are not registered or formally recognised in law, but in practice most
candidates in elections, and almost all winning candidates, belong to one of
the main political parties.
The percentages of votes cast for the main political parties in the general
election of May 1979 and the resulting distribution of seats in the House of
Commons are given in Table 3.
The party which wins most seats (although not necessarily the most
votes) at a general election, or which has the support of a majority of
members in the House of Commons, usually forms the Government. By
tradition, the leader of the majority party is asked by the Sovereign to form
a government; and about 100 of its members in the House of Commons and
the House of Lords receive ministerial appointments (including appoint¬
ment to the Cabinet—see p 49) on the advice of the Prime Minister. The
largest minority party becomes the official Opposition with its own leader
and own ‘shadow Cabinet’; while members of other parties or any inde¬
pendents who have been elected support or oppose the Government
according to their party or their own view of the policy being debated at any
given time. Leaders of the Government and Opposition sit on the front
benches of the Commons with their supporters (the back-benchers) sitting
behind them. Similar arrangements for the parties also apply in the House
Table 3: Percentages of Votes Cast, and Members Elected, in the May
1979 General Election
Party
% of Votes
Cast
Party
Members
Elected
Conservative
Labour
Liberal
Others
439
36-9
13-8
5'4
ioo-o
Conservative
Labour
Liberal
Scottish National
Plaid Cymru (Welsh Nationalist)
Official Unionist (Northern Ireland)
Democratic Unionist (Northern Ireland)
United Ulster Unionist
Ulster Unionist
Social Democratic and Labour
(Northern Ireland)
Independent (Northern Ireland)
Speaker
339
268
11
2
2
5
3
1
1
1
1
1
635
On 30 September 1982 the state of the parties (excluding the Speaker and his three deputies) was as follows:
Conservative 333; Labour 236; Social Democratic 30 (a new party formed in 1981 whose members
comprised 27 former Labour MPs, one former Conservative MP and 2 newly elected MPs); Liberal 12;
Scottish Nationalist 2; Plaid Cymru (Welsh Nationalist) 2; Official Unionist (Northern Ireland) 5;
Democratic Unionist (Northern Ireland) 3 i United Ulster Unionist 1; Ulster Progressive Unionist
elected as Ulster Unionist 1; Independent Socialist (Northern Ireland)—elected as Social Democratic and
Labour 1; Anti-H Block Proxy Prisoner (Northern Ireland) 1; Independent Labour 1; vacant 3.
40
Parliamentary
Procedure
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
of Lords; however, Lords who do not wish to be associated with either
the Government or the Opposition may sit on the ‘cross-benches’. The
effectiveness of the party system in Parliament rests largely on the relation¬
ship between the Government and the opposition parties. Depending on
the relative voting strengths of the parties in the House of Commons, the
Opposition might seek to overthrow the Government by securing its defeat
on a ‘matter of confidence’. In general, however, its aims are to contribute
to the formulation of policy and legislation by constructive criticism; to
oppose government proposals that it considers objectionable; to secure
concessions on government Bills; and to increase public support and en¬
hance its chances of electoral success.
The detailed arrangements of government business are settled, under the
direction of the Prime Minister and the Leaders of the two Houses, by the
Chief Government Whips in consultation with the Chief Opposition
Whips. The Chief Whips together constitute the ‘usual channels’ often
referred to when the question of the possibility of finding time for debating
some particular issue is discussed. The Leaders of the two Houses are
primarily responsible for the direction of business and for providing
facilities for the Houses to debate matters about which they are concerned.
Outside Parliament, party control is exercised by the national and local
organisations. Inside Parliament, it is exercised by the Chief Whips and
their assistants (chosen within the party) whose duties include keeping
members informed of forthcoming parliamentary business, maintaining
the party’s voting strength by ensuring that members attend important
debates, and conveying to the party leadership the opinions of back-bench
members. The importance a party attaches to a vote on a particular issue is
indicated to the MPs by the underlining (once, twice or three times) on the
notice sent to them; failure to comply with a ‘three-line whip’ is usually
seen as rebellion against the party’s policy. Party discipline tends to be less
strong in the Lords than in the Commons.
The Chief Government Whip in the Commons is Parliamentary Secretary
to the Treasury; of the other Government Whips, three (one of whom is
deputy Chief Whip) are officers of the Royal Household, five hold titular
posts as Lords Commissioners of the Treasury and five are Assistant
Whips. Salaries are likewise paid to the Chief Opposition Whips in both
Houses and to two of the Assistant Whips for the Opposition in the
Commons. The Government Whips in the Lords hold offices in the Royal
Household and act as government spokesmen.
Annual assistance from public funds helps opposition parties in Parlia¬
ment to carry out their business. It is limited to parties which had at least
two members elected at the last general election or one member elected and
a minimum of 150,000 votes cast. The formula is: nearly £2,000 for every
seat and nearly £2 for every 200 votes, up to a maximum of £290,000.
Since 1945 Conservative or Labour administrations have been in power
in roughly equal proportions. There has recently been much speculation
over the prospects of a centre alliance formed in 1981 between the Liberal
Party and the new Social Democratic Party and its effect on the traditional
two-party system.
Parliamentary procedure is based on custom and precedent, partly formu¬
lated in standing orders governing details of practice in each House. The
system of debate is much the same in the two Houses: the subject originates
in the form of a motion (a proposal made by a member in order to elicit a
GOVERNMENT H
decision from the House). When a motion has been moved and seconded,
the Speaker proposes the question as the subject of debate. Members speak
from wherever they have been sitting. Questions are decided by a vote on a
simple majority. The main difference between the two Houses is that in the
Lords the office of Speaker carries with it no authority to check or curtail
debate, such matters being decided by the general sense of the House,
whereas in the Commons the Speaker has full authority to give effect,
promptly and decisively, to the rules and orders of the House. The Speaker
must guard against abuse of procedure or infringement of minority rights,
and has discretion to allow or disallow a closure motion (to end discussion
so that the matter may be put to the vote). The Speaker has powers to check
irrelevance and repetition in debate, and to save time in other respects. In
cases of grave disorder the House can be adjourned or the sitting suspended
by the Speaker. Voting in the Commons is under the direction of the
Speaker whose duty it is to pronounce the final result. In the event of a tied
vote the Speaker gives the casting vote, but only in accordance with
established conventions which preclude an expression of opinion on the
merits of the question.
The voting procedure in the House of Lords is similar to that in the
Commons, except that the Speaker or chairman has an original, but no
casting, vote. Bills and subordinate legislation are in general allowed to
proceed in the form before the House unless a majority votes to reject or
amend them; on other motions the question is decided in the negative
unless there is a majority in favour. When the House is sitting judicially (see
pp 107 and 117) the judgment under appeal is not changed if the votes are
equal.
The Commons has a public register of MBs’ financial interests. Members
with a relevant pecuniary interest in a matter before the House, direct or
indirect, must declare it when taking part in a debate, though to operate as a
disqualification from voting the interest must be direct, immediate and
personal. In any other proceedings of the House or in transactions with
other members or with ministers or civil servants, MPs must also disclose
any relevant financial interest or benefit.
Proceedings of both Houses are public, except on extremely rare occa¬
sions; the minutes (in the Commons called Votes and Proceedings and in
the Lords, Minutes of Proceedings) and the speeches (The Official Report
of Parliamentary Debates, Hansard) are published daily. The records of
the Lords from 1497 and of the Commons from 1547, together with the
parliamentary and political papers of certain past members of the Houses,
are available to the public in the House of Lords Record Office. Parliament
is not televised,1 but proceedings are recorded and sound transmissions of
some are made on television and radio, either live or in recorded form. A
Parliamentary Sound Archive has been established.
Legislative The law undergoes constant reform in the courts as established principles
Proceedings are interpreted, clarified or reapplied to meet new circumstances, but sub¬
stantial changes are the responsibility of Parliament and the Government
through the normal legislative process.
A draft law takes the form of a parliamentary Bill. Most Bills are public
'Debates on televising proceedings have taken place on several occasions and in 1968 an internal television
experiment took place in the Lords. In 1980 the Commons voted to allow the introduction of a private
member’s Bill to permit the televising of proceedings, but it progressed no further.
42
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Bills involving measures relating to public policy, but there are also private
Bills which deal solely with matters of individual, corporate or local inter¬
est. Public Bills can be introduced, in either House, by a government
minister or by a private member. Most public legislation is in practice
sponsored by the Government.
Before a Government Bill is finally drafted, there is normally consider¬
able consultation with professional bodies, voluntary organisations and
other agencies interested in the subject matter, such as major interest and
‘pressure’ groups which aim to promote a specific cause. Proposals for
legislative changes are sometimes set out in Government ‘White Papers’
which may be debated in Parliament before a Bill is introduced. From time
to time consultative documents, sometimes called ‘Green Papers’, set out
for public discussion government proposals which are still at the formative
stage.
Bills must, in principle, be passed by each House (see below). As a rule
Government Bills likely to raise political controversy go through the
Commons before the Lords, while those of an intricate but uncontroversial
nature often pass through the Lords first. A Bill with a mainly financial
purpose is nearly always introduced in the Commons, and a Bill involving
taxation must be based on resolutions agreed by that House, often after
debate, before it can be introduced. If the main object of a Bill is to create a
public charge, it can only be introduced by a minister or, if brought from
the Lords, be proceeded with in the Commons if taken up by a minister,
which gives the Government considerable control over legislation.
At the beginning of each session private members of the Commons ballot
for precedence in introducing a Bill on one of the Fridays specially allo¬
cated; the first 20 are successful. A private member may also present a Bill
after question time (see p 45), or seek to introduce a Bill under the ‘ten
minute rule’ which allows two speeches, one in favour of and one against the
measure, after which the House decides whether to allow the Bill to be
brought in. Private members’ Bills do not often proceed very far, but a few
become law each session. If one secures a second reading, the Government
usually introduces any necessary money resolution. Private members’ Bills
may be introduced in the House of Lords at any time, but the time that can
be given to them in the Commons is strictly limited.
The process of passing a public Bill is similar in both Houses. The Bill
receives a formal first reading on introduction, it is printed, and after a
while (between one day and several weeks depending on the nature of the
Bill) is given a second reading after a debate on its general principles and
merits. In the Commons a non-controversial Bill may be referred to a
second reading committee to decide whether it should be read a second
time. After a second reading in the Commons, a Bill is usually referred for
detailed examination to a standing committee (see p 44). If the House so
decides, the Bill may be referred to the whole House sitting in committee.
The committee stage is followed by the report stage, during which further
amendments may be considered. At the third reading a Bill is reviewed in
its final form. In the Commons this stage is taken without a debate unless
there is a motion in the name of six MPs that the question ‘be not put
forthwith’—a procedure frequently used. The House may vote to limit the
time devoted to examining a Bill by passing a timetable motion, commonly
referred to as a ‘guillotine’. After the third reading a Commons Bill is sent
to the Lords where it goes through broadly the same stages. In the Lords,
after the second reading, a Bill is considered by a committee of the whole
GOVERNMENT
43
Delegated
Legislation
House unless the House takes the rare decision to refer it to a Public Bill
Committee. It is then considered and read a third time; at all these stages
amendments may be made. A Bill which starts in the Lords and is passed by
that House is then sent to the Commons for all the stages there. Amend¬
ments made by the second House generally must be agreed by the first, or a
compromise reached, before a Bill can become law.
Most Government Bills introduced and passed in the Lords pass through
the Commons without difficulty because of their non-controversial nature.
However, if a non-governmental Lords Bill were unacceptable to the
Commons it would generally not become law because no debating time
would be allotted to it. The Lords, on the other hand, do not in general
prevent a Bill insisted upon by the Commons from finally becoming law.
Normally they either accept the Bill without changes, or amend and return
it for consideration by the Commons, who frequently agree to the amend¬
ments made. In practice, the Lords pass without amendment Bills such as
those authorising taxation or national expenditure. A Bill that deals only
with taxation or expenditure must become law within one month of being
sent to the Lords, whether or not they agree to it, unless the Commons
direct otherwise. If no agreement is reached between the two Houses on a
non-financial Commons Bill (or an amendment to it) the Lords can in
practice delay the Bill (with certain exceptions) for about 13 months. At the
end of this time it becomes law in the form originally passed by the
Commons. A Bill to lengthen the life of a Parliament would require the full
assent of both Houses in the normal way.
The limitations on the power of the Lords are based on the belief that the
principal legislative function of the non-elected House nowadays is to act as
a chamber of revision, complementing, not rivalling, the elected House.
When a Bill has passed through all its parliamentary stages, it is sent to
the Queen for royal assent, after which it is part of the law of the land and
known as an Act of Parliament. The royal assent has not been refused since
I7°7- . . •
Private Bills, promoted by people or organisations outside Parliament,
go through substantially the same procedure as public Bills, but most of the
work is done in committee, where proceedings follow a semi-judicial
pattern: the promoter must prove the need for the powers or privileges
sought and the objections of opposing interests are heard. Both sides may
be legally represented.
Delegated legislation, used to relieve pressure on parliamentary time, gives
ministers and other authorities the power to regulate administrative details
after a law has been passed. To minimise the risk that powers thus
conferred on the executive might supersede or weaken parliamentary
government, they are normally delegated to authorities directly responsible
to Parliament. Moreover, the Acts of Parliament by which particular
powers are delegated normally provide for some measure of parliamentary
control over legislation made in the exercise of these powers, for instance,
by reserving to Parliament the right to affirm or annul the orders them¬
selves. Certain Acts also require direct consultation with organisations
affected before rules and orders can be made.
A joint committee of both Houses reports on the technical propriety of
these ‘statutory instruments’. In order to save time, the Commons also uses
standing committees to consider the merits of instruments, with any
decisions reserved to the House.
44
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Parliamentary
Committees
Committees of the
Whole House
Standing
Committees
Select Committees
Either House may resolve itself into a committee (of the whole house) to
consider Bills in detail after their second reading. A committee of the whole
house is presided over by the Chairman of Ways and Means (the Chairman
of Committees in the House of Lords) or a deputy chairman.
House of Commons standing committees include those which examine
public Bills at the committee stage and, in certain cases, at the second
reading and report stages; two Scottish standing committees; the Scottish
Grand Committee; the Welsh Grand Committee; and the Northern Ireland
standing committee. Ordinary standing committees have no distinctive
names, being referred to simply as Standing Committee A, B, C, and so on,
and are each appointed specially to consider a specific Bill. Each has
between 16 and 50 members with a party balance reflecting as far as possible
that in the House as a whole. The Scottish Grand Committee, which
comprises all 71 Scottish members and 10 to 15 others, considers the
principles of Scottish Bills referred to it at second reading stage, the
Scottish estimates and other matters concerning only Scotland; arrange¬
ments may be made for it to sit in Edinburgh. The Welsh Grand Com¬
mittee, with all 36 Welsh members and up to five others, considers Bills
referred to it at second reading stage, and matters concerning only Wales.
The Northern Ireland committee considers matters relating specifically to
the province. A standing committee on regional affairs attended by any of
the 516 members from the English constituencies is occasionally appointed
to consider matters relating to the English regions. The Lords equivalent to
a standing committee, a Public Bill Committee, is rarely used.
A new House of Commons select committee structure has been set up in an
attempt to provide closer examination of government departments and
policies, and of the way ministers discharge their responsibilities.
This was in response to a recognition that Parliament was probably less
effective a check on the executive than it had been for much of the nine¬
teenth century. With the growth of mass political parties, the individual
independence of many MPs has tended to become subordinated to party
interests, and with the great extension of the range and complexity of
central government activities, and the parallel growth of bureaucracy, MPs
have a more difficult task in checking the actions of ministers and their
departments.
Some 14 committees examine the expenditure, administration and policy
of the main government departments and related bodies. The Foreign
Affairs Committee, for example, ‘shadows’ the work of the Foreign and
Commonwealth Office, and there are select committees on Scottish and
Welsh Affairs. The committees are constituted on a party basis, in approxi¬
mate proportions to party strength in the House. Other regular committees
include those on European Legislation, Public Accounts, Members’ Inter¬
ests, the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration and Sound
Broadcasting. The Committee of Selection and the Standing Orders Com¬
mittee have duties relating to private Bills, and the Committee of Selection
also chooses members to serve on standing and select committees. A
Liaison Committee to consider general matters relating to select committees
has been established. On rare occasions a parliamentary Bill is examined by
a select committee (a procedure additional to the usual legislative process).
In their scrutiny of government policies, the committees question
ministers, senior civil servants and interested bodies and individuals.
GOVERNMENT
45
Joint Committees
Party Committees
Other Forms of
Parliamentary
Control
Through hearings and published reports, they bring before Parliament and
the public a body of fact and informed opinion on many important issues,
and build up considerable expertise in their subjects of inquiry.
In the House of Lords, besides the Appeal and Appellate Committees in
which the bulk of the House’s judicial work is transacted, there are select
committees on the European Communities, Science and Technology,
House of Lords Offices, Hybrid Instruments, Leave of Absence, Lords’
Expenses, Personal Bills, Private Bills, Standing Orders, Privileges, Pro¬
cedure, Selection and Sound Broadcasting.
The two Houses may agree to set up joint select committees, and joint
committees are also appointed in each session to deal with Consolidation
Bills and delegated legislation.
In addition to the official committees of the two Houses there are several
unofficial party organisations or committees. The Conservative and
Unionist Members Committee (the 1922 Committee) consists of the back¬
bench membership of the party. The Parliamentary Labour Party is a
corporate body comprising all members of the party in both Houses; when
the Labour Party is in office a liaison committee acts as a channel of
communication between the Government and its back-benchers in both
Houses; when the party is in opposition the Parliamentary Labour Party is
organised under the direction of a Parliamentary Committee often referred
to as the ‘shadow Cabinet’.
The effectiveness of parliamentary control of the Government is a subject
of continuing discussion, both inside and outside Parliament. Control is
exercised finally by the ability of the House of Commons to force the
Government to resign by passing a resolution of ‘no confidence’ or by
rejecting a proposal which the Government considers so vital to its policy
that it has made it a ‘matter of confidence’ or, ultimately, by refusing to vote
the money required for the public service. In addition to the system of close
scrutiny by select committees the House of Commons offers a number of
opportunities for a searching examination of government policy by both the
Opposition and the Government’s own back-benchers.
These include:
1. Question time when for an hour on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and
Thursday, ministers answer MPs’ questions. Parliamentary questions
are one means of eliciting information about the Government’s inten¬
tions, as well as a way of airing, and possibly securing redress of,
grievances brought to MPs’ notice by constituents.
2. The right of MPs to use motions for the adjournment of the House to
open discussions on constituency cases or matters of public concern.
There is a half-hour adjournment period at the end of the business of the
day; and immediately before the adjournment for the Christmas, Easter,
spring and summer recesses a day is spent discussing matters raised by
private members. Moreover, an MP wishing to discuss a ‘specific and
important matter that should have urgent consideration’ may, at the end
of question time, ask leave to move the adjournment of the House. If the
Speaker accepts the terms of the motion, the MP asks the House for leave
for the motion to be put forward. Leave can be given unanimously, or if
40 or more MPs support the motion, or if fewer than 40 but more than 10
46
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Parliamentary
Commissioner for
Administration
Parliamentary
Privilege
support it and the House (on a vote) is in favour. Once leave has been
given, the matter is debated for three hours, usually on the next day.
3. The 19 days1 each session when the Opposition chooses subjects for
debate.
Procedural opportunities for criticism of the Government also arise
during the debate on the Queen’s speech at the beginning of a session,
during debates or motions of censure for which the Government gives up
part of its own time, and during debates on the Government’s legislative
proposals.
Opportunities for criticism are also provided in the House of Lords at
daily question time, during debates on specific motions and in questions
(which can be debated) at the end of the day’s business.
The involvement of Parliament, and more particularly the House of
Commons, in the management of the revenues of the State and payments
for the public service is described in Chapter 17.
To keep the two Houses informed of European Community develop¬
ments, and to enable them to scrutinise and debate Community policies and
proposals, there are two select committees (see above), and ministers make
regular statements about Community business.
The Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration (the ‘Parliamentary
Ombudsman’) investigates, independently, complaints of maladminis¬
tration when asked to do so by MPs on behalf of members of the public.
Powers of investigation extend to administrative actions by central govern¬
ment departments but not to policy decisions (which can be questioned in
Parliament) nor to matters affecting relations with other countries. Com¬
plaints by British citizens arising from dealings with British posts overseas
are open to investigation in some circumstances. The Commissioner has
access to departmental papers and reports the findings to the MP who
presented the complaint. The Commissioner is required to report annually
to Parliament. In addition he publishes details of selected investigations
at quarterly intervals and may submit other reports where necessary. A
Commons select committee has responsibility for overseeing the Com¬
missioner’s work.
Each House of Parliament has certain rights and immunities to protect it
from unnecessary obstruction in carrying out its duties. The rights apply
collectively to each House and individually to each member.
For the Commons the Speaker formally claims ‘their ancient and un¬
doubted rights and privileges’ at the beginning of each Parliament. These
include freedom of speech; freedom from arrest in civil actions; exemption
from serving on juries, attending as witnesses or serving as sheriff's; and the
right of access to the Crown, a collective privilege of the House. Further
privileges include the rights of the House to control its own proceedings (so
that it is able, for instance, to exclude ‘strangers’ if it wishes), to pronounce
upon legal disqualifications for membership and to declare a seat vacant on
such grounds; and to penalise for breach of its privileges and for contempt.
The privileges of the House of Lords closely resemble those of the House
of Commons.
‘Formerly 29. Certain topics traditionally dealt with in Opposition time will, from the 1982-83 session, be
taken in Government time, the balance remaining largely unchanged.
GOVERNMENT
47
THE PRIVY COUNCIL
Until the eighteenth century, the Sovereign in Council, or Privy Council,
was the chief source of executive power in the State. As the system of
Cabinet government developed, however, the Privy Council became less
prominent. Many powers were transferred to the Cabinet as an inner
committee of the Council, and much of its work was handed over to newly
created government departments, some of which were originally com¬
mittees of the Privy Council.
Nowadays the main function of the Privy Council is to advise the Queen
to approve Orders in Council (those made under prerogative powers, such
as Orders approving the grant of royal charters of incorporation; and those
made under statutory powers). Members of the Privy Council attending
meetings at which Orders are made do not thereby become personally
responsible for the policy upon which the Orders are based; this rests with
the minister responsible for the subject matter of the Order in question,
whether or not he or she was present at the meeting.
The Privy Council also advises the Crown on the issue of royal procla¬
mations, some of the most important of which relate to prerogative acts
(such as summoning or dissolving Parliament). The Council’s own statu¬
tory responsibilities, which are independent of the powers of the Sovereign
in Council, include powers of supervision over the registering bodies for
the medical and allied professions.
Apart from Cabinet ministers, who must be Privy Counsellors and are
sworn in on first assuming office, membership of the Council (retained for
life) is accorded by the Sovereign on the recommendation of the Prime
Minister to eminent people in independent monarchical countries of the
Commonwealth. There are about 380 Privy Counsellors. A full Council is
summoned only on the death of the Sovereign or when the Sovereign
announces his or her intention to marry.
Committees of There are a number of advisory Privy Council committees whose meetings
the Privy differ from those of the Privy Council itself in that the Sovereign cannot
Council constitutionally be present. These may be prerogative committees, such as
those dealing with legislative matters submitted by the legislatures of the
Channel Islands and the Isle of Man and with applications for charters of
incorporation; or they may be provided for by statute as are those for the
universities of Oxford and Cambridge and the Scottish universities.
The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council is the final court of appeal
from the courts of the United Kingdom dependencies, courts of indepen¬
dent members of the Commonwealth which have not discontinued the
appeal, courts of the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man, and certain other
courts, some professional and disciplinary committees and church sources.
Administrative work is carried out in the Privy Council Office under the
Lord President of the Council, a Cabinet minister.
HER MAJESTY’S GOVERNMENT
Her Majesty’s Government is the body of ministers responsible for the
administration of national affairs.
The Prime Minister is appointed by the Queen, and all other ministers
are appointed by the Queen on the recommendation of the Prime Minister.
The majority of ministers are members of the Commons, although the
48
Composition
Prime Minister
Departmental
Ministers
Non-Departmental
Ministers
Lord Chancellor
and Law Officers
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Government is also fully represented by ministers in the Lords. The Lord
Chancellor is always a member of the House of Lords.
The composition of the Government can vary both in the number of
ministers and in the titles of some offices. The creation of a paid ministerial
office with entirely new functions, the abolition of an office, the transfer of
functions from one minister to another, or a change in the designation of a
minister may be effected by Order in Council.
The Prime Minister is also, by tradition, First Lord of the Treasury and
Minister for the Civil Service. The head of the Government became known
as the Prime Minister during the eighteenth century. The Prime Minister’s
unique position of authority derives from majority support in Parliament
and from the power to choose ministers and to obtain their resignation or
dismissal individually. By modern convention, the Prime Minister always
sits in the House of Commons.
The Prime Minister informs the Queen of the general business of the
Government, presides over the Cabinet, and is responsible for the allo¬
cation of functions among ministers.
The Prime Minister’s other responsibilities include recommending to
the Queen a number of appointments. These include: Church of England
archbishops, bishops and deans and some 200 other clergy in Crown
‘livings’; high judicial offices, such as the Lord Chief Justice, Lords of
Appeal in Ordinary, and the Lords Justices of Appeal; Privy Counsellors,
Lords-Lieutenant and certain civil appointments, such as Lord High
Commissioner to the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland, Poet
Laureate, Constable of the T ower, and some university posts; and appoint¬
ments to various public boards and institutions, such as the British Broad¬
casting Corporation, as well as various royal and statutory commissions.
Recommendations are likewise made for the award of many civil honours
and distinctions and of Civil List pensions (to people who have achieved
eminence in science and the arts and who are in some financial need). The
Prime Minister also selects the trustees of certain national museums and
institutions.
Ministers in charge of government departments, who are usually in the
Cabinet, are known as ‘Secretary of State’ or ‘Minister’, or may have a
special title, as in the case of the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
The holders of various traditional offices, namely the Lord President of the
Council, the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, the Lord Privy Seal,
the Paymaster General (and from time to time Ministers without Portfolio),
may have few or no departmental duties and are thus available to perform
any special duties the Prime Minister may wish to give them. The Lord
President of the Council, for example, is responsible for co-ordinating the
presentation of information on government policies, and the Lord Privy
Seal is responsible for the day-to-day administration of the Civil Service.
The Lord Chancellor holds a special position, being a minister with depart¬
mental functions and also head of the judiciary in England and Wales. The
four Law Officers of the Crown are: for England and Wales, the Attorney
General and the Solicitor General; for Scotland, the Lord Advocate and
the Solicitor General for Scotland.
GOVERNMENT
49
Ministers of State
Junior Ministers
Ministerial
Salaries
The Cabinet
Cabinet Meetings
Ministers of State usually work with ministers in charge of departments
with responsibility for specific functions, and are sometimes given courtesy
titles which reflect these particular functions. More than one may work in a
department. A Minister of State can be given a seat in the Cabinet and paid
accordingly.
Junior Ministers (generally Parliamentary Under-Secretaries of State or,
where the senior minister is not a Secretary of State, simply Parliamentary
Secretaries) share in parliamentary and departmental duties. They may
also be given responsibility, directly under the departmental minister, for
specific aspects of the department’s work. The Parliamentary Secretary to
the Treasury and other Lords Commissioners of the Treasury are in a
different category as Government Whips (see p 40).
The salaries of ministers in the House of Commons range from £15,700 a
year for junior ministers and £20,575 to £245! 5° f°r more senior ministers
to £28,950 for Cabinet ministers. The Prime Minister and the Lord
Chancellor also receive £28,950.
Ministers in the Commons, including the Prime Minister, also have
parliamentary salaries of £8,460 a year in recognition of their constituency
responsibilities and are entitled to claim the other allowances which are
paid to all MPs.1
The Cabinet is composed of about 20 ministers chosen by the Prime
Minister and may include departmental and non-departmental ministers.
Its origins can be traced back to the informal conferences which the
Sovereign held with leading ministers, independently of the Privy Council,
during the seventeenth century. After the Sovereign’s withdrawal from an
active role in politics in the eighteenth century, and the development of
organised political parties stimulated by successive extensions of the fran¬
chise from 1832 onwards, the Cabinet assumed its modern form.
The functions of the Cabinet are: the final determination of policies, the
supreme control of government and the co-ordination of government
departments. The exercise of these functions is vitally affected by the fact
that the Cabinet is a group of party representatives, depending upon
majority support in the House of Commons.
The Cabinet meets in private and its proceedings are confidential. Its
members are bound by their oath as Privy Counsellors not to disclose
information about its proceedings. The Official Secrets Acts forbid the
publication of Cabinet as well as other state papers (although after they
have been in existence for 30 years they may be made available for inspec¬
tion in the Public Record Office) and a resigning minister wishing to make a
statement involving disclosure of Cabinet discussions should first obtain
permission through the Prime Minister. Diaries published by several
former ministers have given the public an insight into Cabinet procedures
in recent times.
Normally the Cabinet meets for a few hours once or twice a week during
parliamentary sittings, and rather less often when Parliament is not sitting.
To keep the amount of work coming before the Cabinet within manageable
' The Leader of the Opposition in the Commons receives a salary for the post, as well as a parliamentary
salary; in the Lords the Leader of the Opposition receives a salary.
50
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Cabinet
Office
Ministerial
Responsibility
limits, a great deal of work is carried on through the committee system,
which involves the reference of any issue either to a standing Cabinet
committee or to an ad hoc committee composed of the ministers primarily
concerned. The committee then considers the matter in detail and either
disposes of it or reports upon it to the Cabinet with recommendations for
action. The present Cabinet has four standing committees: a defence and
overseas policy committee and an economic strategy committee both under
the chairmanship of the Prime Minister; a home and social affairs com¬
mittee under the chairmanship of the Home Secretary; and a legislation
committee under the chairmanship of the Lord President of the Council.
Sub-committees of the standing committees may be established. Member¬
ship and terms of reference of all Cabinet committees are confidential.
Non-Cabinet ministers may be invited to attend meetings on matters
affecting their departments, and may be members of Cabinet committees.
The Secretary of the Cabinet and other senior officials of the Cabinet Office
also attend meetings of the Cabinet and its committees as appropriate.
The Cabinet Office, headed by the Secretary of the Cabinet, under the
direction of the Prime Minister, comprises the Cabinet Secretariat, the
Central Policy Review Staff, the Central Statistical Office and the Historical
Section.
The Cabinet Secretariat serves ministers collectively in the conduct of
Cabinet business and operates as an instrument in the co-ordination of
policy at the highest level.
The Central Policy Review Staff advises ministers collectively on major
issues of policy.
The Central Statistical Office is concerned with the preparation and
interpretation of the statistics necessary to support economic and social
policies and management, and co-ordinates the statistical work of other
departments.
The Historical Section of the Cabinet Office is in the process of com¬
pleting the official histories of the second world war, and is responsible for
the preparation of official histories of certain peacetime events.
‘Ministerial responsibility’ refers both to the collective responsibility
which ministers share for government policy and actions and to ministers’
individual responsibility to Parliament for their departments’ work.
The doctrine of collective responsibility means that the Cabinet acts
unanimously even when Cabinet ministers do not all agree on a subject.
The policy of departmental ministers must be consistent with the policy of
the Government as a whole. Once the Government’s policy on a matter has
been decided, each minister is expected to support it or resign. On rare
occasions, ministers have been allowed free votes in Parliament on govern¬
ment policies involving important issues of principle.
The individual responsibility of a minister for the work of his or her
department means that, as political head of that department, he or she is
answerable for all its acts and omissions and must bear the consequences of
any defect of administration, any injustice to an individual or any aspect of
policy which may be criticised in Parliament, whether personally respon¬
sible or not. Since most ministers are members of the House of Commons,
they must answer questions and defend themselves against criticism in
person. Departmental ministers in the House of Lords are represented in
GOVERNMENT
51
Non-
Departmental
Public Bodies
the Commons by someone qualified to speak on their behalf, usually a
junior minister.
Departmental ministers normally decide all matters within their respon¬
sibility, although on important political matters they usually consult their
colleagues collectively, through the Cabinet or a Cabinet committee. A
decision by a departmental minister binds the Government as a whole.
The responsibility of ministers for their departments is an effective way
of keeping government under public control, for the knowledge that any
departmental action may be reported to and examined in Parliament dis¬
courages the taking of arbitrary and ill-considered decisions.
On assuming office ministers must resign directorships in private and
public companies, and must order their affairs so that there is no conflict
between public duties and private interests.
GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS
Government departments are the main instruments for giving effect to
government policy when Parliament has passed the necessary legislation,
and for advising ministers. They may, and frequently do, work with and
through local authorities, statutory boards, and government-sponsored
organisations operating under various degrees of government control.
A change of government does not necessarily affect the number or
general functions of government departments, although a radical change in
policy may be accompanied by some organisational change.
The work of some departments (for instance, the Ministry of Defence)
covers the United Kingdom as a whole. Other departments (like the
Department of Employment) cover England, Wales and Scotland, but not
Northern Ireland. Others, such as the Department of the Environment, are
mainly concerned with affairs in England. There are separate departments
for Scotland, Northern Ireland and Wales.
Some departments, such as the Department of Trade, maintain a re¬
gional organisation, and some which have direct contact with the public
throughout the country (for example, the Department of Employment)
also have local offices.
Although departments are usually headed by a minister, some in which
questions of policy do not normally arise are headed by a permanent official,
and a minister with other duties is responsible for them to Parliament. For
instance, ministers in the Treasury are responsible for the Central Office
of Information, Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, the Customs and Excise,
the Inland Revenue and a number of small departments including the
Treasury Solicitor’s Department, the Royal Mint, and the National Debt
Office. Departments generally receive their funds directly out of money
provided by Parliament and are staffed by the Civil Service.
A number of bodies with a role in the process of government are neither
government departments nor part of a department. Known as non-depart-
mental public bodies, but often popularly described as ‘quangos’ (which is
often taken to stand for ‘quasi-autonomous non-governmental organisa¬
tions’, although there is no precise definition of the term), they are of three
kinds: executive bodies, advisory bodies and tribunals. Executive bodies
generally employ staff and spend money on their own account; advisory
bodies and tribunals do not normally employ staff or spend money them¬
selves, but their expenses are paid by government departments concerned.
52
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Many of the more important executive bodies are mentioned in this
Handbook; a note on advisory bodies is set out below; and the position of
tribunals is dealt with on p 119.
As a result of a review of non-departmental public bodies undertaken by
the Government in 1979, several hundred have been wound up, and others
reduced in scale or scope; scrutiny of these bodies continues.
Advisory Many government departments are assisted by advisory councils or com-
Bodies mittees which undertake research and collect information, mainly to give
ministers access to informed opinion before coming to a decision involving
a legislative or executive act. In some cases a minister must consult a
standing committee, but usually advisory bodies are appointed at the
discretion of the minister because of the need for their advice.
The membership of the advisory councils and committees varies accord¬
ing to the nature of the work involved, and may include civil servants and
representatives of varying interests and professions.
In addition to these standing advisory bodies, there are committees set
up by the Government to examine and make recommendations on specific
matters. For certain important inquiries Royal Commissions, whose mem¬
bers are chosen for their wide experience and diverse knowledge, may be
appointed. Royal Commissions examine written and oral evidence from
government departments, interested organisations and individuals, and
submit recommendations. The Government may accept the recommen¬
dations in whole or in part, or may decide to take no further action or to
delay action. Inquiries may also be undertaken by departmental committees.
Distribution of An outline of the principal functions of the main government departments
Functions is given below. Departments are arranged in alphabetical order, except for
the Scottish and Northern Ireland departments which are grouped at the
end of the section. Further information on the work of some departments is
given in later chapters under the relevant subject headings.
DEPARTMENT Main areas of responsibility
The work of many departments listed below covers the United Kingdom as
a whole. Where this is not the case, the following abbreviations are used:
(GB) for functions covering England, Wales and Scotland; (E, W & NI) for
those covering England, Wales and Northern Ireland; (E & W) for those
covering England and Wales; and (E) for those concerned only with
England.
Ministry of
Agriculture,
Fisheries and
Food
Board of
Customs and
Excise
Ministry of
Defence
Policies for agriculture, forestry, horticulture and fishing (E); food policies.
Collecting and accounting for revenues of Customs and Excise, including
value added tax; agency functions including controlling certain imports
and exports and compiling overseas trade statistics.
Defence policy and control and administration of the armed services.
GOVERNMENT
53
DEPARTMENT
Department of
Education and
Science
Department of
Employment
Department of
Energy
Department of
the
Environment
Export Credits
Guarantee
Department
Foreign and
Commonwealth
Office
Department of
Health and
Social Security
Home Office
Department of
Industry
Central Office
of Information
Board of Inland
Revenue
Main areas of responsibility
General promotion of education (E); arts (GB), libraries (E with advice to
W and NI), national museums (E), public libraries and local museums,
British Library, National Heritage (GB); the Government’s relations with
universities (GB); fostering civil science in Britain and internationally.
Manpower policies; labour legislation; payment of unemployment benefit
through local offices; issue of work permits to workers from overseas; Race
Relations Employment Advisory Service (E); policy for the Careers Service
(E); relations with International Labour Organisation and European
Community.
Policies in relation to all forms of energy, including its conservation and
the development of new sources; the Government’s relations with the
nationalised energy industries, the Atomic Energy Authority and the
British National Oil Corporation.
Planning; local government; new towns; housing; construction; inner city
matters; environmental protection; water; the countryside; sport and
recreation; conservation; historic buildings and ancient monuments.
Property Services Agency (E).
Provision of insurance for exporters against risk of not being paid for goods
and services, and access to bank finance for exports.
Conduct of Britain’s overseas relations.
National Health Service, personal social services provided by local
authorities, and certain aspects of public health, including hygiene (E &
W); the social security system (GB).
Administration of law and order including criminal justice, police service,
and prisons. Responsibility for immigration and nationality; community
relations; race relations; broadcasting and radio regulatory matters; con¬
duct of elections; civil defence and fire services; sex discrimination policy;
and regulation of firearms, dangerous drugs, and gaming and lotteries.
Licensing laws. Approval of local authority by-laws (E & W).
Industrial policy; financial assistance to industry other than through the
tax system; sponsorship of private and state-owned manufacturing in¬
dustries.
Provision of publicity material and of publicity and information services
required by other government departments.
Administration of the tax laws.
54
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
DEPARTMENT
The Law
Officers’
Department
The Lord
Chancellor’s
Office
Management
and Personnel
Office
Ordnance
Survey
Overseas
Development
Administration
Parliamentary
Counsel Office
Paymaster
General’s Office
Office of
Population
Censuses and
Surveys
Procurator
General and
Treasury
Solicitor’s
Department
Her Majesty’s
Stationery
Office
Department of
Trade
Department of
Transport
Main areas of responsibility
Provision of advice to the Government on English law and representation
of the Crown in appropriate domestic and international cases, both civil
and criminal, by the Law Officers of the Crown for England and Wales—
the Solicitor General and the Attorney General (E, W & NI).
Administration of the courts and the law. (The Home Office has important
responsibilities for the criminal law.) The Lord Chancellor is involved in
most appointments to the magistracy and judiciary outside Scotland (E,
W & NI).
Organisation, management and efficiency of the Civil Service.
The surveying and mapping of Great Britain, including geodetic surveys
and associated scientific work and topographic surveys (GB).
Administration of financial aid to, and technical co-operation in, develop¬
ing countries.
Drafting of Government Bills (except those related exclusively to Scotland);
advising departments on parliamentary procedure (E, W & NI).
Provision of banking services for government departments other than the
Boards of Inland Revenue and Customs and Excise, and the payment of
public service pensions.
Administration of the Marriage Acts and local registration of births,
marriages and deaths; population estimates; compilation of health statistics;
censuses (E & W); surveys for other government departments (GB).
Provision of a common legal service for a large number of government
departments. Duties include instructing Parliamentary Counsel on Bills
and drafting subordinate legislation; providing litigation and conveyan¬
cing services; and giving general advice on the interpretation and applica¬
tion of the law (E & W).
Publication of parliamentary and government papers; procurement of
office supplies.
Overseas trade policy and commercial relations; export promotion; con¬
sumer protection and safety; competition policy; companies legislation;
insolvency; the insurance industry; printing and publishing; patents, trade
marks and copyright; civil aviation; marine and shipping policy; policies
for tourism, films, and distributive and service trade industries.
Policies for the main transport industries; responsibility for the planning
and maintenance of motorways and trunk roads, for local transport, road
and vehicle safety, and for vehicle and driver licensing (E).
GOVERNMENT
55
DEPARTMENT Main areas of responsibility
Treasury , Broad economic strategy with particular responsibilities for public finance
and expenditure, including control of manpower and pay in the Civil
Service.
Welsh Office Many aspects of Welsh affairs including health and personal social services;
housing; local government; education (except universities); town and
country planning; new towns; water and sewerage; roads; agriculture;
forestry; tourism; national parks; ancient monuments and historic build¬
ings; careers service and work in Wales of the Manpower Services Com¬
mission; certain responsibilities relating to the National Library and the
National Museum, the Wales Tourist Board and Sports Council for Wales;
and shared responsibility for the administration of urban grants to areas of
acute social deprivation; selective financial assistance to industry; and
general responsibility for economic development (Wales only).
SCOTLAND Scotland has its own system of law and wide administrative autonomy. The
Secretary of State for Scotland, a Cabinet minister, has responsibility in
Scotland (with some exceptions) both for formulating and carrying out
policy relating to agriculture and fisheries, education, law and order, local
government and environmental services, social work, health, housing,
roads and certain aspects of shipping and road transport services.
The Secretary of State also has a major role in the planning and de¬
velopment of the Scottish economy, and important functions related to
industrial development, with responsibility for selective financial assist¬
ance to industry, for the Scottish Development Agency, and the Highlands
and Islands Development Board and for the work of the Manpower
Services Commission and the careers service. The Secretary of State plays
a full part in determining energy policy, particularly in relation to respon¬
sibility for the electricity supply industry in Scotland.
The Secretary of State is responsible for legal services in Scotland, and
other important functions are exercised by the two Scottish Law Officers:
the Lord Advocate and the Solicitor General for Scotland (see p 121). On
many domestic matters, the distinctively Scottish features and the different
conditions and needs of the country and its people are reflected in separate
legislation relating wholly to Scotland, or else in sections of special appli¬
cation to Scotland only inserted in Acts which otherwise apply to the
United Kingdom generally. The Secretary of State is also responsible for
the government interest in a range of other functions from fire services to
sport and tourism.
The United Kingdom Government’s administrative functions arising
from these responsibilities are carried out principally by five Scottish
departments supported by Central Services, based in Edinburgh (although
with some staff dispersed over Scotland and with an office in London),
known collectively as the Scottish Office. The Scottish Office Management
Group, under the chairmanship of the Permanent Under-Secretary of
State, with a membership consisting of the head of each of the departments
and the Deputy Secretary, Central Services, advises the Secretary of State,
particularly on questions such as the allocation of resources and forward
56
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
planning, with which more than one of the Scottish departments are
concerned.
United Kingdom government departments with significant Scottish
responsibilities have offices in Scotland with delegated powers and work
closely with the Scottish Office.
An outline of the main functions of the Scottish departments is given
below.
DEPARTMENT
Functions
Department of
Agriculture and
Fisheries for
Scotland
Promotion of the agriculture and fishing industries.
Scottish
Development
Department
Scottish
Economic
Planning
Department
Town and country planning; housing; roads; building control; water
supplies and sewerage; pollution control; general policy relating to local
government organisation; ancient monuments and historic buildings;
certain transport functions.
Industrial and regional economic development matters; energy.
Scottish
Education
Department
Scottish Home
and Health
Department
Central
Services
Crown Office
Scottish Courts
Administration
Other
Administrative
Departments
Education (excluding universities); student awards; libraries; museums
and galleries; sport and recreation; the arts; social work services.
Central administration of law and order (including police service, criminal
justice, legal aid and penal institutions); the National Health Service; fire,
home defence and civil emergency services.
Services to the five Scottish departments. These include the Office of the
Solicitor to the Secretary of State, the Scottish Information Office, and
Finance Divisions.
Provision of legal advice to the Government on issues affecting Scotland
and the principal representation of the Crown for litigation in Scotland by
the Law Officers of the Crown for Scotland (the Lord Advocate and the
Solicitor General for Scotland); control of all prosecution in Scotland.
Organisation, administration and staffing of the courts and court offices;
jurisdiction and procedure of civil courts; enforcement of judgments; and
programme of Scottish Law Commission.
Department of the Registrar General for Scotland; Scottish Record Office;
Department of the Registers of Scotland.
GOVERNMENT
57
DEPARTMENT Functions
NORTHERN The Northern Ireland Office is the department of the Secretary of State for
IRELAND Northern Ireland, a Cabinet minister who has responsibility, and is answer-
able to Parliament, for the government of Northern Ireland. Through this
Office the Secretary of State has responsibility for constitutional develop¬
ments, law and order and security, and electoral matters.
The Northern Ireland departments are subject to the direction and control
of the Secretary of State. Their principal functions are listed below. Under
the arrangements for the partial or full devolution of powers to Northern
Ireland (see p 17), the responsibility of the departments could pass in part
or wholly to the devolved administration.
DEPARTMENT Functions
Department of
Agriculture
Department
of Economic
Development
Department
of Education
Department of
the
Environment
Department of
Finance and
Personnel
Development of agricultural, forestry and fishing industries.
Development of industry and commerce, and administration of schemes of
assistance to industry, especially through the Industrial Development
Board for Northern Ireland; administration of employment service and
labour training scheme.
Central policy, co-ordination, legislation and financial control of the
education and library service; recreation, culture and entertainment.
Road construction and maintenance; water supplies and sewerage, plan¬
ning; public health; public transport, road traffic management, motor
taxation; historic monuments and buildings; and certain controls over
housing and local government.
Control of public expenditure; liaison with the United Kingdom Treasury
and the Northern Ireland Office on financial matters, economic and social
planning and research; general management and control of the Northern
Ireland Civil Service; valuation.
Department of
Health and
Social Services
Health, personal social services and social security.
THE CIVIL SERVICE
The Civil Service is concerned with the conduct of the whole range of
government activities as they affect the community, ranging from policy
formulation to executing the day-to-day duties that public administration
demands.
Civil servants are servants of the Crown. They are responsible to the
minister in whose department they work for the execution of his or her
58
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Northern
Ireland Civil
Service
Structure
policies. Ministers alone are answerable to Parliament for their policies and
the actions of their staff. A change of minister, for whatever reason, does not
involve a change of staff. (Ministers sometimes appoint special policy
advisers from outside the Civil Service; the advisers are paid from public
funds, but their appointments come to an end when the Government’s term
of office finishes.)
Including part-time staff (two part-time officers being reckoned as
equivalent to one full-time), there are about 666,000 civil servants (some
40 per cent of them women), roughly 328,000 of whom are engaged in the
provision of public services, such as paying sickness benefits and pensions,
collecting taxes and contributions, running employment services, staffing
prisons, and providing services to industry and agriculture. About 217,000
are employed in the Ministry of Defence, including the Royal Ordnance
factories and Royal Dockyards. The rest are divided between: central
administrative and policy duties; service-wide support services, such as
accommodation, printing and information; and largely financially self-
supporting services, for instance, those provided by the Department for
National Savings and the Royal Mint.
Over three-quarters of civil servants work outside London. As part of its
policy of cutting public service manpower the Government plans to reduce
the service to 630,000 by 1984, a total smaller than at any time since the end
of the second world war.
The total number includes about 138,000 ‘industrial’ civil servants,
mainly manual workers in government industrial establishments, whose
pay and conditions of service are on the whole separately administered from
those of‘non-industrial’ civil servants.
The Northern Ireland Civil Service is modelled on its counterpart in Great
Britain, and has its own Civil Service Commission. Interchange of staff
between the two Civil Services occurs to a minor extent only.
The structure of the Home Civil Service is designed to allow for a flexible
deployment of staff so that talent can be used to the best advantage, with
higher posts open to people of outstanding ability, whatever their specialist
background or original method of entry into the Service. Although work
requiring specialist skill is always done by appropriately qualified indivi¬
duals, personnel management policies are designed to ensure that people
with the necessary qualities gain suitable wide experience to fit them for
higher posts.
At the top levels of the Home Civil Service there is an open and unified
structure which, with very few exceptions, covers all posts whatever the
nature of their duties. It comprises three grades—permanent secretary,
deputy secretary and under-secretary.
At other levels the structure is based on a system of categories and
occupational groups, which are the basic groupings of staff for the pur¬
poses of pay, recruitment and personnel management. These include the
General Category (covering the Administration, Economist, Statistician,
Information Officer and Librarian groups), the Science Category, the Pro¬
fessional and Technology Category (including architects, surveyors, elec¬
trical and mechanical engineers, graphics officers and marine services staff),
and the Training, Legal, Police, Secretarial, Data Processing, Research
Officer, Social Security, Security and Museum Categories. These 12
categories account for some 75 per cent of non-industrial staff.
GOVERNMENT
59
The Diplomatic
Service
Recruitment
and Training
Promotion and
Conditions of
Service
The Diplomatic Service, a separate service of some 6,000 or so people,
provides the staff for the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and at United
Kingdom diplomatic missions and consular posts abroad. Its functions
include advising on policy, negotiating with overseas governments and
conducting business in international organisations; promoting British
exports and trade generally, administering aid, presenting ideas, policies
and objectives to the people of overseas countries; and protecting British
interests abroad.
The Service has its own grade structure, linked for salary purposes with
that of the Home Civil Service, and conditions of work are in many ways
comparable while taking into account the special demands of the Service,
particularly of postings overseas. Members of the Home Civil Service and
the armed forces, and individuals from the private sector, may serve in
the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and at overseas posts on loan or
attachment.
Recruitment of senior staff to the Home Civil Service and the Diplomatic
Service is the responsibility of the Civil Service Commission which, in
conjunction with departments, ensures that staff are selected solely on
merit through fair and open competition. The choice of a successful
candidate for a particular vacancy is made by the department concerned.
The selection of junior staff, such as those engaged in clerical and manual
work, is undertaken almost entirely by the departments themselves.
For the Administration Group, the central part of the Home Civil
Service, entry is at three levels relating broadly to the academic achieve¬
ments of: a second class honours degree, or better; GCE Advanced level;
and GCE Ordinary level. The selection procedure for the highest of these
levels (the Administration Trainee entry) comprises qualifying tests,
followed by tests and interviews at the Civil Service Selection Board and an
interview by the Final Selection Board. For the next level (the Executive
Officer entry) selection involves qualifying tests for those possessing the
necessary academic qualifications, followed by an interview. For the lower
level (the clerical entry) selection is normally by interview of those holding
the prescribed educational qualifications.
Entry to the professional and technical grades usually requires appro¬
priate qualifications, and selection is on the basis of past record and by
interview.
Most government departments employ full-time training officers and
tutors to help identify staff training needs and to organise training by the
most appropriate methods (for example, formal courses or self-instruction).
The Civil Service College provides that training which is most efficiently
undertaken centrally. Considerable use is also made of external institutions.
Civil servants under the age of 18 may continue their education by
attending appropriate courses usually for one day a week (‘day release’
schemes). Adult staff may be entitled to financial assistance to undertake,
mainly in their own time, private studies leading to recognised educational
or professional qualifications in approved subjects. There are also oppor¬
tunities for civil servants in mid-career to obtain fellowships or to go on
sabbatical leave to undertake research in areas of interest to themselves and
their departments.
Promotions are made partly through centrally conducted competitions and
partly by the departments themselves. Normally promotion is from grade
to grade, but there can be accelerated promotion for staff who show
6o
Political and
Private
Activities
Security
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
exceptional promise. Promotion or appointment to deputy secretary posts
and above and all transfers between departments at these levels are
approved by the Prime Minister, advised by the secretary of the Cabinet
and official joint head of the Home Civil Service.
Civil servants are encouraged to join the trade union which represents
the grade to which they belong. The National Whitley Council, consisting
of senior officials (the Official Side) and representatives of the unions (the
Trade Union Side), discusses conditions of service of staff and provides a
forum for consultation. There are Whitley committees in all government
departments. Pay negotiations are conducted directly with the individual
unions or with the Trade Union Side representing all the unions.
An independent inquiry (the Megaw Inquiry) into future arrangements
for the determination of non-industrial civil service pay reported in mid-
1982. Its recommendations are being considered.
Civil servants are expected to serve loyally the Government of the day,
regardless of its political composition. To maintain their reputation for
political impartiality, some restrictions are placed on their freedom to
participate in political activities. No civil servant may be a member of
Parliament, or (with certain exceptions corresponding to the ‘politically
free’ group shown below) be adopted as a parliamentary candidate.
Civil Service rules place staff in three groups for the purpose of political
activities: (1) the ‘politically free’ group, consisting of industrial and non¬
office grades, who are free to engage in any political activity including
standing for Parliament (although they would have to resign from the
Service if elected); (2) the ‘politically restricted’ group, consisting of all
staff above Executive Officer level, together with those Executive Officers
and certain related grades such as Information Officers, who are debarred
from national political activities but may apply for permission to take part
in local political activities; and (3) the ‘intermediate’ group, comprising all
other staff—mainly clerical and typing grades—who may apply for per¬
mission to take part in national or local political activity apart from
adoption as a parliamentary candidate.
Where required, permission is granted to the maximum extent consis¬
tent with the reputation of the Civil Service for political impartiality and
the avoidance of any conflict with official duties. It is granted subject to a
code of discretion requiring moderation and the avoidance of embarrass¬
ment to ministers.
Generally, there are no restrictions on the private activities of civil
servants, provided that these do not bring discredit on the Civil Service,
and that there is no possibility of conflict with official duties. For instance, a
civil servant is required to seek permission before taking part in any outside
activity which involves the use of official experience, or before accepting a
directorship in any company holding a contract with his or her department.
As a general rule the political views of civil servants are not a matter of
official concern. However, no one whose loyalty is in doubt may be em¬
ployed on work vital to the security of the State. For this reason certain
posts are not open to anyone known to be a member of a Communist or
Fascist organisation, or associated with such an organisation in a way that
raises legitimate doubts about his or her reliability, or to anyone whose
reliability may be in doubt for any other reason.
Each department is responsible for its own internal security, advised as
GOVERNMENT
6l
Principal Types
of Local
Authority
necessary by the Security Service. The Security Commission, if requested
to do so by the Prime Minister after consultation with the Leader of the
Opposition, may investigate any report on breaches of security in the public
service and advise on changes in security procedure.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT
A wide range of public services is provided by democratically elected local
authorities throughout the United Kingdom. The gradual expansion of
local authority services, particularly in the period between the late 1940s
and mid-1970s, has inevitably led to a steady rise in local government
expenditure and in its support from central funds. In recent years central
government has sought to check this growth as part of a general policy of
reducing public expenditure, and at local level sections of the electorate
have protested at having to meet considerable annual increases in ‘rates’
(local property taxes—see p 66). The Government has emphasised the need
to achieve substantial reductions in public expenditure in order to redress
the balance between the public and private sectors of the national economy
and has asked local authorities to reduce their expenditure in line with
reductions being made in its own spending. In particular, since manpower
forms such a significant part of expenditure, they have been urged to reduce
staff levels.
The specific powers and duties of local authorities are conferred on them
by Parliament, or by measures made under its authority. The actual
administration, and the exercise of discretion within statutory limits, are
the responsibility of the local authority. In the case of certain services,
however, ministers have powers to secure a measure of national uniformity
in the standard of a service provided, to safeguard public health, or to
protect the rights of individual citizens. For some services the minister
concerned has wide powers of supervision; for others there are strictly
limited powers.
The main links between local authorities and the central government are:
in England, the Department of the Environment, although other depart¬
ments are concerned with various local government functions; in Scotland,
the Scottish Office; in Wales, the Welsh Office; and in Northern Ireland,
the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland.
England and Wales (outside Greater London) is divided into 53 large
county authorities, within which there are 369 smaller district authorities.
Both types of authority have independent, locally elected councils, and
have separate functions to perform. County authorities normally provide
the large-scale local government services, while the districts are respon¬
sible for the more local ones (see pp 63-4). However, in six of the
English counties, which are heavily populated and known as ‘metropolitan’
counties, responsibility for some large-scale services rests with the district
authorities. The local government system in Wales closely resembles that
in non-metropolitan areas in England. English parish councils or meetings
serve as focuses for local opinion as bodies with limited powers of local
interest. In Wales community councils have similar functions.
Greater London—an administrative area of about 1,580 square km (610
square miles) and a population of some 7 million—is administered by the
Greater London Council, the councils of 32 London boroughs and the
Corporation of the City of London.
62
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Election of
Councils
On the mainland of Scotland local government is on a two-tier basis:
nine regions are divided into 53 districts, each area having its own elected
council. There are three virtually all-purpose authorities for Orkney,
Shetland and the Western Isles. Provision is made for local community
councils to be formed, although these councils have no statutory functions
and are not local authorities.
The areas and electoral arrangements of local authorities are kept under
review by the Local Government Boundary Commissions for England,
Wales and Scotland.
In Northern Ireland 26 district councils are responsible for local en¬
vironmental and certain other services. Statutory bodies and local offices,
responsible to central departments, administer major services such as
roads, water, education, health, and housing.
Local authority councils consist of a number of elected unpaid councillors
presided over by a chairman. They can claim a flat-rate attendance allow¬
ance or a financial loss allowance for performing council business; they are
also entitled to travelling and subsistence allowances. Parish and community
councillors cannot claim expenses for duties within their own areas.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland each council annually elects a
chairman and vice-chairman. Some districts have the ceremonial title of
borough, or city, both granted by royal authority (in Northern Ireland by
the Secretary of State). In boroughs and cities the chairman is normally
known as the Mayor (in the City of London and certain other large cities, he
or she is known as the Lord Mayor). In Scotland the chairman of the district
council of each of the four cities is called the Lord Provost. No specific title
is laid down for the chairmen of other councils, but some are known as
conveners, while others continue to use the old title of ‘provost’.
Elections for any form of local government normally take place every
four years. Metropolitan district elections are held for a third of the seats in
each year when there is no county council election. Non-metropolitan
district councils may adopt the same procedure or opt for whole council
elections every four years.
Anyone is entitled to vote at a local government election in Great Britain
provided that he or she is aged 18 years or over, is a British subject
(including those with Commonwealth citizenship), or a citizen of the Irish
Republic, is not subject to any legal incapacity and is registered as a local
government elector for the area for which the election is held. To qualify for
registration a person must be resident in the council area on the qualifying
date. In Northern Ireland there are slightly different requirements.
A candidate for election as councillor normally stands as a representative
of one of the national political parties, or of some local interest, or as an
independent. Candidates must be British subjects or citizens of the Irish
Republic and aged 21 or over. In addition, they must be registered as a local
elector in the area of the local authority to which they seek election; or have
resided or occupied (as owner or tenant) land or other premises in that area
during the whole of the 12 months preceding the day on which they are
nominated as candidates or, in that 12 months, have had their principal or
only place of work there. Candidates are also subject to a number of
statutory disqualifications.
Local authority areas are generally divided into electoral areas for local
council elections. Administrative counties in England and Wales are
divided into electoral divisions. Districts in England, Wales and Northern
GOVERNMENT
63
Functions and
Services
Ireland are divided into electoral ‘wards’, returning one councillor or more.
In Scotland in the regions and islands areas the electoral areas are called
electoral divisions, each returning a single member; the districts are
divided into wards, similarly returning a single member. For parish or
community council elections in England and Wales, each parish or com¬
munity, or ward of a parish or community (or, in some cases, a combination
of parishes or communities), forms an electoral area which returns one
member or more. For elections to the Greater London Council, Greater
London is divided into electoral divisions, each returning one councillor.
The procedure for local government voting in Great Britain is similar to
that for parliamentary elections, although postal voting is more restricted.
There is no postal voting for parish or community council elections. In
Northern Ireland local government elections are held on the basis of
proportional representation and electoral wards are grouped into district
electoral areas.
Local authorities’ functions are far reaching. Some are primarily duties,
others purely permissive.
Broadly speaking, functions in England and Wales are divided between
county and district councils on the basis that county councils are respon¬
sible for matters requiring planning and administration over wide areas or
requiring the support of substantial resources. Within the metropolitan
areas district councils are responsible for functions needing substantial
resources because they have populations large enough to give such support.
District councils as a whole administer functions of more local significance.
In London the division of functions is slightly different.
English county councils are generally responsible for strategic planning,
transport planning, highways, traffic regulation, consumer protection,
refuse disposal, police and the fire service. Education, libraries and the
personal social services are functions of county councils in non-metropolitan
areas and of district councils in metropolitan areas. All district councils are
responsible, for instance, for environmental health, housing, decisions on
most planning applications, and refuse collection. They may also provide
off-street car parks subject to the consent of the county council. Powers to
operate some functions—such as the provision of museums, art galleries
and parks—are available at both levels; arrangements depend on local
agreement.
In Greater London the boroughs and the City Corporation are respon¬
sible for the same range of functions as district councils in metropolitan
areas (with the addition of consumer protection). The Greater London
Council (GLC) deals only with services which require unified administra¬
tion and control over the whole area. In inner London education is
administered by the Inner London Education Authority, an autonomous
committee of the GLC. Responsibility for highways in London is divided
according to the type of road; the main strategic road network is a matter for
the GLC, while the boroughs look after other roads. The boroughs have
prime responsibility for the provision of housing. The GLC has transferred
its housing stock to the boroughs and surrounding districts and concen¬
trates on its strategic role focusing attention on areas of particular housing
need. London’s police force is directly responsible to the Home Secretary.
In Wales the division of functions between county and district councils
is much the same as that between county and district councils in non¬
metropolitan areas of England.
64
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Internal
Organisation of
Local
Authorities
Officers and
Employees
Local authorities in England and Wales may arrange for any of their
functions to be carried out on their behalf by another local authority, other
than functions relating to education, police, the personal social services and
national parks.
In Scotland the regional and district authorities discharge local govern¬
ment functions in a way broadly similar to that of authorities in England
and Wales. Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles, because of their
isolation from the mainland, have single, virtually all-purpose authorities.
In Northern Ireland, local environmental and certain other services are
administered by the district councils, but responsibility for planning,
roads, water supply and sewerage services is exercised in each district by a
local office of the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland
working closely with the district council and its staff. Area boards, re¬
sponsible to central departments, administer locally education, public
libraries and the health and personal social services. The Northern Ireland
Housing Executive, responsible to the Department of the Environment,
administers housing.
Local authorities have considerable freedom to make internal arrange¬
ments for carrying out their duties. Most use the committee system, where¬
by policy and principle are decided in full council, and committees ad¬
minister the various services. Parish and community councils in England
and Wales are often able to do their work efficiently in full session although
they appoint committees from time to time as necessary. Some councils
have policy advisory or co-ordinating committees with powers to originate
policy, subject to the approval of the full council. The powers and duties of
local authority committees (which may be advisory or executive) are
usually laid down in the appointing council’s standing orders.
A council is free to delegate all its powers to committees, except those in
connection with raising loans, levying rates (see p 66), or making financial
demands on other authorities liable to contribute; these are legally reserved
to the council as a whole.
Local authorities can co-operate or share among themselves the discharge
of their functions.
The public and the press are admitted to all council and committee
meetings but may be excluded while a particular item is considered if the
council or committee decides that publicity would not be in the public
interest.
The execution of council policy rests with salaried officers and employees,
of whom there are over 2 million in Great Britain. These include admini¬
strative, professional and technical staff, teachers and manual workers.
Nearly half of all local government workers are employed in the education
service.
Although a few appointments must be made by all the authorities
responsible for the functions concerned, councils are individually respon¬
sible within national policy requirements for determining the size, compo¬
sition and deployment of their workforces. An authority must not, how¬
ever, employ one of its own councillors. In Northern Ireland, each council
must by law appoint a clerk of the council as its chief officer.
As a general rule, employees are of three kinds: heads of departments or
chief officers; administrative, professional, clerical and technical staff; and
manual workers. Senior staff appointments are usually made on the recom-
GOVERNMENT
65
Local
Government
Finance
Government
Grants
mendation of the committee or committees particularly concerned; most
junior appointments are made by heads of departments, who are also
responsible for engaging manual workers. Appointments and engagements
always conform to the council’s set establishment, and committees are
informed of appointments which they have not made themselves.
Pay and conditions of service for local authority staff are a matter for each
council, although there are recommended scales.
Local authority expenditure in the United Kingdom (on both current and
capital accounts) was about jCSS?000 million in 1981. A clear distinction is
made between capital and current expenditure. Capital expenditure (just
under a quarter of the total) is financed partly from the current account
surplus (about half), partly from borrowing (two-fifths) and the remainder
from grants and other income. Housing, the major element, accounted
for over half the total in 1981. Current expenditure by local authorities
accounts for just over a quarter of total current account spending by central
and local government. The education service represents over a third of this
expenditure, followed by the police, personal social services, roads (includ¬
ing lighting), public health and debt interest. Current expenditure is
financed mainly from central government grants (about three-fifths) and
from local rates (about one-third). Each local authority is responsible for its
own finance, although in a few cases several authorities combine to provide
a specialist service which it would be uneconomic for each to provide on its
own.
Government ‘rate support grants’ to local authorities are paid in aid of
revenues generally. Grants are also paid towards the cost of specific
services—either towards current expenditure, such as on the police, or
towards capital expenditure, such as on the acquisition and clearance of
derelict land. (In Wales and Scotland approved schemes for acquiring and
clearing derelict land are financed by the Welsh and Scottish Development
Agencies.) Annual subsidies are paid for local authority housing.
Grants are also made towards the cost of rate rebates for people with low
incomes.
A new system for the distribution of rate support grant in England and
Wales took effect in 1981-82. This consists of a single block grant together
with prescribed ceilings for the level of total local authority capital ex¬
penditure. Authorities receive annual capital amounts for housing, educa¬
tion, social services, transport and other services, but are free to determine
their own spending priorities by the transfer of resources from one category
to another. One of the effects of the new system is to ensure that high-
spending authorities do not pre-empt even larger shares of government
money, reducing the amount available to those which observe national
financial guidelines.
In Scotland the old system has been retained, the grant being distributed
in three parts: the ‘needs’ element, designed to give most help to authorities
whose spending needs are greatest; the ‘resources’ element, used to supple¬
ment the rate income of authorities whose rateable value per head of
population falls below a standard figure, prescribed for each year; and the
‘domestic’ element, which compensates authorities for loss of rate income
from reductions in rate poundage which they are required to give to
householders. Excessive and unreasonable expenditure levels by local
authorities, however, are discouraged by central government which can
66
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Rates
Loans
make selective grant reductions. Local authority capital expenditure has
been subject to central government control since 1975.
In Northern Ireland district councils receive certain specific grants (for
example, for the acquisition of open space) and grants to compensate them
for loss of rate income arising from the partial derating of industrial
premises. In addition, councils whose rating resources are below a standard
level receive a resources grant to bring them up to that level.
Rates are local taxes paid by the occupiers of land and property (with
certain exceptions, see below) to meet part of the cost of local services. Each
occupier’s payment is calculated annually by the rating authority by
multiplying the rateable value of a property (broadly equivalent to its
annual rental value) by the rate poundage—an amount per £ of rateable
value fixed by the authority according to its projected financial needs.
Rateable values are assessed periodically, and there is a system of appeals
for disputed assessments. Crown (government) property is not rateable but
payments are made, based on values assessed by the Treasury Valuer, in
lieu of rates.
Government grants reduce domestic rates below the levels paid by
commercial concerns, and provide rebates for people with low incomes.
Rating relief is available in certain circumstances on premises adapted for
the use of the disabled. Agricultural land and buildings (apart from living
accommodation) and places of religious worship are exempted from rates.
Charities pay half the full rate on premises occupied for charitable purposes
and may be given further relief by rating authorities, who can also reduce or
remit the rates for a wide range of non-profit-making bodies. Rates may be
levied on empty properties at any percentage up to the full amount and in
the case of empty commercial property a surcharge may be payable.
In Scotland industrial (including freight transport) premises are rated at
a half of net annual value. There is empty property rating but no empty
property surcharge.
In Northern Ireland industrial (including freight transport) premises are
rated at a quarter of net annual value. Empty properties are not rated.
Local authorities may raise loans to finance capital expenditure under
general powers. For items of expenditure in key sectors (such as education,
housing and roads) those in England and Wales must seek prior central
government approval. For other capital expenditure, each authority re¬
ceives an annual loan authorisation within which it determines the sums to
borrow and the projects to undertake. The GLC applies annually for
parliamentary sanction to raise the money needed for capital expenditure
while the City of London has ancient charter powers to cover its borrow¬
ings. In Northern Ireland long-term borrowing by district councils is
subject to central approval; in Scotland central approval is given to capital
expenditure, not to loans.
Local authorities may raise long-term loans by means of private mort¬
gages, issuing stock upon The Stock Exchange and bonds which may or
may not be quoted on The Stock Exchange. Local authorities also have
right of access to the Public Works Loan Board, financed by the Exchequer,
or, in Northern Ireland, to the Government Loans Fund, for long-term
borrowing to finance a proportion of their reckonable capital payments, and
may borrow temporarily for a limited proportion of their current outstand¬
ing loan debt.
Control of Finance
Local
Government
Complaints
System
GOVERNMENT 6?
Local councils normally have a finance committee to keep their financial
policy under constant review. They must have their accounts audited.
A complaints system for local government in England and Wales involves
independent statutory Commissions for Local Administration comprising
local commissioners (local government Ombudsmen). The English Com¬
mission consists of three local commissioners and the Welsh of one. In
Scotland the statute provides for a single commissioner. All commissioners
are responsible in their particular area for investigating citizens’ complaints
of maladministration by local authorities. The commissioners help local
authority councillors to protect the interests of constituents.
In Northern Ireland a Commissioner for Complaints deals with com¬
plaints alleging injustices suffered as a result of maladministration by
district councils and certain other public bodies.
THE FIRE SERVICES
Every part of Britain is covered by a local fire service, which is subject to a
measure of central control. Other than in Northern Ireland, the cost is
borne by local authorities aided by central government through the rate
support grant.
Each of the 64 fire authorities must by law make provision for fire¬
fighting, and maintain a brigade of sufficient strength to meet all normal
requirements (in some parts of Scotland, authorities combine to provide
fire cover). Other fire-fighting organisations are maintained, for instance,
by the Army and Air Force Departments of the Ministry of Defence; by
the Department of Industry at certain establishments; and by some large
industrial and commercial concerns.
The Home Secretary and the Secretary of State for Scotland have central
responsibility in England and Wales and in Scotland respectively. Central
control is directed mainly towards ensuring the operational efficiency of
brigades. Ministers have statutory powers to make regulations on such
matters as appointments and promotions, standards of training and equip¬
ment, pensions and disciplinary matters. Their approval is also required
for reductions in the operational establishments of fire brigades. Each
minister is advised by a Central Fire Brigades Advisory Council, consisting
of officers of the respective home departments, representatives of local
authorities and of the associations representing members of fire brigades
and other people with special qualifications, appointed by the minister
concerned. Inspectorates of fire services advise on operational and tech¬
nical matters. Most fire brigades include part-time personnel to augment
and support the full-time strength in return for a retaining fee and call-out
and attendance fee. Fire authorities also employ people for duties in
controls communications and mobilising and staff duties. There are about
39,000 full-time and 18,500 part-time operational members of fire brigades
in Britain.
Every fire authority must buy appliances and equipment to meet all
normal fire-fighting requirements in its area. Certain equipment is
standardised so that there is complete interchangeability when a fire is
attended by more than one brigade. The principal types of fire-fighting
appliances are bought by fire authorities to specifications approved by
central government on the advice of the Central Fire Brigades Advisory
Councils. The specifications ensure that minimum standards are main-
68
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Fire Prevention
Research
Special Services
Fire Losses
tained, and allow sufficient freedom of design to meet special circumstances
and encourage further developments.
Each fire authority must appoint a Chief Fire Officer (Firemaster in
Scotland) who exercises central control from brigade headquarters.
Divisional officers in charge of the geographical divisions into which most
brigade areas are divided are responsible for mobilising forces to deal with
outbreaks of fire. Constant communication is maintained between divi¬
sional and brigade headquarters and, if a fire should be beyond the capa¬
bilities of a division, help is sent from one or more neighbouring divisions,
or even from another fire authority. The nearest available force is sent to a
fire, regardless of area boundaries.
Fire authorities are concerned in some way with fire precautions in most
buildings used by the public and have major responsibility for enforcing
legislation concerning fire precautions. They must also make efficient
arrangements for giving advice on fire prevention, restricting the spread of
fires, and means of escape. Courses in fire prevention are held at the Fire
Service Technical College for fire brigade officers. In addition to their
enforcement and advisory duties, brigades are also involved in education
and publicity to promote fire safety, particularly in the home. The Govern¬
ment is advised on prevention by the Joint Fire Prevention Committee of
the Central Fire Brigades Advisory Councils, representing the fire service
and central and local authorities.
Research into health hazards to firemen, fire brigade organisation and fire¬
fighting equipment is conducted by the Home Office with the help of the
fire service under the auspices of the J oint Committee on Fire Research of
the Central Fire Brigades Advisory Councils. Individual research projects
are undertaken by the Home Office Scientific Research and Development
Branch or, under contract to the Home Office, by other government
agencies, notably the Fire Research Station, which is part of the Building
Research Establishment of the Department of the Environment, or by
private consultants. The Fire Research Station is the main organisation
studying and investigating technical aspects of fire.
Fire authorities have discretion to use their brigades and equipment, free
of charge, in a variety of non-fire emergencies (such as rail, road and
aircraft accidents, collapse of buildings, flooding of premises, leakage of
harmful gas or liquids and the rescue of people or animals from dangerous
situations).
The direct cost of damage to buildings and goods destroyed by fires in
Great Britain in 1981 amounted to an estimated £356 million (consequential
losses from the interruption of business are not included in this total). Most
fires involving heavy losses occur when the premises are unattended; and
fires are more likely to start in storage areas than in production departments.
Industries which suffer most severely include engineering and electrical
firms, textiles, food, drink and tobacco, warehousing, chemical and allied
industries, paper, printing and publishing firms, and retailing.
About 1,000 people, particularly the elderly and young children, die in fires
every year (most of them at home) and a further 9,000 or so suffer injuries.
Among the chief causes of fatal fires are ignition of upholstery, bedding and
clothing by smokers’ materials and heaters.
Fire Casualties
3 Overseas
Relations
Britain’s overseas relations reflect both its traditional position as a major
trading and maritime power whose people have settled throughout the
world, and its present concern to help to maintain peace and to secure
world-wide economic and social progress through international co¬
operation. It has diplomatic relations with some 150 countries, and with
about 20 of these has common security arrangements, principally through
the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation. Commercial activities have
helped Britain to maintain its position as a world financial centre. It has
considerable overseas investments and its international trading pattern
reflects its dependence on imports for nearly half of its food and more than
half of its raw material requirements and the relatively high proportion of
its gross national product accounted for by exports (over a third); for details
of trade and payments, see Chapter 19. British development assistance is
provided to over 120 countries.
In an increasingly interdependent world, the attainment of overseas
objectives and the ability to exert influence in support of them are seen as
best achieved through co-operation with other nations on a regional or
global basis. Britain is now a member of some 120 international organi¬
sations ranging from the world-wide United Nations concerned with
problems of world peace, international economic co-operation and social
issues to regionally based and technically orientated bodies. In particular,
it is a member of the European Community whose policies it helps to
determine, and is increasingly co-ordinating its overseas policies through
the Community’s political co-operation mechanism (see p 74). As a mem¬
ber of the Commonwealth, Britain is a part of a representative cross-section
of the international community, which has evolved from the British Empire
(since 1945 Britain has progressively, and largely peacefully, dismantled its
Empire and prepared nearly 50 countries for independence) and whose 47
members share a common language, common technical standards, similar
systems of law and close professional, academic and commercial links.
Britain has strong ties, also, with the United States, including a common
language and many common political and cultural traditions.
A long involvement in world affairs has given Britain both a vital interest
and a firm belief in the maintenance of international order governed by
respect for a generally accepted system of law. As a permanent member of
the United Nations Security Council it makes support for the United
Nations a central feature of its foreign policy.
Administration Although responsibilities of many government departments have a signifi¬
cant overseas dimension, the general conduct of overseas relations is the
responsibility of the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs acting through the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and British
diplomatic posts overseas. The latter comprise embassies and high com¬
missions in nearly 130 countries, together with subordinate consulates
general and consulates, and missions at eight multilateral organisations.
?o
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The British
Council
These posts, like the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, are staffed by
members of the Diplomatic Service and locally engaged staff. Excluding
supporting administrative and communications services, about a quarter of
the staff are employed on political and economic work, nearly a third on
export promotion and other commercial matters, a quarter on consular
and immigration work, and the remainder on aid administration and
information and cultural work. Other departments which have a primary
concern with overseas relations include the Ministry of Defence, the
Department of Trade, the Treasury and the Overseas Development
Administration which is part of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office;
but the involvement of most has increased in recent years with the growing
dependence of domestic economic policy on international decisions and
with Britain’s membership of the European Community.
Where questions of overseas policy involve matters within the respon¬
sibility of other departments, the Foreign and Commonwealth Office
formulates policy in consultation with the departments concerned. The
balance of responsibilities is a matter of constant adjustment, and the
department with the predominant functional interest, even though it may
be primarily domestic, takes the lead. This is particularly so in policy
concerning the European Community and international monetary matters.
In the case of policy towards the Community, the Foreign and Common¬
wealth Office exercises its co-ordinating role at official level through the
machinery of the Cabinet Office.
Other bodies whose work has an overseas dimension include the British
Overseas Trade Board and the Export Credits Guarantee Department
which provide export services for industry; the Crown Agents for Oversea
Governments and Administrations which helps to arrange purchases from
British aid funds and appointments under technical co-operation pro¬
grammes; and the British Council.
The British Council was founded in 1934 to promote a wider knowledge of
Britain and the English language abroad and to develop closer cultural
relations between Britain and other countries. (For Britain’s international
scientific relations, see p 362.) The activities of the Council, which
has staff in over 80 countries, include the teaching of English and the
recruitment of British teachers for posts overseas, administering the
Government’s educational assistance and technical co-operation training
programmes; fostering personal contacts between British and overseas
people, especially in the educational, professional and scientific areas;
running, or helping to maintain, libraries of British books and periodicals
overseas and providing information through touring exhibitions and
bibliographical services; and presenting overseas the best of British arts. In
Britain, the Council is concerned mainly with arranging programmes for
professional visitors and with the placing, administration and welfare of
overseas students. A basic principle is that the Council’s work should be of
benefit both to Britain and to the receiving country.
About 78 per cent of the Council’s budget, which totalled some £142-1
million in 1982-83, is provided by the Foreign and Commonwealth Office
(including funds from the Overseas Development Administration) and on
its behalf the Council is responsible for the implementation of more than 30
cultural agreements with other countries. Overseas it acts as education
adviser to Britain’s diplomatic missions and is responsible for educational
assistance in developing countries in which it is represented. Increasingly,
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
71
the Council is undertaking education projects paid for by overseas clients
and is providing English classes abroad; these activities are expected to
produce about 22 per cent (some £31 million) of its income in 1982-83.
The Council’s role in Britain’s educational aid programme has increased
considerably in recent years and in 1980-81 it assumed responsibility for all
links and exchanges in higher education which require official support.
MEMBERSHIP OF THE EUROPEAN
COMMUNITY
Britain joined the European Community on 1 January 1973 and its
membership was endorsed in a national referendum in 1975- The other
members are Belgium, France, the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy,
Luxembourg and the Netherlands, the original six members; Denmark
and the Irish Republic which joined with Britain in 1973; and Greece
which became a member in 1981. With its partners, Britain seeks to develop
the Community in the interests of all its members. It supports the
membership applications of Portugal and Spain, seeing enlargement as a
means of strengthening democracy in Europe.
The European Community consists of three communities set up by
separate treaties—the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC), the
European Economic Community (EEC) and the European Atomic Energy
Community (Euratom). The Community is the world’s largest trading
block, accounting for about a third of world trade. Designed to lay the
foundations for a closer union between the peoples of Europe and to
promote economic expansion by means of a common market and the
Membership ofthe European Commimit%
Irish
Republic
Portugal
)
■ * - \
72
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Britain’s
Accession
Community
Institutions
gradual approximation of member states’ economic policies, the Com¬
munity has moved towards these objectives by abolishing internal tariffs
and certain other trade barriers, establishing a common customs tariff, and
making provision for the free movement of labour, capital and services.
Over 40 per cent of British exports go to the other member states. There is
also a common policy for agriculture. Overseas countries having special
links with Community member states are accorded preferential treatment
in aid and the development of trade.
A common market for coal and steel is designed to ensure an orderly
supply of these commodities to member states. The Coal and Steel
Community’s funds are raised by a levy on production, and investment
grants are given to encourage the modernisation of the industries, for
research, and for social measures to help to re-deploy coal and steel
workers. Loans are also raised which promote workers’ housing and aid
capital investment.
One of the Community’s aims is to co-ordinate member states’ nuclear
energy industries and their other peaceful nuclear activities. Since 1959
there has been a common market for all nuclear materials and a common
control system prevents their diversion to purposes other than those
declared. There is also a co-ordinated research programme in the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy.
By the Treaty of Accession, signed in January 1972, Britain became a party
to the two treaties of Rome establishing the EEC and Euratom. Accession
to the ECSC was effected by a decision of the Council of Ministers. The
European Communities Act 1972 made the legislative changes necessary
for Britain to comply with the obligations entailed by membership of the
Community and to exercise the rights of membership.
In 1977, following a transitional period during which tariffs on trade in
industrial products between Britain and the original six members were
progressively reduced, the internal tariffs were abolished and the phased
introduction of the common customs tariff on British imports from
countries neither members of the Community, nor having any special
arrangements with it, was completed. Britain also adopted, progressively,
the Community system of agricultural support under the Common
Agricultural Policy. The period of adjustment for payments to the
Community budget ended in 1979.
The separate institutions established by the treaties for each of the three
communities were merged in 1967. Each state has one representative on the
Council of Ministers; in the other institutions Britain’s representation is in
line with that of the other large member states (France, the Federal
Republic of Germany, and Italy). English is one of the Community’s
official languages.
The Council of Ministers is the principal decision-making body for all
major Community questions, member states being represented on it by
foreign or other ministers as appropriate to the subject under discussion.
The presidency of the Council changes at six-monthly intervals. Most
Council decisions are taken on the basis of a proposal by the Commission
(see p 73). Some issues may be decided by majority, or qualified majority,
with votes weighted according to provisions in the Treaty of Accession.
Where very important interests of member states are involved, however,
the Council usually proceeds on the basis of unanimity. The Committee of
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
73
Permanent Representatives (COREPER), composed of member states’
ambassadors to the Community, assists the Council by preparing its
meetings and co-ordinating the work of other subordinate bodies and
groups.
The Commission formulates detailed policy proposals for submission to
the Council of Ministers, promotes the Community interest, attempts to
reconcile national viewpoints and implements the provisions of the treaties
and Community measures. Limited powers of decision relating mainly to
the detailed administration of agriculture are delegated to it. It is com¬
posed of 14 commissioners nominated by member governments; two are
from Britain. The President of the Commission is its representative and is
responsible for its general administration. Each of the other commissioners
is responsible for one or more of the main Community activities. The
Commission is pledged to act independently of national or sectional
interests and to formulate its proposals and administer policy in the
interests of the Community as a whole. Its proposals are made only after
extensive consultation with officials of the national governments and with
producers, trade unions, employers’ associations and many others.
The Court of Justice interprets and adjudicates on the meaning of the
treaties and of any measures taken by the Council of Ministers and
Commission under them, hears complaints and appeals brought by or
against Community institutions, member states or individuals and gives
preliminary rulings on questions referred to it by courts in the member
states. As a court of final appeal, its procedure in such cases is broadly
similar to that of the highest courts in member states; its rulings are binding
on member countries, Community institutions and individuals. The Court
consists of 11 judges assisted by five advocates-general who make reasoned
submissions concerning cases brought before the Court to help it in its
interpretation and application of Community law.
The European Parliament is composed of 434 members, 81 elected from
Britain, who sit according to party affiliation and not nationality. Direct
elections to the Parliament, originally a nominated body, were first held in
June 1979? and in future will be held every five years. The Parliament is
consulted on and debates all major policy issues of the Community.
Members may question the Council of Ministers and Commission, and
have the power on a two-thirds majority to dismiss the Commission. T he
Parliament can also reject in its entirety the draft annual budget as pre¬
sented by the Commission and approved by the Council. A formal
conciliation procedure has been adopted for use in the event of disagree¬
ment between the Parliament and the Council of Ministers on matters with
major budgetary or financial implications.
The European Court of Auditors examines all Community revenue and
expenditure to see that it has been legally received and spent, and to ensure
sound financial management. It draws up an annual report, and may also
submit observations on specific questions at the request of the Community
institutions.
The Economic and Social Committee is a consultative body representing
a cross-section of economic interests. Its members (representing em¬
ployers’ organisations, trade unions and other interests) are consulted by
the Council of Ministers and the Commission during the formulation of
policy. Britain is entitled to send 24 members out of a total of 156.
In addition to, and separately from, the institutions operating within the
Community framework established by treaty, the member states have set
74
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
up machinery under which they consult each other before taking up final
positions on important questions of foreign policy. Known as political
co-operation, these consultations include regular meetings of foreign
ministers, monthly meetings of senior officials, and contacts at working
level among those concerned with particular questions. In addition, the ten
foreign ministries are linked by a secure communications system. Repre¬
sentatives of member states serving in other countries and international
organisations maintain regular contact.
The Community’s heads of State or of Government meet at least three
times a year as the European Council which operates outside the treaty
framework and considers both Community matters and those arising in the
context of political co-operation. It discusses issues unresolved in the
Council of Ministers as well as general Community problems and lays
down guidelines and political direction for future work.
Community policies are implemented by regulations, which are legally
binding and directly applicable in all member countries; directives, which
are binding, as to the result to be achieved, on member states to which
they are addressed but allow national authorities to decide on means of
implementation; decisions, which are binding on those to whom they
are addressed (for example, member states, firms, or individuals); and
recommendations and opinions, which have no binding force. The Council
can also indicate a general policy direction through resolutions.
Community
Policies1
External Relations
The member governments discuss a wide range of foreign policy issues
and, where possible, reach common positions. At the United Nations their
policies are closely co-ordinated, and they have voted together on a large
number of issues. They adopted a common strategy at the 1975 Helsinki
Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe and have continued to
work closely at both the Belgrade (1977-78) and Madrid (1980-82) review
conferences. The Community condemned the 1981 imposition of martial
law in Poland and the suppression of the independent trade union,
Solidarity, as a violation of the principles agreed upon at Helsinki, and
instituted a number of economic sanctions against Poland and the Soviet
Union. Following the European Council’s Venice Declaration in June
1980, which set out the Community’s views on the principles on which a
comprehensive settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict should be based,
Community representatives have visited the area to discuss their ideas with
the parties concerned. Four Community members are participating in a
peacekeeping force in Sinai following the 1982 withdrawal from the area by
Israel. The Community has adopted a code of conduct on employment
practices for member states’ companies operating in South Africa, and
supported efforts to promote an internationally acceptable solution to the
problem of Namibia. Following a British initiative, the Community has
proposed an international conference, to meet in two stages, with a view to
ending Soviet intervention in Afghanistan and restoring that country’s
independence and non-aligned status.
On international trade matters the Council of Ministers agree a common
position in advance of negotiations and the Commission speaks on behalf of
the Community. Commercial co-operation agreements have been con¬
cluded with a number of countries in the Mediterranean area, the South
'Some details of Community policies as they affect British domestic affairs will be found in the appropriate
chapters.
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
75
Internal Policies
Asian sub-continent, Latin America and other areas, and with the Associ¬
ation of South East Asian Nations. Discussions covering trade and other
matters have taken place with regional groupings of Latin American, Arab
and South-East Asian countries.
The Community has also improved progressively its generalised scheme
of preferences, which covers manufactures and semi-manufactures ex¬
ported by developing countries, with the aim in particular of benefiting the
poorest of them (see p 348). A new scheme started in January 1981 and will
run for ten years.
The second Lome Convention, which governs aid, trade and co¬
operation between the Community and over 60 developing countries in
Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific (ACP), came into operation in 1981;
over half the ACP countries are members of the Commonwealth. The
Convention provides for increased aid and European Investment Bank
lending of nearly £3,000 million, industrial and agricultural co-operation,
an extension of the scheme designed to stabilise the commodity export
earnings of the ACP countries, assistance for ACP mineral producers
whose production and income suffer from temporary disruptions beyond
their control, and duty-free access to the Community for ACP countries’
exports of all industrial and most agricultural goods, including improved
access for exports such as rum and beef. All British dependent territories
(with the exception of Bermuda, Gibraltar and Hong Kong), together with
the overseas territories of other Community members, are formally associ¬
ated with the Community as a whole under conditions parallel to those in
the Lome Convention and have similar aid and trade benefits.
Britain has played a leading part in urging the Community to adopt a new
aid and development policy based on the criterion of need and applicable on
a world-wide basis, thereby encompassing those developing countries
(many of which are among the world’s poorest) not covered by the Lome
Convention or having any other special relationship with the Community.
Although it is still small, the aid programme for these non-associated states
has grown steadily since 1976. The Community also has a large food aid
programme, worth about £300 million in 1982. (See also North-South
Dialogue at the end of this chapter.)
All member countries contribute to a common budget which provides
funds for specific Community policies. This is largely financed by an ‘own
resources’ system of levies on agricultural imports, customs duties and a
proportion, not exceeding 1 per cent, of the proceeds of the value added tax
collected on an agreed range of goods and services.
In the late 1970s Britain’s budgetary contributions were out of balance,
resulting in its being one of the largest net contributors despite its relatively
low gross domestic product per head. This problem was foreseen during
the accession negotiations, and Britain was given an assurance that, if
unacceptable situations arose, the very survival of the Community would
demand that the institutions find equitable solutions. In May 1980 the
Community agreed on proposals providing for more equitable net budget¬
ary contributions by Britain for the years 1980 and 1981. It also agreed to
review the development of Community policies and to make structural
changes with a view to preventing the recurrence of such ‘unacceptable
situations’ to any Community member. Since this was not achieved in time,
arrangements were made to reduce Britain’s net contribution in 1982 to
£390 million. In Britain’s view, the Common Agricultural Policy (see
?6
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Chapter 14) absorbs too large a share of the budget in comparison with
other sectors such as industrial, regional, social and urban policies.
(Expenditure on the Policy accounts for over 62 per cent of the total budget,
while regional policy takes 4-9 per cent, social policy 41 per cent, aid to
developing countries 3-7 per cent and projects concerned with research,
energy, industry and transport 19 per cent.) This situation, Britain
believes, is detrimental to the fundamental Community objectives of
strengthening the economies of the member states and, by reducing
regional differences, ensuring their harmonious development.
The European Monetary System was established in 1979 to promote
monetary stability in Europe. Britain does not participate in the exchange
rate mechanism of the scheme, but it is taking part in other aspects such as
the development of the European currency unit1 and of the European
Monetary Co-operation Fund.
The European Social Fund finances schemes for training and retraining
young people, migrant workers, workers in textile and clothing industries,
the handicapped and workers leaving agriculture. The European Regional
Development Fund (see p 207) provides grants for industrial and infra¬
structure projects in the less developed or industrially declining regions of
the Community with the aim of reducing existing imbalances or preventing
the creation of new ones. Britain has received substantial grants from the
two Funds, together with grants and loans from the European Coal and
Steel Community, the European Investment Bank (see p 207) and the
guidance section of the European Agricultural Guidance and Guaranteee
Fund (see p 273).
Community industrial policy includes measures designed to deal with
the collapse of demand for steel; temporary mandatory production quotas
have been introduced in order to cut back production to the level of
demand, thereby allowing economic price levels to be obtained. Efforts are
also being made to restructure and modernise the industry so that it can
become profitable without governmental aid.
Other areas of action include energy, environment and transport
policies.
THE COMMONWEALTH
The Commonwealth is a voluntary association of 47 independent states
with a combined population of over 1,000 million, about a quarter of the
world total. Britain participates fully in all its activities and values it as a
means of consulting and co-operating with peoples of widely differing
cultures, thereby contributing to the promotion of international under¬
standing and peace.
Commonwealth members are a representative cross-section of mankind
in all stages of political and economic development. Their peoples are
drawn from practically all the world’s main races and from all continents.
As some of its members are very rich and others very poor, the Common¬
wealth acts as a bridge between rich and poor nations.
The members are Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, the Bahamas,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Botswana, Britain, Canada, Cyprus,
Dominica, Fiji, The Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guyana, India, Jamaica,
^he European currency unit (ecu) is defined as a ‘basket’ of all Community currencies and is used within
the Community for budgetary and other purposes.
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
77
Consultation
Kenya, Kiribati, Lesotho, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mauritius,
Nauru, New Zealand, Nigeria, Papua New Guinea, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Swaziland, Tanzania, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tuvalu, Uganda, Vanuatu, Western Samoa, Zambia and
Zimbabwe. Maldives, Nauru, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, and
Tuvalu are special members entitled to take part in all functional Common¬
wealth meetings and activities but not meetings of heads of Government.
The Queen is recognised as head of the Commonwealth; she is also head of
State in 17 countries (see p 31).
The origin of the Commonwealth lies in the gradual granting of self-
government to the older-established British colonies (later known as the
Dominions) in Australia, Canada, New Zealand and South Africa1 where
European settlement had occurred on a large scale. Their fully independent
status in relation to Britain was legally formulated in the Statute of
Westminster of 1931. The main expansion in Commonwealth member¬
ship, however, took place after the second world war following Britain’s
decision to guide its dependent territories towards self-government and
independence. This process began in 1947 with the independence of India
and Pakistan,2 and in 1957 Ghana became the first African dependency
to become independent. By the end of the 1960s nearly all the British
dependencies in Africa had gained their independence as had many in the
Caribbean and in Asia. The most recent Commonwealth members are
Antigua and Barbuda and Belize, both of which attained their indepen¬
dence in 1981, and the Maldives, independent since 1965, joined in 1982.
As a member of the Commonwealth, Britain participates in a system of
mutual consultation and co-operation. The Commonwealth does not
formulate central policies on, say, economic or foreign affairs. Nevertheless
the considerable consultation and co-operation is of benefit to member
countries and contributes to international understanding. It led, for
instance, to the Commonwealth playing a significant role in the events
leading to Zimbabwe’s independence in April 1980, and to Commonwealth
involvement in Uganda when a team observed the 1980 elections and when
a military training team was sent there in 1982.
Consultation takes place through diplomatic representatives known as
High Commissioners, meetings of heads of Government, specialised con¬
ferences of other ministers and officials, expert groups, and discussions at
international conferences and the United Nations. Trade and cultural
exhibitions and conferences of professional and unofficial medical, cultural,
educational and economic organisations are other ways in which frequent
contacts are made.
Heads of Government usually meet every two years, most recently in
Melbourne in 1981; the next meeting will be in New Delhi in 1983.
Proceedings are normally in private which facilitates a frank and informal
exchange of views. On international affairs no formal decisions are taken
and no attempt is made to formulate specifically Commonwealth policies,
although, on occasion, common views on matters of major international
concern are formulated and reflected in the communiques issued at the end
of the meetings. Occasionally separate declarations are made on particular
'South Africa ceased to be a member of the Commonwealth in 1961.
2Pakistan left the Commonwealth in 1972.
?8 BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
issues, for instance, the 1971 declaration of Commonwealth principles,
the 1977 statement which commits member governments to take every
practical step to discourage sporting contacts with South Africa, the 1979
Lusaka declaration on racism and racial prejudice, and the 1981 Melbourne
declaration on the economic and other problems facing developing
countries. One of the most important Commonwealth activities is con¬
sultation and co-operation in economic affairs, and finance ministers meet
annually to discuss world economic problems. In recent years, they have
paid particular attention to the problems of development and the establish¬
ment of a fairer international economic order. Other ministerial meetings
include those of agriculture, education, health and law ministers which take
place every two or three years.
The Common- The Commonwealth Secretariat provides the central organisation for
wealth consultation and co-operation among member states. Established in
Secretariat London in 1965, headed by a Secretary-General appointed by the heads of
Government, and financed by member governments, the Secretariat is
responsible to Commonwealth governments collectively.
As the main agency for multilateral communication between govern¬
ments, the Secretariat promotes consultation, disseminates information on
matters of common concern, and organises meetings and conferences,
including those of heads of Government and of ministers. It co-ordinates
many Commonwealth activities, its main areas of operation being inter¬
national affairs, the role of women in development, youth activities, and
applied studies in government. It also administers the Commonwealth
Fund for Technical Co-operation.
Because of its neutral position the Secretariat has been able to make its
good offices available in cases of dispute, and has carried out, on request,
special assignments requiring demonstrable impartiality.
Common¬
wealth Fund
for Technical
Co-operation
Britain plays an active part in the work of the Commonwealth Fund
for Technical Co-operation established within the Commonwealth
Secretariat to provide technical co-operation for economic and social
development in Commonwealth developing countries. The Fund is
financed by contributions from both developed and developing states,
Britain contributing about 30 per cent of its income.
The Fund provides experts to undertake advisory assignments or fill
specific posts and uses consultancy f rms to make studies for governments.
Its education and training programme is of particular help in raising levels
of technical and managerial skill, and makes wide use of training facilities
within developing member countries for the benefit of other developing
countries. It has a special programme to help countries develop their
exports, another on food production and rural development and a small
technical assistance group to give advice in key areas. An industrial
development unit, the main executive agency of the Commonwealth Action
Programme of Industrial Co-operation established in 1979, investigates
the feasibility of establishing new industries in developing countries and
helps to prepare agreed projects.
Other Expenditure by Britain on technical co-operation with Commonwealth
Technical developing countries in 1981 was nearly £106 million, the greater part
Co-operation being spent on financing staff for service for Commonwealth governments
and in financing training places in Britain for people from Commonwealth
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
79
Other
Organisations
DEPEN¬
DENCIES AND
ASSOCIATED
STATES
countries; volunteers are also sent from Britain to serve overseas. Other
help includes consultancy services, the supply of training and research
equipment, and the provision of advice by British scientific and technical
institutions.
Britain is a major contributor to the Commonwealth Scholarship and
Fellowship Plan, a system of awards for people of high intellectual promise
to study in Commonwealth countries other than their own, and provides
650 awards annually out of a total of over 1,000 within the scheme. Under
the Aid for the Commonwealth Teaching of Science Scheme, Britain sends
out experts to serve in curriculum development units, institutes of
education and the inspectorates of ministries of education.
Financial disbursement of official development assistance to Common¬
wealth developing countries totalled some £363 million in 1981. In
addition, some received investment finance from the Commonwealth
Development Corporation.
A large number of organisations are concerned with the Commonwealth.
The Commonwealth Institute, financed largely by the British Government,
promotes knowledge about the Commonwealth through films, library
services, lecture tours by members of the staff and study conferences for
students; its headquarters in London has a permanent public exhibition
depicting the life of member states, each country financing its own stand.
The Commonwealth Foundation, established in 1965 and financed by
member governments, administers a fund for increasing co-operation
between professional organisations; it has assisted in the creation of 21
Commonwealth-wide professional associations, helped in the creation and
growth of many national ones, and has created 16 multidisciplinary
professional centres. The Royal Commonwealth Society, which is over 100
years old, is a centre for study and discussion, its library in London having
one of the largest collections on the Commonwealth. The Society has
branches, affiliated organisations and representatives in many countries.
In keeping with the fact that the Commonwealth is an association of
peoples as well as governments, many unofficial organisations, profes¬
sional bodies and voluntary societies provide machinery for co-operation.
Professional bodies include associations of architects, doctors, engineers,
lawyers, librarians, magistrates, museum curators, nurses, pharmacists,
planners, surveyors and veterinary surgeons. Other organisations include
the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association which organises an annual
conference of parliamentarians, the Commonwealth Press Union, the
Commonwealth Broadcasting Association, the Commonwealth Youth
Exchange Council, the Commonwealth Games Federation and the Com¬
monwealth Arts Association.
There are 13 remaining British dependent territories: Anguilla, Bermuda,
British Antarctic Territory, British Indian Ocean Territory, British Virgin
Islands, Cayman Islands, Falkland Islands and Dependencies, Gibraltar,
Hong Kong, Montserrat, Pitcairn Island, St Helena and Dependencies,
and the Turks and Caicos Islands. They have a combined population of
5-2 million, of which some 5 million live in Hong Kong. Few are rich in
natural resources, and some are scattered groups of islands. There are no
permanent inhabitants in the British Antarctic Territory or British Indian
Ocean Territory.
Most dependencies have considerable self-government with their own
8o
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Detente
legislature and civil service. Britain is generally responsible, through a
Governor, for defence, internal security and foreign affairs.
British policy is to give independence to those dependencies that want it,
and not to force it on those which do not. The Falkland Islands and
Gibraltar are the subject of territorial claims by Argentina and Spain
respectively. In both cases the inhabitants wish to retain the link with
Britain, which refuses to accept that British sovereignty is in doubt. The
Government is therefore pledged not to support any transfer of sovereignty
against their wishes since this would be contrary to the principle of self-
determination. It was in fulfilment of this responsibility that Britain, after
diplomatic efforts had failed, resorted to military force to restore British
administration in the Falkland Islands and Dependencies following their
illegal invasion and occupation by Argentina in April 1982.
St Kitts-Nevis, situated in the Caribbean with an estimated population
of 50,000, is not a dependency but an Associated State. This status, which
gives the country complete control of its own internal affairs with Britain
retaining responsibility for external relations and defence, can be ter¬
minated at any time by either party; five former Associated States are now
independent.
INTERNATIONAL PEACE AND SECURITY
One of Britain’s primary concerns is to protect its territorial integrity and
political independence, as well as the interests of its dependencies and of its
allies. These objectives are pursued through a national security policy in
which defence is coupled with strenuous efforts towards both removing or
alleviating the causes of international tension and achieving balanced and
verifiable international arms control and disarmament agreements.
British defence policy (see Chapter 4) is based on the North Atlantic
Treaty Organisation (NATO)1 which member countries regard as their
guarantor of security, freedom and well-being, and as an important
contribution to international peace and stability. NATO’s twin aims are
defence and the reduction of East-West tension. It pursues a strategy of
deterrence, designed to convince any potential aggressor that the use of
force, or the threat of it, carries risks far outweighing any likely advantage.
In pursuit of this NATO countries are engaged in a number of negotiations
aimed at reducing the level of nuclear and conventional forces.
Outside Europe, Britain is committed to joint consultation with Australia,
New Zealand, Malaysia and Singapore under the Five Power Defence
arrangement and is responsible for the security of its overseas dependen¬
cies, the Associated State of St Kitts-Nevis and Brunei, with which it has a
special treaty relationship. Britain also supports the UN peacekeeping
efforts in various parts of the world.
Britain favours genuine improvements in East-West relations based on
undiminished security and a process of dialogue. The basic prerequisite is
that both sides should avoid policies which risk provoking confrontation,
aiming instead for mutual accommodation and co-operation while exercis¬
ing restraint in the conduct of international relations both in Europe and
‘NATO’s 16 member countries are Belgium, Britain, Canada, Denmark, France, the Federal Republic of
Germany, Greece, Iceland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Turkey and
the United States. France does not participate fully in NATO’s integrated military structure.
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
8l
the rest of the world. This is explicitly recognised in the Final Act of the
1975 Helsinki Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe which
states that European security has to be considered in the broader context of
world security and that the pursuit of security should extend to other parts
of the world.
The Soviet Union’s invasion of Afghanistan in December 1979, and its
occupation of that country since then, have seriously damaged East-West
relations. The NATO countries have urged the Soviet Union to take
positive action, including a withdrawal from Afghanistan, to help to restore
mutual confidence. As a step in this direction, the European Community,
on Britain’s initiative, proposed in 1981 a two-stage international con¬
ference to reach agreement on Soviet withdrawal and a restoration of
Afghanistan’s non-aligned status. The Soviet Union has not agreed to the
proposal, however, and since then the prospects for improved East-West
relations have been further undermined by developments in Poland (see
below).
Britain attaches great importance to the full and balanced implemen¬
tation by all participants of the provisions of the 1975 Helsinki Final Act for
increased stability in Europe and improved co-operation between the 35
European and North American signatory states. While not a legally binding
document, the Final Act is a charter and code of conduct of behaviour for
what the participants hope will in time become a more normal and open
relationship between both governments and peoples in East and West. To
this end it contains undertakings about security, human rights, and co¬
operation in economic, humanitarian and other matters. At the 1977-78
Belgrade follow-up meeting Britain participated fully in the thorough
exchanges of views on the implementation of the Final Act, and has done
the same at the second follow-up meeting which opened in Madrid in
November 1980. Britain, along with other members of NATO, has also
supported France’s proposal for a conference on disarmament in Europe,
the first task of which would be to negotiate more thorough-going
confidence- and security-building measures (for example, by developing
existing arrangements for prior notification of major troop movements and
military manoeuvres and the presence of observers at the latter) which
would be militarily significant, binding, verifiable and applicable to the
whole of Europe from the Atlantic to the Urals; agreement in principle has
been reached on the first three of these criteria.
Hopes that the Madrid meeting would, through securing greater respect
in practice for the Helsinki principles, restore a secure political foundation
for the peaceful and co-operative management of East-West relations were
adversely affected by the imposition of martial law in Poland in December
1981. Both this, and the sustained campaign of Soviet pressure on the
Polish authorities which preceded it, have been condemned by Britain
and its allies as incompatible with the Final Act’s principles, particu¬
larly those on respect for human rights and freedom, non-intervention in
another state’s affairs and freedom of communication; and as damaging
to the process of peaceful change towards greater openness, tolerance
and humanity which the Act symbolises. Because of events in Poland
the Madrid meeting adjourned in early 1982 but it will reconvene in
November 1982.
Together with France, the United States and the Soviet Union, Britain is
a signatory to the 1972 Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin which reaffirms
the four countries’ rights and responsibilities in Berlin, and provides for
82
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Arms Control
and Disarma¬
ment
greatly improved travel and communications facilities between Berlin and
both the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic
Republic, and for the maintenance and development of the ties between
West Berlin and the Federal Republic.
Britain has played a prominent part in all the major multilateral disarma¬
ment negotiations and is a party to all, and a depository government for
most, of the treaties concluded as a result. It participates in the Committee
on Disarmament and in the arms control and disarmament work of the
United Nations. Britain played an active part in preparations for the 1982
United Nations Special Session on Disarmament, emphasising the need
for a realistic approach to arms control and for agreements to include
adequate verification provisions if they are to enhance security and build
up confidence between states. Britain also considers regional agreements to
be particularly useful.
A nuclear weapon state, Britain is committed to negotiating in good faith
to halt the nuclear arms race and to move towards nuclear disarmament.
The negotiation of a comprehensive test ban treaty, which in Britain’s
view would help curb the development of new types of nuclear weapons,
is a British goal, and Britain has supported the establishment of a sub¬
group of the United Nations Committee on Disarmament to examine the
verification and compliance problems relating to a comprehensive ban.
Britain has supported the United States in strategic arms limitation talks
with the Soviet Union and welcomed the United States proposal to the
Soviet Union in May 1982 for negotiations aimed at achieving significant
reductions in strategic nuclear weapons. Britain has also played an active
role in NATO consultations leading up to the negotiations between the
United States and the Soviet Union on intermediate range nuclear forces
(INF) which began in November 1981. It supports the United States
proposal that all longer range INF missiles should be eliminated (the so-
called ‘zero option’).
Believing that it is possible to improve international access to the benefits
of peaceful uses of nuclear energy while minimising the risk of the spread
of nuclear weapons technology, Britain has played a leading part in
strengthening the regime of non-proliferation through the International
Atomic Energy Agency and other organisations. A party to the 1968 Non-
Proliferation Treaty, which is designed to curb the nuclear arms race and
provide an assurance, through international safeguards, that civil nuclear
activities of non-nuclear-weapon states will not be diverted to making such
weapons, Britain reaffirmed its full support for the Treaty at a review
conference in 1980. It has undertaken not to use nuclear weapons against
non-nuclear-weapon states which have internationally binding commit¬
ments not to manufacture or acquire nuclear explosive devices (except in
the case of an attack on British interests by such a state in association with a
nuclear-weapon state). Britain believes that limiting the security assurances
to these states provides further support for nuclear non-proliferation.
The establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones in different parts of
the world can contribute to non-proliferation and regional security, and
Britain supports proposals for such zones where nuclear weapons do not
play a part in existing security arrangements. It was the first nuclear-
weapon state to ratify the protocols to the 1967 Treaty for the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (the Treaty of Tlatelolco).
As a result of a British initiative, another category of weapons of mass
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
83
destruction, biological weapons, is the subject of the 1972 Convention on
Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacterio¬
logical (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on their Destruction. Britain
took an active part in a conference in 1980 which reviewed the operation of
the Convention. Britain has also encouraged efforts to agree on a ban on
chemical weapons, and in 1976 put forward a draft convention on the
prohibition of their development, production and stock-piling which has
served as a focus of discussion. More recently, in February 1982, Britain
tabled a working paper on verification.
Conventional weapons are by far the largest component of national
armouries, and Britain has suggested a study by the United Nations on
ways to halt the world-wide build-up which it believes increases regional
tension. In particular it believes in the value of regional agreements as a
means of facilitating this. In the talks on Mutual and Balanced Force
Reductions, Britain, together with its NATO allies, is working for an
agreement with the Warsaw Pact participants which would contribute to a
more stable relationship and strengthen peace and security in Europe.
This requires an approximate parity between NATO and Warsaw Pact
forces in central Europe where the Warsaw Pact currently outnumbers
NATO by over 150,000 troops. The Western participants have also pro¬
posed associated confidence-building measures designed to facilitate veri¬
fication of an agreement. In June they put forward a new proposal for a
single agreement (in place of the previous two-phase approach) designed to
break the deadlock in the negotiations.
Britain played a key role in securing agreement in 1980 on a UN Con¬
vention establishing a legal framework for prohibitions and restrictions on
the use of particularly inhumane and injurious weapons together with
protocols restricting the use of mines, booby traps and incendiary weapons
and prohibiting the use of weapons which cause injury by fragments not
detectable by X-ray. Britain was among the first to sign the Convention
when it opened for signature in April 1981.
Concerned about the rising scale of military expenditure in the world,
Britain has supported proposals at the United Nations for a multilateral,
balanced and verifiable reduction of military budgets, and called for a
standard method of reporting military expenditure to be adopted. British
experts have taken part in United Nations studies on the relationship
between disarmament and development and on disarmament initiatives.
BRITAIN AND THE UNITED NATIONS
Support for the United Nations (UN) and the purposes and principles of its
Charter has been a cornerstone of British policy since 1945, for Britain sees
a strong and effective United Nations as the best framework of pursuing
and achieving many of its foreign policy objectives (the peaceful resolution
of disputes, disarmament and arms control, the protection of human rights,
the promotion of the rule of law) designed to contribute both to its own
well-being and security and to the development of a more harmonious
international community.
The United Nations and its various agencies also provide an im¬
portant framework for discussing such issues as disaster relief, the sea¬
bed, terrorism, the world environment, energy, development and world
resources.
84
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Keeping the
Peace
Human Rights
Economic and
Social Affairs
The maintenance of international peace and security was the primary
purpose envisaged for the United Nations at the time of its establishment.
Britain believes that it is appropriate for the United Nations, as the only
forum in which almost the whole international community is represented,
to seek to resolve disputes which threaten peace and stability whether on a
regional or world scale. With other members, it has worked to strengthen
and make more effective the machinery of the Security Council, the organ
with primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and for preventing and settling disputes. As a permanent member of the
Security Council, Britain has a particular interest in and responsibility for
questions of international peace and security, and plays an active role in the
Council’s work. It has sought to develop and improve the United Nations’
role in the peaceful settlement of disputes.
Another British concern is that the United Nations should have an
effective peacekeeping capacity. It contributes to the UN force in Cyprus
and provides logistic support for the UN Interim Force in Lebanon.
Britain has supported the UN’s Universal Declaration of Human Rights
since its adoption by the General Assembly in 1948. While not legally
binding, the Declaration has inspired many other international instru¬
ments designed to secure the observance of its provisions. These include
the two international covenants adopted by the General Assembly in 1966
which do impose legal obligations on those who ratify them—the Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights. Both came into force, and were ratified by Britain, in 1976.
Under the latter Britain also recognises the competence of the UN Human
Rights Committee (set up by the Covenant to monitor the implementation
of the human rights protected by it) to receive and consider state-to-state
complaints.
Britain is also a party to conventions aimed at implementing particular
rights contained in the Universal Declaration, including those on the
elimination of racial discrimination and of discrimination against women,
on the status of refugees and stateless persons and on slavery.
The adoption of conventions and covenants in itself is insufficient to
secure the protection of human rights, and Britain believes it is necessary to
develop effective procedures to ensure the implementation of standards
which such arrangements contain. It also believes that UN members,
through voluntary acceptance of the Universal Declaration and the inter¬
national covenants, have accepted that human rights are a legitimate object
of international concern.
The Economic and Social Council has general responsibility within the
United Nations for human rights activities. The bodies directly concerned
are the Commission on Human Rights, its Sub-Commission on Prevention
of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, and the Commission on the
Status of Women. Britain is represented on all these bodies and is active in
their work.
The Charter states that ‘the promotion of the economic and social ad¬
vancement of all peoples’ is one of the principal aims of the United Nations,
and an estimated 90 per cent of the organisation’s efforts, in terms of
resources and personnel, is now employed to this end. With the growing
concern for the problems of development, the main emphasis has become
increasingly the provision of direct assistance for member states. The UN
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
85
system is now the largest single source of technical assistance for de¬
veloping countries, as well as providing considerable emergency and relief
aid and assistance for refugees. (The provision of capital assistance has been
generally confined to the World Bank group and regional development
banks whose operations are generally considered separately from those of
the rest of the UN system.)
Successive British governments have affirmed their support for the
functional and developmental work of the United Nations. Britain is the
sixth largest contributor to the UN’s regular budget, providing some £11-5
million, 4 46 per cent of the total, in 1981. In addition, it contributed
some £4 9 million to the World Health Organisation, £1-9 million to the
International Labour Organisation, £3 6 million to the Food and Agri¬
culture Organisation and £4 3 million to the UN Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organisation. Britain provides a considerably larger pro¬
portion of the UN’s voluntary funds, donating some £41 million in 1981
including £17-5 million for the UN Development Programme, £5 2
million for the UN Relief and Works Agency for Palestinian Refugees, £6
million for the UN Children’s Fund, £2 3 million for the UN Fund for
Population Activities, about £5 4 million for the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees, and £2 5 million for the World Food Programme.
In the deliberations of the governing bodies of the various agencies and
programmes, Britain encourages the deployment of resources towards the
poorest countries and the poorest communities in the developing world. It
also seeks to promote the most efficient use of UN development resources
and improvements in the co-ordination, control and effectiveness of the
system, in order to avoid unnecessary duplication by the various agencies.
The United Nations is central to the North-South dialogue (see later,
this chapter), not only through the involvement of its agencies in de¬
velopment and other international economic problems, but also as the
forum within which the dialogue is reviewed. In the General Assembly’s
Committee of the Whole, set up in 1978 to monitor developments in the
dialogue, and at its special session on global economic issues in 1980,
Britain played an active role in the discussions which led to the adoption of a
new international development strategy for the 1980s.
OTHER INTERNATIONAL
ORGANISATIONS
Britain is a member of many other international organisations, including
those concerned with the management of the world economy. It is a
founder member of the International Monetary Fund, established in 1944
(along with the World Bank—see p 89) to regulate the international
financial system and to provide a source of credit for states facing balance
of payments problems, and has welcomed the creation by the Fund of
facilities to provide special assistance to developing countries experiencing
financial or trading difficulties. It is a strong supporter of efforts under the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade to liberalise further and promote
the growth of world trade, and to improve the developing countries’
participation in it (see pp 71 and 347).
Britain is also a member of the Organisation for Economic Co-opera¬
tion and Development (OECD). An instrument for intergovernmental
co-operation among 24 industrialised countries, the OECD’s aims are
86
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Official and
Other Flows
to promote policies designed to achieve the highest sustainable econo¬
mic growth and employment, and a rising standard of living in member
countries while maintaining financial stability, and thus to contribute to
the development of the world economy; to assist developing countries; and
to contribute to the expansion of world trade on a multilateral, non-
discriminatory basis in accordance with international obligations.
Other organisations to which Britain belongs or extends support are
more restricted in their operations and include the regional development
banks in Africa, the Americas and Asia and specialist technical, agricultural
and medical institutions.
With 20 other nations Britain is a member of the Council of Europe
which aims to provide the widest possible European forum for the dis¬
cussion of political, economic, social and scientific issues with a view to
achieving a greater unity between its members. Membership is open to
any European parliamentary democracy which accepts the principles of the
rule of law and the protection of human rights. The Council was re¬
sponsible for the adoption in 1950 of the European Convention on Human
Rights, to which Britain is a party.
DEVELOPMENT CO-OPERATION
The basic objective of Britain’s aid programme is to help developing
countries’ efforts to raise their living standards, the emphasis being on
assisting the poorest countries and the poorest communities within them.
It is these countries which find it most difficult to generate investment
funds domestically or attract external private flows. Britain’s ability to
support development overseas is dependent on the state of its own
economy, and alongside development objectives, due weight is given to
political, commercial and industrial considerations in the deployment of
aid resources. Increasingly, the aid programme is being used in ways which
will benefit both the developing countries and Britain.
Official aid is only one aspect of Britain’s support for overseas de¬
velopment. Private investment is a much larger component and one which
has benefited from the abolition of exchange controls in 1979. Britain is
the world’s second largest overseas investor, with over a fifth of its over¬
seas assets located in developing countries. Similarly, trade is important,
developing countries providing nearly a fifth of Britain’s imports in 1981.
Aid is also provided by private voluntary societies which concentrate their
activities in the poorest countries.
In 1981 official aid flows amounted to some £ 1,605 million, of which £ 1,174
million represented official development assistance1 and £431 million
other official flows. Of the former, bilateral aid accounted for £747 million
including technical co-operation funds of £217 million; some £427
million was provided through multilateral agencies. Repayments of capital
and payments of interest on loans came to £92 million and £32 million
respectively; another £27 million of capital repayments and £6 million of
interest were cancelled.
Aid performance is commonly measured as a proportion of gross national
product (GNP), particularly with reference to the two United Nations
'Official development assistance, the international basis for reporting on aid performances, is defined as
official flows for development purposes with a grant (concessional) element of 25 per cent or more.
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
8?
Bilateral Aid
targets for resource transfers to developing countries; that net official
development assistance equals 0 7 per cent of GNP and that combined
private and official flows equal 1 per cent of GNP. Britain accepts in
principle the first of these but is not committed to a timetable for reaching
it. Successive governments have made it clear that progress must depend on
Britain’s economic condition and upon other calls on its resources. In
1981 net official development assistance amounted to £1,082 million, 0 43
per cent of GNP. The average for donor countries belonging to the
Development Assistance Committee of the Organisation for Economic Co¬
operation and Development was 0 35 per cent. The 1 per cent target has
never received the publicity accorded to the 0 7 per cent target. For many
years, however, Britain has far exceeded it, and in 1981 total net financial
flows from Britain to developing countries amounted to £4,980 million,
nearly 2 per cent of GNP.
Britain’s aid programme began as part of the discharge of its responsibili¬
ties towards dependent territories, and the main emphasis remains on the
Commonwealth which includes among its members some of the world’s
poorest countries. In 1981, £469 million (69 per cent) of direct bilateral
official development assistance allocated went to Commonwealth countries.
Of this, £19 million went to Britain’s remaining dependencies, which are a
first charge on the aid programme. The regional disbursement pattern is
shown below.
Regional Distribution of Bilateral Aid 1981
million
Africa
total 252
Americas and
Caribbean Oceania Europe
total 40 total 23 total 33
million million million
Unspecified
total 102
million
88
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Financial Aid
Technical
Co-operation
The country receiving the largest amount (£169 million) was India.
Other major recipients included Bangladesh, Sudan, Kenya, Tanzania, Sri
Lanka, Turkey and Pakistan.
In line with the policy of concentrating aid on the poorest countries,
£43! million (58 per cent) of net bilateral aid went to countries with a 1980
per capita income of $370 or less.
Bilateral financial aid in 1981 totalled £531 million; over 84 per cent was in
grants and the rest in concessionary loans. Budgetary aid, over £7 million,
is provided in the form of grants. Most development aid, and all provided to
the poorest countries (which include India, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and
many African countries), is in grant form only. In 1981 loan commitments,
excluding investments by the Commonwealth Development Corporation
(see below), totalled £59 million. Where loans bear interest it is at fixed
concessionary rates ranging from 2 per cent to 6 per cent, and nearly all
loans carry from three to seven years’ grace periods for repayments of
capital. The average maturity of loans is 25 years. Britain has more than
fulfilled the 1972 and 1978 recommendations of the OECD’s Development
Assistance Committee on easing the terms of financial aid. Since 1978
Britain has concluded agreements to remove the burden of past aid loans
worth £900 million from 18 of the poorest countries.
Loans and grants are normally tied to the purchase of goods, equipment
and services from Britain, although there may be an element for local costs
and a foreign content in contracts financed from tied aid in appropriate
cases. New loan commitments can be untied, if the recipient agrees, to the
extent that goods can be purchased either from the poorest developing
countries or from Britain. The important role which the Commonwealth
Development Corporation plays in development assistance was endorsed
by the British Government in 1981. The Corporation invests in de¬
velopment projects in most Commonwealth countries, and, with British
Government approval, in some other countries. By the end of 1981 some
£409 million had been invested out of a total commitment of £596 million.
Of the latter, £108 million was in Asia, £74 million in the Pacific, £84
million in the Caribbean and virtually all of the remainder in Africa.
Commitments approved in 1981 totalled over £94 million, 74 per cent
going to the poorest countries.
Technical co-operation, the transfer of specialised knowledge and skills
from country to country, complements financial aid, expertise often being
essential to the success of a programme of financial aid or investment.
Expenditure on it has increased in recent years and was £217 million, 29 per
cent of bilateral aid, in 1981. Of this, £88 million was for the provision
of expert personnel, including volunteers, £36 million for students and
trainees in Britain and overseas, £6 million for research services and
projects, £18 million for consultancy services, and £69 million in support
of various British institutions, and for the provision of equipment and
supplies.
During 1981 there were 5,319 people financed by Britain (other than
volunteers) working in developing countries, of whom some 2,279 were
engaged in the field of education, 775 in agriculture and allied fields, and
342 in health services. In addition, under the British Volunteer Programme
there were 1,193 volunteers, mainly graduates or otherwise qualified,
working in developing countries, the majority of them teaching. Re-
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
89
Multilateral
Aid
Voluntary
Agencies
cruitment, training and placing overseas is undertaken by four volun¬
tary bodies (Catholic Institute for International Relations, International
Voluntary Service, United Nations Association International Service and
Voluntary Service Overseas), 90 per cent of their costs being met by the
British Government.
Britain receives large numbers of students and trainees from developing
countries. Over 13,451 were financed in Britain in 1981 under regional
programmes of technical co-operation, by awards under the Common¬
wealth Scholarship and Fellowship Plan, and under British Council
schemes.
To support development overseas, the Government maintains four
specialist scientific organisations (the Directorate of Overseas Surveys, the
Land Resources Development Centre, the Tropical Products Institute and
the Centre for Overseas Pest Research) and provides support for many
others. The latter includes overseas units/divisions of the government-
financed Transport and Road Research Laboratory, the Building Research
Establishment, the Hydraulics Research Station Limited and the Institute
of Geological Sciences. These organisations provide specialist information,
advice and experts for service overseas, and undertake field and laboratory
research investigations.
Britain is the second largest subscriber to the World Bank group of
institutions—the International Bank for Reconstruction and Develop¬
ment, the International Development Association (IDA) and the Inter¬
national Finance Corporation. The British commitment to the IDA’s
Sixth Replenishment (1980 to 1984) is £660 million. Britain contributes
to the resources of the Asian Development Bank, the Inter-American
Development Bank, the Caribbean Development Bank and the African
Development Bank. Its contribution to the United Nations Development
Programme for 1981 was £17-5 million, and it is the largest source for
expertise and fellowships provided under the Programme. There is also a
major British contribution to other UN agencies and programmes (see
p 85) and an increasing proportion of British aid is now channelled through
the European Community’s aid programme. Britain’s contribution to the
fifth European Development Fund established by the second Lome
Convention, covering the period from 1980 to 1985, is about £470 million.
Voluntary agencies provided an estimated £50 million for work in de¬
veloping countries in 1981, mainly on agriculture, health and nutrition, and
education projects and on emergency relief operations.
There are about 200 agencies in all, including church and missionary
societies; among the best known are Oxfam, Christian Aid, War on Want,
the Save the Children Fund, the British Red Cross Society and the Catholic
Fund for Overseas Development. The funds are raised largely through
appeals in the media, both on a regular basis and in response to specific
emergencies; the latter, in particular, meet with a good response. The
Government co-operates with the agencies in various ways, especially in
immediate post-disaster relief and rehabilitation operations and through its
Joint Funding Scheme. Under this it meets half the cost of selected
development projects undertaken by the agencies and aimed at helping the
poorest. Such projects include community health, non-formal education,
the improvement of food supplies, agricultural training, water supply and
irrigation. Expenditure on the Scheme in 1981 was some £2 8 million.
90
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Voluntary agencies’ work on behalf of refugees overseas also receives
official support. The Government finances about half the budget of the
United Kingdom Standing Conference on Refugees, a consultative body
for agencies engaged in assisting refugees, and in 1977 introduced a scheme
for financing voluntary projects for refugees overseas. Some £132,000 was
spent under the scheme in 1980, the projects being concerned mainly with
improving health and general well-being of the refugees.
THE NORTH-
SOUTH
DIALOGUE
The North-South dialogue, which embraces questions of development,
transfer of resources, raw materials, trade and international monetary
issues, is being conducted between the industrialised nations and the
developing countries with a view to furthering the equitable evolution of
the world economy. Britain attaches importance to securing progress in the
dialogue, and, in its approach to the discussions involved, works in close
association with its partners in the European Community.
During the latter part of 1981, when Britain held the Presidency of
the Community, the Government took an active part in the preparations
for global negotiations and the United Nations conference on new and
renewable sources of energy held in Nairobi.
Britain recognises that the interests of developing and industrialised
countries are mutual and that all will benefit if the problems of the world
economy can be effectively tackled. Despite the recession Britain seeks to
defend the open trading system. Although domestic priorities have obliged
the Government to adopt restrictive measures in certain highly sensitive
areas, it is conscious of their exceptional character. Moreover, a substantial
aid programme has been maintained and Britain shares the priority the
international community attaches to providing special assistance to the
poorest developing countries. In addition, direct investment and private
financial flows to the developing world have been encouraged.
Britain favours the continuing evolution of the existing world economic
system with its free flow of trade and capital, and has defended the
independence of efficient international institutions like the International
Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade. As previously constituted these institutions serve the vital
interests of all nations and their work reflects the growing interdependence
of developed and developing countries.
Britain also supports the important role of the International Monetary
Fund in providing financial assistance, the level of which has recently been
substantially increased, to help developing countries to carry out adjust¬
ment measures to overcome balance of payments difficulties.
Britain has long recognised the importance of commodities to the
economies of many developing countries and has played a full part, in
company with other European Community member states, in negotiating
the commodities agreements called for by the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development in its 1976 resolution establishing the In¬
tegrated Programme for Commodities (IPC). It is a member of agreements
covering tin, rubber, cocoa and coffee, the purpose of which is to stabilise
prices and supplies at levels fair and remunerative both to producers and
consumers. As a member of the Community Britain belongs to agreements
covering wheat and olive oil designed to improve market conditions by
consultations between producers and consumers, and has consistently
urged Community membership of the International Sugar Organisation.
It has also ratified the Common Fund for Commodities, a key element of
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
91
the IPC, and has agreed to contribute to the voluntary as well as to the
obligatory part of its work. A substantial British contribution is made to the
Stabex scheme operated by the Community which compensates com¬
modity producing Lome Convention countries (see p 75) for shortfalls in
commodity revenue.
In 1964 Britain was the first major developed country to support the idea
of extending tariff preferences to all developing countries on a non¬
reciprocal and non-discriminatory basis. This led to a generalised system of
preferences operated by the European Community and the other de¬
veloped countries. It also strongly supported the objectives of the last
round of multilateral trade negotiations. Set out in the 1973 Tokyo
Declaration, these were the further liberalisation of world trade through
the progressive dismantling of tariff and non-tariff barriers, and within this,
the provision of special and more favourable treatment for the developing
countries where possible.
Community trade arrangements are among the most liberal applied by
industrial nations, and Britain has played a significant role in determining
their nature. It took a major part in the negotiations for the first Lome
Convention, both to safeguard the trading interests of Commonwealth
developing countries and to ensure that reciprocal preferences would not
be demanded from the developing countries, as had been the case with
previous Community arrangements. Britain also contributed to the suc¬
cessful conclusion of the second Lome Convention. In addition, Britain
has supported improvements to the Community’s Generalised System
of Preferences scheme, especially with regard to more liberal access
into the Community for imports of manufactured and processed agri¬
cultural products and in its application to the poorest developed countries,
particularly those in South Asia. Before entering the Community, Britain
secured a commitment to expand and reinforce Community trade relations
with the Commonwealth countries of Asia, and this has led to the con¬
clusion of commercial co-operation agreements with India, Sri Lanka and
Bangladesh.
Defence
Britain’s defence policy is based on the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation
(NATO—see also pp 80-83) whose collective defence provides each of its
members with far greater security than any could achieve alone. Britain is
fully committed to NATO and its strategy of deterrence and, in assigning
the greater part of its military forces to it, makes a major contribution to the
full range of the North Atlantic Alliance’s deterrent capabilities, the only
European nation to do so.1 It also plays a full part in the Alliance’s efforts,
complementary to its defence preparations, to negotiate balanced and
verifiable arms control agreements and to reduce tension so as to achieve a
more just and lasting peaceful order in Europe.
Despite its economic difficulties, Britain is determined to play its full part
in meeting NATO’s requirements, and, using the most economical means
available, is increasing its defence efforts to the level required to provide the
best possible guarantee of safety. Britain is firmly committed to the NATO
target of securing real increases in defence spending in the region of 3 per
cent annually. The defence budget for 1982-83, an estimated £14,091
million, makes provision for such an increase, and further increases of 3 per
cent are planned for each of the years to 1985-86, implementing in full the
NATO target. In 1981 Britain contributed 4.9 per cent of its gross domestic
product to defence spending, third in NATO after the United States and
Greece; the average for NATO’s European members was 3-7 per cent.
Britain has consistently spent a higher proportion of its defence budget on
new equipment than any other NATO member.
In 1981 the Government reviewed Britain’s defence programme in order
to establish how best to exploit the substantial planned increases in defence
expenditure and to ensure that these resources would be spent most
effectively in pursuit of its commitment to the North Atlantic Alliance and
to Western security.2 In the light of rising equipment costs and advancing
technology, the review identified the need for, and ways of achieving, a
better balance between the various elements of the defence forces which
would improve the combat effectiveness of the front line forces, thus
enhancing Britain’s already major contribution to NATO, and, within the
NATO framework, be sufficiently balanced and flexible to enable Britain to
respond to challenges to its interests at home and overseas. Britain’s
response to the Argentine invasion of the Falkland Islands in April 1982
shows that the force structure is sufficiently adaptable to permit such an
effective response. The Government is examining the Falklands operations
to see what adjustments may be required in the defence programme,
though the main threat to Britain’s security, which the defence programme
is designed to meet, remains the nuclear and conventional forces of the
Warsaw Pact.
NATO’s NATO’s strategy is based on the principle that peace and stability can be
Strategy maintained only if a potential aggressor is convinced that it would lose far
more than it could ever hope to gain by the use of force. NATO neither
needs nor intends to match the Warsaw Pact weapon for weapon, but seeks
1 France, which also has nuclear forces, does not participate fully in NATO’s integrated military structure.
2 The United Kingdom Defence Programme: The Way Forward. Cmnd 8288, HMSO.
DEFENCE
93
Britain’s
NATO
Contribution
to deter aggression by having enough forces to respond effectively to an
attack at any level and, if necessary, to raise the level of conflict to make
clear the Alliance’s ability and determination to go on resisting. For this it
needs a wide range of conventional and nuclear forces, these being closely
linked to provide a chain of options from which to choose the appropriate
method of countering aggression. This concept of flexible response is
complemented by that of forward defence, the stationing of members’
forces well forward in Europe to emphasise their collective determination
and commitment to defend the whole of NATO territory.
It is to maintain the Alliance’s defence and deterrent capacity in the face
of the build-up in Warsaw Pact military strength that NATO members are
co-operating in the Long Term Defence Programme (adopted in 1978 and
designed to effect improvements in key areas and to make the most effective
use of Alliance resources), and have agreed to aim to secure real increases in
defence expenditure in the region of 3 per cent annually. NATO’s inter¬
mediate theatre nuclear forces are also being modernised. Britain is actively
involved in these measures, and is also updating its own strategic nuclear
capability. In addition, in the Eurogroup, Britain and 10 other European
members are working to improve the effectiveness of their contribution to
the Alliance and to achieve better co-ordination, thereby making the best
possible use of the available resources.
NATO is concerned to deter Soviet exploitation of instability outside
Europe, and to demonstrate its resolve to defend essential interests, but, at
the same time, to recognise the rights and views of regional countries and
their primary responsibility for their own defence. In Britain’s view these
requirements can be best reconciled through the provision of military aid,
including the sale of arms, the periodic deployment of NATO forces in
strategically important areas, and the maintenance of a capability to inter¬
vene militarily where necessary. With these measures in mind, Britain has
welcomed the United States plans for a rapid deployment force, and has
promised to support them where possible.
Britain’s contribution to NATO is concentrated in areas where it can best
help to maintain Alliance security, principally NATO’s strategic nuclear
deterrent and the defence of the Central Region of Europe, the Eastern
Atlantic and English Channel, and the British ‘home’ base and its im¬
mediate approaches.
Britain’s Polaris strategic force (to be replaced by a Trident force in the
1990s—see p 96) represents a unique European contribution to NATO’s
nuclear deterrent, providing a second and independent centre of decision¬
making within the Alliance. At a time of strategic parity, this provides an
important assurance against any Soviet misconception that the United
States would not be prepared to use its nuclear forces in Europe’s defence.
Britain’s theatre nuclear systems are also committed to NATO, and it has
agreed to provide bases for 160 of the 464 ground-launched cruise missiles
which, with 108 Pershing II missiles, the United States is to deploy in
Europe to modernise NATO’s intermediate nuclear forces.
Britain’s decision in 1980 to update its strategic deterrent has led to
increased calls from some groups within the country for unilateral nuclear
disarmament, both on the grounds of cost and as an example to others.
While the Government understands the widespread concern regarding
nuclear war, it believes such apprehensions to be misplaced so long as the
policy of nuclear deterrence and efforts to relax East-West tensions,
94
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Non-NATO
Responsibilities
including the pursuit of arms control, which have helped to maintain the
peace for over 30 years, are maintained. It also believes that unilateral
disarmament by Britain would not significantly alter the views of other
states which maintain, or may think of acquiring, nuclear weapons, and that
such action would weaken NATO’s ability to deter aggression in the face of
the continuing nuclear and conventional threat.
Virtually all of the Royal Navy, the largest NATO navy in Western
Europe, is earmarked for assignment to the Alliance and permanent con¬
tributions are made to its two standing naval forces, in the Atlantic and
the Channel, and to its Mediterranean force when activated. The British
Army of the Rhine (BAOR) and Royal Air Force (RAF) Germany are
stationed in the Federal Republic of Germany. (Britain’s Field Force in
Berlin is not committed to NATO.) BAOR’s combat element is being
reorganised into three stronger divisions, two comprising three armoured
brigades each and a third made up of two armoured brigades and an
infantry brigade. A reserve division, comprising one regular and two
Territorial Army brigades, will be located in Britain. On mobilisation,
BAOR’s peacetime strength of around 55,000 would be more than doubled
by reinforcements from Britain and up to 70 per cent of the Army would be
in Central Europe in wartime. Nearly all the RAF’s combat and support
aircraft are assigned to NATO. RAF Germany’s 12 squadrons (one of
helicopters) are equipped for strike/attack, reconnaissance, close support
and air defence roles, while RAF Strike Command, based in Britain,
provides forces for these and for the maritime patrol, anti-submarine
warfare and transport roles.
Britain also provides important elements to NATO’s specialist rein¬
forcement forces, including ground and air units for the United King¬
dom Mobile Force and for its contribution to the Allied Command
Europe Mobile Force, four squadrons for NATO’s Strategic Air Re¬
serve, and naval and marine units for a British-Netherlands amphibious
force.
Forces from all three Services are stationed at Gibraltar, which,
positioned at the western entry to the Mediterranean, is an important base
for NATO.
In support of other defence commitments, and with a view to playing its
part in collective Western responses to threats to its world-wide interests,
Britain is improving its ability to operate outside the NATO area without
diminishing its central commitment to the Alliance. Britain’s ability to
deploy forces world wide, both quickly and effectively, was shown when,
after diplomatic efforts had failed, Britain sent a task force to expel
Argentine forces and restore British administration to the Falkland Islands
in May-June 1982 (see p 80). It also provides military aid to friendly
countries and deploys its forces on visits and exercises in important areas.
In Cyprus British forces provide for the security of Britain’s Sovereign
Bases Areas and contribute the largest component of the United Nations
force there. All three Services contribute to the garrison in Hong Kong,
while that in Belize is provided by the Army and the RAF with the Royal
Navy deploying a warship in the Caribbean as a guardship. A Gurkha
battalion is stationed in Brunei and substantial forces are being main¬
tained in the Falkland Islands following their recapture. Britain is
also participating in the multinational force and observers deployed
DEFENCE
95
Northern
Ireland
THE ARMED
FORCES
Personnel
Reserve Forces
along the Israel-Egypt border following Israel’s withdrawal from Sinai
in 1982.
The armed services assist the civil authorities in Northern Ireland in
maintaining law and order and in countering terrorism (see p 16).
The total strength of the armed forces, all volunteers, was about 327,900 on
1 April 1982:73,100 in the Royal Navy and the Royal Marines, 163,100 in
the Army and 91,700 in the Royal Air Force. To maintain force strengths
and improve their standards, and to overcome shortages of skilled
personnel, service conditions are being improved and pay has been restored
to comparability with civilian levels. An average of 230,200 civilians are
expected to be employed by the Ministry of Defence during 1982-83.
The three women’s Services, with a combined strength of 15,600, are
integral parts of the armed forces, and servicewomen serve alongside
servicemen in Britain and overseas, mainly in support roles. Their im¬
portance is increasing, however, and some are trained to bear arms for
defensive purposes.
Engagements for non-commissioned ranks range from 3 to 22 years, with
a wide freedom of choice on the length and terms of service. Subject to a
minimum period of service (varying from three to nine years, excluding
training), entrants may leave at any time, at 18 months’ notice. Discharge
may also be granted on compassionate grounds, by purchase, or on grounds
of conscience. Commissions, either by promotion from the ranks or by
direct entry based on educational and other qualifications, are granted for
short, medium and long terms. All three Services have schemes for school
and university/college sponsorships.
Non-commissioned personnel receive basic training supplemented by
further and specialist training throughout their careers. Study for educa¬
tional qualifications is encouraged and Service trade and technical training,
highly valued by industry, leads to nationally recognised qualifications for
large numbers of Service personnel.
Commissioned ranks receive initial training at the Britannia Royal Naval
College, Dartmouth, the Royal Military Academy, Sandhurst, or the Royal
Air Force College, Cranwell. This is followed by specialist training, often
including degree courses at university or Service establishments. Higher or
advanced training for officers is provided by the Royal Naval College,
Greenwich, the Army Staff College at Camberley, and the Royal Air Force
Staff College at Bracknell. Selected senior officers and civilian officials from
Britain and other countries attend the Royal College of Defence Studies,
London, which provides the wider background necessary for those
destined to fill higher appointments.
Operational training includes joint-Service and inter-allied exercises.
Training is provided for the armed forces of allied, Commonwealth and
other countries.
Reserve and auxiliary forces are an integral part of the armed forces. In
addition to supplementing the regular forces on mobilisation with trained
personnel able immediately to take their places either as formed units or
as individual reinforcements, they form an important link between the
Services and the civil community. Some have a reserve liability following a
period of regular service (regular reserve); others are volunteers who train
in their spare time. The latter include the Territorial Army whose role is to
reinforce the ground forces committed to NATO and help to maintain a
96 BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
secure home base in the United Kingdom; its strength is being increased to
86,000 over the remainder of the decade. A Home Service Force, linked to
the T erritorial Army and with a strength of up to 4,500, is being established
to assist in guarding important civilian and military installations when
necessary. Other volunteer forces include the Royal Naval Reserve, the
Royal Marines Reserve, the Royal Auxiliary Air Force and the Royal Air
Force Volunteer Reserve. There is also the Ulster Defence Regiment
which is a locally recruited and largely part-time force which supports the
police and the Army in Northern Ireland. On 1 January 1982 regular re¬
serves totalled 197,200, and volunteer reserves and auxiliary forces 84,600.
Cadet forces, which make a significant contribution to recruitment to the
regular forces, totalled 144,200.
COMBAT
FORCES
Strategic
Nuclear Forces
The Royal Navy’s Polaris force comprises four nuclear submarines, each of
which can remain on underwater patrol for long periods and is equipped
with 16 nuclear-armed Polaris missiles. Improved (‘Chevaline’) Polaris
missiles, designed to maintain the force’s effectiveness until its replacement
in the 1990s by a Trident nuclear submarine force, are planned to enter
service soon. The Trident development programme is expected to cost
some £7,500 million (at September 1981 prices) which, over 15 years, will
average some 3 per cent of total defence expenditure, reaching perhaps
5 per cent at its peak.
Royal Navy Britain’s naval forces, while capable of operating throughout the world
General when required, are concentrated in the Eastern Atlantic and English
Purpose Channel where they constitute the majority of forces immediately available
om at Forces j-0 NATO. They include three anti-submarine warfare carriers (including
two of the new Invincible class) equipped with the Sea King anti-submarine
helicopters and the Sea Harrier maritime vertical short take-off and landing
(V/STOL) aircraft for air defence and anti-surface ship operations; 12
nuclear-powered attack submarines, soon to be equipped with the anti¬
ship missile Sub-Harpoon, and 15 diesel-powered submarines; 11 guided
missile destroyers; and 41 general purpose and anti-submarine warfare
frigates. Most of the destroyers and frigates carry weapon-carrying heli¬
copters (the Lynx, Wasp or Wessex), and armaments installed include the
Exocet surface-to-surface, Sea Wolf point air defence and Sea Dart area air
defence missile systems, and the Ikara anti-submarine guided weapons
system. There is also an amphibious capability comprising two assault
ships, Fearless and Intrepid, and the Royal Marines Commando Forces,
while the anti-submarine warfare carrier Hermes (to be phased out when
the third Invincible class carrier enters service) retains a secondary role
as a commando ship. Other ships include over 30 mine counter-measures
vessels and a new class of offshore patrol vessels for protecting fishing
interests and offshore oil and gas installations.
In coming years Britain’s contribution to NATO’s maritime defence will
be based increasingly on an enhanced anti-submarine warfare element
made up principally of nuclear-powered attack submarines whose numbers
are planned to build up to 17, a newly designed general purpose frigate with
a strong anti-submarine warfare capability, the Type 23, and Nimrod
maritime patrol aircraft. These apart, the surface fleet is being renewed
through a major construction programme involving the third Invincible
class carrier, 5 Type 42 destroyers (which are being increased to 14),
4 Type 22 frigates, and 6 Hunt class mine counter-measures vessels. The
DEFENCE
97
Army Combat
Forces
Royal Air
Force General
Purpose Forces
destroyer/frigate element committed to NATO will be reduced to about 50
ships by the mid-1980s as older and more manpower intensive ships are
disposed of. Major new weapon programmes include the Sting Ray
lightweight torpedo for ships, aircraft and helicopters, a new heavyweight
torpedo for submarines (Spearfish), and the Sea Eagle anti-ship missile.
Most of the Army’s combat forces, consisting of BAOR and the forces
stationed in Britain, have primary roles in support of NATO. Others are
stationed overseas in support of treaty commitments.
Armoured regiments in BAOR are equipped with the Chieftain main
battle tank, mounting a fully stabilised 120-mm gun, which will be joined in
the mid-1980s by Challenger, a new tank fitted with Chobham armour,
which provides greater protection than conventional steel or aluminium
armour, and a more powerful diesel engine. Enough Challengers are being
bought to equip four regiments. Tracked combat reconnaissance vehicles
include Scorpion, a light tank with a 76-mm gun, Scimitar, a reconnaissance
vehicle with a 30-mm cannon, and Striker which mounts the Swingfire
long-range anti-tank missile. The primary tracked armoured personnel
carrier for mechanised infantry units is the FV432, but steps to improve
the mobility of both mechanised and non-mechanised infantry are being
examined, one of which will be the introduction of the MCV80 from the
mid-1980s. The crew-portable Milan anti-tank missile system is widely
deployed with BAOR infantry units and will be joined in a few years by the
man-portable light anti-tank weapon, LAW80. Lynx helicopters are being
fitted with the TOW long-range anti-tank weapon. Artillery units have
been strengthened by the introduction of the towed howitzer, FH70, and
the purchase of additional Mi09 self-propelled guns, both of which fire
155-mm ammunition. Another 155-mm gun, the SP70, will enter service
later in the decade, as will the Multiple Launch Rocket System. Tactical
nuclear support is provided by the Lance missile and dual capable artillery.
Integral air defence is based on the Rapier missile system, a tracked version
of which is being introduced, and the Blowpipe man-portable missile. Both
systems are undergoing qualitative improvement.
The Royal Air Force contains aircraft equipped for all modern operational
roles, together with the RAF Regiment field squadrons for anti-aircraft and
ground defence.
Phantom and Lightning aircraft, together with Rapier and Bloodhound
surface-to-air missiles, are employed in air defence. Radar warning is
provided by Shackleton airborne early warning aircraft and by the ground
radars and control and reporting centres of the United Kingdom Air
Defence Ground Environment system. Tornado GRis (which began re¬
placing Vulcans in mid-1982), Jaguars and Buccaneers operate in the strike/
attack role; Jaguars and Canberras are employed for reconnaissance;
Jaguars and the Harrier V/STOL aircraft provide ground support (with
the Harrier also having a tactical reconnaissance capability); and Nimrods
are used for long-range maritime patrol and anti-submarine warfare and for
off-shore surveillance and fishery protection duties. Land-based air defence
of the fleet is provided by Phantoms, while Buccaneers are deployed in the
anti-ship role. Victor tankers are used for in-flight refuelling, and transport
support is provided by Hercules aircraft for medium ranges and by Wessex,
Puma and Chinook helicopters for short-range tasks. Weapons in or being
introduced into service include the Skyflash, Sidewinder and AIM9L air-
to-air missiles.
98
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Research and
Development
The Royal Air Force is undergoing a comprehensive re-equipment
programme. Improvements to Britain’s air defences include the replace¬
ment from the mid-1980s of the Lightning and most of the Phantom
squadrons with the air defence version of the Tornado (which will number
70 in all); the entry into service in 1983 of specially equipped Nimrods
which will form Britain’s contribution to NATO’s integrated airborne
early warning force; and the equipping, with air-to-air missiles, of 72 Hawk
trainer aircraft for local air defence. An increased air-to-air refuelling
capability, with the completion of the VC 10 tanker conversion programme
and the introduction of some Vulcans and Hercules in this role, will
multiply the patrol time and range of air defence aircraft; it will also enable
Britain to project its power further afield when necessary. At the same time,
the Tornado GRi (of which 220 have been ordered) will continue to be
introduced into the strike/attack role in place of some Buccaneers as well as
of the Vulcans, and will replace the Canberra in the reconnaissance role;
while 60 improved Harriers, the Anglo-American AV8B, are to be pro¬
cured for ground support duties. The Nimrod maritime patrol aircraft,
some now equipped for in-flight refuelling, are being extensively modern¬
ised and will carry the Sting Ray lightweight torpedo and the Harpoon anti¬
ship weapon, while another anti-ship missile, the Sea Eagle, is to be fitted to
the Buccaneer.
CIVIL DEFENCE
Civil defence arrangements are based on the extended and adapted use
of the peacetime resources of government departments, local authorities,
the emergency services and nationalised industries, supplemented by the
efforts of voluntary organisations and individual volunteers.
Following a review of existing arrangements by the Home Office in 1980,
an additional £45 million is being spent on civil defence in the years to
1983-84, when annual expenditure will total £45 million. This is being
used to improve the quality and readiness of central and local government
planning; increase training opportunities arranged by the Home Office on
staff college lines at the Home Defence College, Easingwold; help local
authorities to plan for better community involvement in civil defence; and
improve the emergency system for decentralised government control and
communications. Improvements are also being made in the communi¬
cations, equipment and administrative facilities of the United Kingdom
Warning and Monitoring Organisation. This includes the civilian Royal
Observer Corps, which is organised to provide public warning of an attack,
of the location and strength of nuclear explosions, and of the distribution
and level of radioactive fall-out.
DEFENCE PROCUREMENT
Responsibility for the planning of research, development and production
of defence equipment lies with the Ministry of Defence’s Procurement
Executive. The Executive works with the Service users and industry to
achieve cost-effectiveness in equipment procurement.
Most research is undertaken by the Ministry’s research and development
establishments, which have a very wide technological capability, but in
addition the Ministry sponsors a substantial amount of research by in-
DEFENCE
99
Production
Defence Sales
dustry and the universities. The establishments also monitor contractors’
progress during the development stages and help with testing programmes
and solving technical problems.
The development of modern defence equipment requires a high initial
investment; the cost of British equipment research and development in
1982-83 is estimated at over £1,841 million. The search for a more efficient
use of resources has encouraged Allied collaboration, one of the principal
aims of the NATO Conference of National Armaments Directors in which
Britain plays a full part. Nevertheless, the importance of maintaining a
sound national industrial base for defence procurement is recognised, and
there is close consultation between government and industry both in the
National Defence Industries Council and through other specialised bodies.
Collaboration between Britain and its European allies is encouraged
through the work of the independent European Programme Group which,
consisting of all NATO’s European members except Iceland, promotes co¬
operation in defence equipment procurement. Successful projects involv¬
ing European countries include the Anglo-French Jaguar aircraft, Martel
air-to-surface missile, and Lynx, Puma and Gazelle helicopters, and the
Anglo-Belgian family of armoured combat reconnaissance vehicles. Britain
is co-operating with the Federal Republic of Germany and Italy, in the
production and development of the Tornado multi-role combat aircraft
and of medium artillery equipment, the FH70 and SP70, and with Italy in
the development of a successor for the Sea King helicopter. Britain also
favours increased transatlantic co-operation, and, with other European
countries, is collaborating with the United States in the procurement of a
multiple launch rocket system and the possible joint development of a new
generation of air-to-air missiles.
National projects in all the main categories of equipment are under
development. The main ones already mentioned include the air defence
variant of the Tornado; a light man-portable anti-armour weapon
(LAW80); a lightweight torpedo (Sting Ray) equipped with advanced
homing devices for anti-submarine warfare; and a new heavyweight
torpedo (Spearfish). Work is also in progress on a new airfield attack
weapon, the JP233. An airborne early warning (AEW) version of the
Nimrod is being developed with an advanced AEW radar.
Equipment is manufactured by private industry or by the Royal Ord¬
nance Factories and Royal Dockyards. Alternatively, procurement may be
undertaken on a collaborative basis or by purchase from overseas.
Sales of British defence equipment enable allies and friendly governments
to take advantage of Britain’s extensive research and development pro¬
grammes to improve their own defensive capabilities. The Defence Sales
Organisation of the Ministry of Defence provides advice and assistance on
equipment procurement and defence infrastructure. It also formulates
assistance packages containing equipment, construction work, training,
support and other services and involving contributions from government
and from industry. These are often handled by International Military
Services Ltd, the Organisation’s commercial arm.
5 Justice
and the Law
THE LAW
Although the United Kingdom is a unitary state, England and Wales,
Scotland and Northern Ireland each have their own legal systems and law
courts. There is substantial similarity on many points, but considerable
differences remain in law, organisation and practice. In Northern Ireland
procedure closely resembles that of England and Wales but there are often
differences in enacted law. However, a large volume of modern legislation
applies throughout the United Kingdom and there is a common distinc¬
tion between criminal law concerned with wrongful acts harmful to the
community and civil law concerned with individuals’ rights, duties and
obligations towards one another.
The main sources of law are legislation, common law and European
Community law. Legislation consists of Acts of Parliament, orders (rules
and regulations made by ministers under the authority of an Act of
Parliament) and by-laws made by local government or other authorities
exercising powers conferred by Parliament. Common law, the ancient law
of the land deduced from custom and interpreted in court cases by the
judges, has never been precisely defined or codified but forms the basis of
the law except when superseded by legislation. European Community law
is confined mainly to economic and social matters; in certain circumstances
it takes precedence over domestic law. It is normally applied by the
domestic courts, but the most authoritative rulings are given by the
European Court of Justice (see p 73).
CRIMINAL JUSTICE
There are four distinct stages in British criminal justice: making laws
which define prohibited acts and provide for the treatment of offenders;
preventing crime and enforcing the law—largely matters for the police;
determining in the courts the guilt or innocence of people accused of
crimes, and sentencing the guilty; and dealing with convicted offenders.
The Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure, which reported in 1981,
made recommendations for placing on a consistent and statutory footing
the powers of the police in England and Wales, the rights of suspects and
the arrangements for prosecuting offenders, which are being considered by
the Government. A similar review in Scotland led to recommendations
which have been largely implemented by recent legislation.
With continuing concern in Britain, as in many other countries, over
rising crime rates, public expenditure on the law and order programme
reflects the special priority given by the Government to these services.
Recent increases have been made to cover, in particular, greater police
manpower and extra spending on prison building. More than two-thirds of
total expenditure is initially incurred by local authorities (with the help of
central government grants), mainly on the police service.
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
IOI
The Criminal
Law
Crime Statistics
Criminological
Research
The criminal law, like the law generally, undergoes constant reform in the
courts but substantial changes are matters for Parliament. In practice
most legislation affecting criminal law is government-sponsored, but there
is usually consultation between government departments and the legal
profession, the police, the probation and prison services, and voluntary
bodies.
Chief constables in England and Wales must supply statistics relating to
offences, offenders, criminal proceedings and the state of crime in their
areas. Crime statistics are published annually by the Home Office and
further information about crime trends (as well as about police matters)
is contained in the annual reports of Her Majesty’s Chief Inspector
of Constabulary and (for London) the Commissioner of Police of the
Metropolis. Similar arrangements operate in Scotland and Northern
Ireland.
The differences in the legal systems of the United Kingdom make it
impracticable to analyse in detail trends in crime for the country as a whole.
In considering these it has to be remembered that the number of offences
recorded by the police may be affected by the level of police manning and by
the number of crimes that remain undetected or unreported. Nevertheless
it is clear that, as in Western Europe generally, there has been an upsurge in
crime since the early 1950s.
Table 4 shows the rate of serious offences recorded by the police in 1981
in England and Wales.
Table 4: Serious Offences Recorded by the Police, per 100,000 Population
(England and Wales) 1981
Offence Group 1981
Homicide 1
Violence against the person (excluding homicide) 202
Sexual offences 39
Burglary I3465
Robbery 41
Theft and handling stolen goods 33248
Fraud and forgery 216
Criminal damage 784
Other offences 8
TOTAL 6,005
Source: Home Office
The difference between the total and the sum of the component parts is due to rounding.
The number of serious offences recorded by the police in England and
Wales in 1981 was 2,964,000. The number cleared up was 1,056,000, nearly
38 per cent of the total recorded by the police.
A wide range of research into criminal and social policies is carried out by
the Home Office and the Scottish Home and Health Department. Research
is also carried out in university departments, much of it financed by the
Government. The principal university criminological research establish¬
ment is the Institute of Criminology at Cambridge.
M
i &
/ /
•:xi
*>
102
Criminal
Injuries
Compensation
Scheme
Measures to
Combat
Terrorism
THE POLICE
SERVICE
Forces
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Criminal Injuries Compensation Scheme provides ex gratia com¬
pensation to victims of violent crimes, including violence within the family,
and to people hurt in attempting to arrest offenders and prevent offences.
Compensation is assessed on the basis of common law damages and usually
takes the form of a lump sum payment. In 1980-81 over 20,000 awards were
made at a total cost of nearly £21 - 5 million.
In Northern Ireland there is separate, statutory provision in certain
circumstances for compensation from public funds for criminal injuries,
and for malicious damage to property including losses of profits arising
from the damage.
Various temporary measures to deal with terrorism in Northern Ireland
have affected some aspects of British criminal justice. The emergency
powers include: the right to search, arrest and detain suspected terrorists;
the proscription of organisations engaged in terrorism connected with
Northern Ireland affairs and occurring in the United Kingdom; and the
exclusion from Great Britain and Northern Ireland of people involved in
terrorism. There are also controls at ports on passengers travelling between
Great Britain and Ireland.
Trials in Northern Ireland criminal courts of terrorist offences are heard
by a judge without a jury to obviate the danger of intimidation of jurors.
The emergency laws are temporary and must be renewed regularly; they
have also been subject to independent examination and a review of the
provisions began in 1982. Although conferring special powers on ministers,
they have been used sparingly. No one can be imprisoned for political
beliefs; all prisoners except those awaiting trial have been found guilty in
court of criminal offences.
The security forces in Northern Ireland are subject to the law and can be
prosecuted for criminal offences. Procedures for handling complaints
against the police involve two independent elements: the Director of Public
Prosecutions where allegations of criminal conduct are made; and the
Police Complaints Board for Northern Ireland where complaints relate
only to disciplinary offences.
The Criminal Jurisdiction Act 1975 makes it possible to try in the
Province a person accused of certain offences committed in the Irish
Republic. It also enables evidence to be obtained in Northern Ireland for
the trial of offences in the Irish Republic. Reciprocal legislation is in force in
the Irish Republic.
British police action in enforcing the law rests mainly upon common
consent, for there are only a small number of officers in relation to the
population (roughly one officer to every 400 or so people). Officers do not
normally carry firearms (their only weapon is a truncheon) and there are
strict limitations on police powers.
Each of Britain’s 52 police forces is responsible for law enforcement in its
area, but there is constant co-operation among them.
Outside London most counties (regions or islands in Scotland) have their
own police forces, though in the interests of efficiency several have
combined forces. The policing of London is in the hands of the Metro¬
politan Police Force, with headquarters at New Scotland Yard, and the
City of London force. As part of the Government’s commitment to the law
and order services, the strength of the regular police force in Great Britain
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
103
Police
Authorities and
Chief
Constables
Central
Authorities
Status and
Duties
has continued to grow, and is almost 131,500 (including nearly 11,500
policewomen); in Northern Ireland the strength is about 7,500. The size of
individual police forces depends on the area and population served. The
strength of the Metropolitan Police Force, some 25,400, is at its highest
ever.
Each regular police force is maintained by a police authority, a committee of
local councillors and, in England and Wales, magistrates. The police
authority for the Metropolitan Police Force is the Home Secretary. In
Northern Ireland the police authority is appointed by the Secretary of
State.
The police authority’s primary duty is to provide an efficient police force
for its area. Its functions, some subject to ministerial approval, include
appointing the chief constable, deputy chief constable and assistant chief
constables; fixing the maximum permitted strength of the force; and
providing buildings and equipment. In the Metropolitan Police area the
commissioner of police and his immediate subordinates are appointed on
the recommendation of the Home Secretary. The police authorities are
financed by central and local government.
Chief constables are responsible for the direction and control of police
forces and for the appointment, promotion and discipline of all ranks below
assistant chief constable. They are generally answerable to the police
authorities on matters of efficiency, and must submit a report every year.
The Home Secretary and the Secretaries of State for Scotland and
Northern Ireland are concerned with the organisation, administration and
operation of the police service. They approve the appointment of chief
constables, and may require a police authority to retire a chief constable in
the interests of efficiency, call for a report from a chief constable on matters
relating to local policing or institute a local inquiry. They can make
regulations covering such matters as police ranks; qualifications for ap¬
pointment, promotion and retirement; discipline; hours of duty, leave,
pay and allowances; and uniform Some of these regulations are first
negotiable on the Police Negotiating Board, which has an independent
chairman and representatives of the police authorities, police staff associ¬
ations and the home departments. Matters of a non-negotiable kind and
general questions are discussed by the Police Advisory Boards.
All police forces (except the Metropolitan Police for which the Home
Secretary is responsible) are subject to inspection by inspectors of con¬
stabulary reporting to the Home Secretary, the Secretary of State for
Scotland or the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland. Inspectors also
maintain close touch with forces under their responsibility, and have
advisory functions.
A British police officer is an agent of the law of the land, not of the police
authority nor of the Government, and may be sued or prosecuted for any
wrongful act committed in carrying out duties. Strict procedures, normally
including an independent element, govern the way in which complaints are
handled.
Members of the police service may not belong to a trade union nor may
they withdraw their labour in furtherance of a trade dispute. All ranks,
however, have their own staff associations to represent their interests.
Police work ranges from the protection of people and property, road or
I04 BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
street patrolling (the trend in many places is increasingly away from the car
patrol and back to ‘community’ policing on foot) and traffic control to crime
prevention, criminal investigation and arresting offenders. In urban areas,
particularly, police officers have to deal with social problems and may bring
in other social agencies and expert help. The importance of consultation
with local communities is recognised, especially in areas with ethnic
minorities, and efforts are being made to encourage members of the
minorities to join the forces. In England and Wales (but not in Scotland)
the police also prosecute accused people and may decide whether to grant
bail before the court proceedings (see p 105). The main departments in all
forces are the uniform department, criminal investigation department,
traffic department and specialised departments, including river or marine
police, mounted police, and dog handlers.
In order to release as many uniformed police officers as possible for
operational duties, police authorities employ over 37,800 civilians on
administrative and technical duties in England and Wales. The number of
civilian support staff has been growing as forces secure economies by
replacing police officers with civilians where posts do not require police
powers and training. Traffic wardens (of whom there are 4,460) carry out
specified duties concerned with traffic and parking. Wardens are under the
control of the chief constable.
Each force has an attachment of volunteer special constables who
perform police duties in their spare time, without pay. In England and
Wales they act as auxiliaries to the regular force. In Scotland they are
retained mainly for emergency use. In Northern Ireland there is a part-time
and full-time paid reserve.
Common A number of common services are provided by central government de-
Services partments and by arrangements between forces. The most important are:
training services; a Forensic Science Service in England and Wales (the
Metropolitan Police maintains its own laboratory); telecommunications
services which provide police radio equipment; and central and provincial
criminal records available to all forces. Regional crime squad teams of
detectives from several forces investigate major crimes involving inquiries
in more than one police area. The Scottish Crime Squad assists forces in the
investigation and prevention of crime.
Certain special services such as liaison with the International Criminal
Police Organisation (Interpol) are provided for other British forces by the
Metropolitan Police. They are available to other police forces in England
and Wales as are the services of the Fraud Squad run jointly by the
Metropolitan Police and City of London Police to investigate company
frauds.
In all areas of police work the use of scientific aids is widespread. A
national police computer helps to rationalise records and speed up the
dissemination of information.
Powers of In England and Wales arrest may be made with or without a warrant issued
Arrest by a magistrate. An arrested person is entitled to ask the police to notify a
named person, such as a relative or a solicitor, about the arrest. The police
may delay notification in the interests of the investigation, prevention of
crime or apprehension of offenders and may question an arrested person in
custody, so long as he or she has not been charged with the offence or
informed that he or she may be prosecuted for it. Answers to such questions
ids
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
are admissible as evidence in any subsequent proceedings, provided that
they have been given voluntarily.
Guidance on the questioning of arrested persons is contained in the
Judges’ Rules and Administrative Directions to the Police; although these
do not have the force of law, the police are required to comply with them.
The Judges’ Rules also require the police to caution an arrested person
before charging him or her. Once a person has been charged with an
offence, the police may not ask further questions, except in exceptional
circumstances, to prevent or minimise harm or loss to some other person or
to the public or to clear up an ambiguity in a previous answer or statement.
If the police decide not to charge the arrested person (for example,
because of insufficient evidence) he or she may be released immediately.
Alternatively, the police may decide to release the person and proceed by
way of summons, or to issue a caution (reprimand). If the police need to
make further inquiries they may release the arrested person on bail to
return to the police station, where he or she may be charged on re¬
appearance.
Anyone arrested without a warrant must be released by the police on bail
if he or she cannot be brought before a magistrates’ court within 24 hours,
unless the alleged offence is serious. If detained in custody, the defendant
must be brought before a magistrates’ court as soon as practicable. On
appearance before a magistrates’ court, a defendant charged with an
imprisonable offence may be refused bail in certain specified circumstances
only, the most important being substantial grounds for believing that he or
she might abscond, commit further offences or otherwise interfere with the
course of justice. If bail is refused, the defendant can apply to a judge of the
High Court and, if committed to the Crown Court, may apply for bail to
that court. The majority of people remanded by magistrates are given bail.
A person who thinks that the grounds for detention are unlawful1 may
apply to the High Court for a writ of habeas corpus against the person who
detained him or her, requiring the person to appear before the court to
justify the detention. An application for this writ is normally made by the
person detained or by someone acting on his or her behalf. Similar
procedures apply in Northern Ireland.
In Scotland police have powers of arrest similar to those in England and
Wales but an arrest must be accompanied by a criminal charge. Once a
person has been charged there is little scope for questioning and only
voluntary statements will normally be allowed in evidence at the trial. The
court will reject statements unless satisfied that they have been fairly
obtained. The Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 1980 introduced a new pre¬
arrest power of detention which enables the police to detain and question a
suspected person for a period of up to six hours. Thereafter the person must
either be released or charged. Anyone arrested must be brought before a
court with the least possible delay. Where a prosecution on indictment is
intended, the accused is brought before a judge for judicial examination and
may then be committed for trial or for further examination. Eight days may
elapse between commitment for further examination and commitment for
trial. Anyone accused of a crime, even murder or treason, is entitled to
apply for release on bail. Money bail has virtually been abolished and the
courts, or the Lord Advocate, may release an accused person on conditions.
'Detention is lawful in pursuance of criminal justice, for contempt of court or of either House of Parliament
and when expressly authorised by Parliament. It is also sometimes lawful in the case of the mentally
disordered.
io6
CRIMINAL
COURTS
Prosecution
England and
Wales
Scotland
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Breach of any of the conditions without reasonable excuse is a separate
offence. There is a right of appeal to the High Court by the accused person
against the refusal of bail, or by the prosecutor against the granting of bail,
or by either party against the conditions imposed. The writ of habeas
corpus does not apply in Scotland but if a person has been arrested with a
view to being prosecuted on indictment, the trial must begin within no
days of the date of full committal. The trial of a person charged with a
summary offence must begin within 40 days.
The decision to prosecute normally rests, in England and Wales, with the
police and in Scotland with public prosecutors. In Northern Ireland there
is a Director of Public Prosecutions (see below). In England and Wales (and
exceptionally in Scotland) a private person may institute criminal pro¬
ceedings. Police may issue cautions (warnings in Scotland) instead of
prosecuting.
In England and Wales some offences can be prosecuted only with the
consent of the Attorney General, others only with his consent or by, or with
the consent of, the Director of Public Prosecutions, who acts under his
superintendence. Such crimes as bribery and corruption of officials, and
the use and possession of explosives, are offences requiring the Attorney
General’s consent; in the case of incest, for example, the Director’s consent
is sufficient. The Director always prosecutes crimes such as treason and
murder. The police must report to the Director’s office a further list of
offences, including serious offences against the person, sedition, criminal
offences by police officers, and offences relating to obscene or indecent
publications. The Director does not necessarily prosecute all such cases but
may do so in any that appear to be important or where intervention is
thought necessary; otherwise proceedings are conducted by solicitors
employed by the police. The Director also considers whether proceedings
should be taken in cases reported by government departments, and advises
the police and others concerned with administration of the criminal law.
When cases go for trial, barristers in private practice appear on the
Director’s behalf; at the Central Criminal Court in London they are drawn
from a panel of ‘Treasury Counsel’ appointed by the Attorney General.
The prosecution process in Scotland is different from that in the rest of the
United Kingdom. The Lord Advocate (see p 121) is responsible for the
prosecution of all crimes but delegates most of the work to the Solicitor
General (see p 121), to ten advocates depute and to procurators fiscal. The
permanent adviser to the Lord Advocate on prosecution matters is the
Crown Agent who is head of the procurator fiscal service and is assisted by a
staff of civil servants known as the Crown Office. Prosecutions in the High
Court of Justiciary are prepared by the Crown Office while crimes tried
before the sheriff and district courts are prosecuted by the procurators fiscal
who are lawyers and full-time civil servants. The police investigate offences
and report to the procurator fiscal who decides whether to prosecute,
subject to the discretion of the Crown Office.
The Director of Public Prosecutions for Northern Ireland, who is respon¬
sible to the Attorney General, prosecutes all offences tried on indictment,
and may do so in summary cases of a serious nature. Other summary
offences are prosecuted by the police.
Northern Ireland
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
IO7
Courts in
England and
Wales
Appeals
Magistrates’ courts deal with nearly all criminal cases in England and
Wales, and conduct preliminary investigations into more serious offences.
The Crown Court, situated in a number of towns and cities, takes all
criminal work above the level of magistrates’ courts and trials are held
before a jury.
Magistrates’ courts hear charges against people accused of ‘summary
offences’, those that can be legally disposed of by magistrates sitting
without a jury. There are some 700 courts and some 23,000 magistrates
(‘justices of the peace’, JPs) who are advised on points of law and procedure
by a clerk to the justices (or an assistant) who is normally legally qualified
and is also in charge of the court’s administrative arrangements. Each court
normally consists of three unpaid lay magistrates who ascertain the facts of
a case and apply the law to them. Magistrates are appointed by the Lord
Chancellor. In inner London and other large urban areas where work is
heavy, professional ‘stipendiary’ magistrates, full-time, salaried and legally
qualified, usually preside alone.
Magistrates must as a rule sit in open court, but when they make
preliminary inquiries into a serious case to see whether there is evidence
to justify committal for trial in the Crown Court the proceedings must not
be reported in the press at the time except at the defendant’s request, un¬
less the person is discharged. Magistrates cannot usually impose a sentence
of more than six months’ imprisonment or a fine exceeding £1,000. If an
offence carries a higher maximum penalty, they may commit the offender
for sentence at the Crown Court if they consider their own power in¬
adequate.
Cases involving people under 17 are heard in juvenile courts, specially
constituted magistrates’ courts which sit apart from other courts, or at a
different time; only limited publicity is allowed. If a young person under 17
is charged jointly with someone of 17 or over, the case is heard in the
ordinary magistrates’ court. If the young person is found guilty, the court
may transfer the case to a juvenile court, unless it wishes to pass sentence
itself.
The Crown Court deals with trials of the more serious cases, the
sentencing of offenders committed for sentence by magistrates’ courts,
and appeals from magistrates’ courts. It has about 90 centres and is
presided over by High Court judges, full-time ‘circuit judges’ and part-
time recorders. All contested trials take place before a jury. A High Court
judge sits alone for the most serious cases. A circuit judge or recorder sits
with between two and four magistrates for appeals and committals for
sentence from magistrates’ courts and may sit with magistrates to try the
less important cases.
The Crown Court may impose a fine of any amount on a convicted
offender and, within the maximum penalty determined for the offence by
Parliament, any other custodial or non-custodial penalty.
A person convicted by a magistrates’ court may appeal to the Crown
Court against the sentence and, if contesting a finding of guilt, against
the conviction itself. Where the appeal is on a point of law, either the
prosecutor or the defendant may appeal from the magistrates’ court to
the High Court, which sits in London and some regional centres (see
pp 117-18). Appeals from the Crown Court, either against conviction or
against sentence, are usually made to the Court of Appeal (Criminal
Division). A further appeal from the Court of Appeal to the House of Lords
io8
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Scotland
Northern
Ireland
can be brought if the court certifies that a point of law of general public
importance is involved and it appears to the court or the Lords that the
point is one that ought to be considered by the House. A prosecutor or
defendant may appeal to the Lords from a decision of the High Court in a
criminal case.
The Attorney General may seek the opinion of the Court of Appeal on a
point of law which has arisen in a case where a person tried on indictment is
acquitted; the court has power to refer the point to the House of Lords if
necessary. The acquittal in the original case is not affected, nor is the
identity of the acquitted person revealed without his or her consent.
In Scotland the High Court of Justiciary tries such crimes as murder,
treason and rape; the sheriff court is concerned with less serious offences
and the district court with minor offences. Criminal cases are heard either
under solemn procedure, when proceedings are taken on indictment and
the judge sits with a jury of 15 members, or under summary procedure,
when the judge sits without a jury. All cases in the High Court and the more
serious ones in sheriff courts are tried by a judge and jury. Summary
procedure is used in the less serious cases in the sheriff courts, and in all
cases in the district courts. District courts are the administrative responsi¬
bility of the district and islands local government authorities. The judges
are lay justices of the peace including up to one-quarter of the elected
members of the authorities appointed as ex-officio justices. In Glasgow
there are three stipendiary magistrates who are full-time salaried lawyers.
Children under 16 who have committed an offence or are considered to
need compulsory care may be brought before an informal children’s
hearing comprising three members of the local community (see p 115).
Scotland’s six sheriffdoms are further divided into sheriff court districts,
each of which has a sheriff or sheriffs, who are the judges of the court.
The High Court of Justiciary, Scotland’s supreme criminal court, is both
a trial and an appeal court. Any of the following judges is entitled to try
cases in the High Court: the Lord Justice General (the head of the court),
the Lord Justice Clerk (the judge next in seniority) or one of the Lord
Commissioners of Justiciary. The main seat of the court is in Edinburgh,
although the High Court on circuit also tries cases in other towns.
All appeals are dealt with by the High Court in Edinburgh. In both
solemn and summary procedure, an appeal may be brought against con¬
viction, or sentence, or both. The Court may authorise a retrial if it sets
aside a conviction. There is no further appeal to the House of Lords.
The structure of Northern Ireland courts is broadly similar to that of
England and Wales. The day-to-day work of dealing summarily with minor
cases is carried out by magistrates’ courts presided over by a full-time,
legally qualified resident magistrate. Young offenders under 17 and young
people under 17 who need care, protection and control are dealt with by
juvenile courts consisting of the resident magistrate and two lay members
(at least one of whom must be a woman) specially qualifed to deal with
juveniles. Appeals from magistrates’ courts are heard by the county court.
The Crown Court deals with criminal trials on indictment. It is served by
High Court and county court judges. Proceedings are heard before a single
judge, and all contested cases, other than those involving offences specified
under emergency legislation, take place before a jury. Appeals from the
Crown Court against conviction or sentence are heard by the Northern
Trial
The Jury
JUSTICE AND THE LAW 109
Ireland Court of Appeal. Procedures for a further appeal to the House of
Lords are similar to those in England and Wales.
Criminal trials in the United Kingdom take the form of a contest between
the prosecution and the defence. Since the law presumes the innocence of
an accused person until guilt has been proved, the prosecution is not
granted any advantage, apparent or real, over the defence. A defendant has
the right to employ a legal adviser and may be granted legal aid from public
funds. If remanded in custody, the person may be visited by a legal adviser
to ensure a properly prepared defence. In England, Wales and Northern
Ireland during the preparation of the case, the prosecution usually tells the
defence of relevant documents which it is not proposed to put in evidence
and discloses them if asked to do so. The prosecution should also inform the
defence of witnesses whose evidence may help the accused and whom the
prosecution does not propose to call. The defence or prosecution may
suggest that the defendant’s mental state renders him or her unfit to be
tried. If the jury decides that this is so, the defendant is admitted to a
specified hospital.
Criminal trials are normally in open court and rules of evidence (con¬
cerned with the proof of facts) are rigorously applied. If evidence is
illegally admitted, a conviction can be quashed on appeal. During the trial
the defendant has the right to hear and cross-examine witnesses for the
prosecution, normally through a lawyer; to call his or her own witnesses
who, if they will not attend voluntarily may be legally compelled to attend;
and to address the court in person or through a lawyer, the defence having
the right to the last speech at the trial. The defendant cannot be questioned
without consenting to be sworn as a witness in his or her own defence.
When he or she does testify, cross-examination about character or other
conduct may be made only in exceptional circumstances and generally the
prosecution may not introduce evidence of such matters. Confessions made
in the course of previous judicial proceedings are admissible as evidence
only if they have been made on oath.
In jury trials the judge decides questions of law, sums up the evidence for
the jury, and discharges the accused or passes sentence. Only the jury
decides whether the defendant is guilty or not guilty. If the jury cannot
reach a unanimous verdict, the judge may direct it to bring in a majority
verdict provided that, in the normal jury of 12 people, there are not more
than two dissentients. If the jury returns a verdict of ‘not guilty’, the
prosecution has no right of appeal and the defendant cannot be tried again
for the same olfence. If ‘guilty’ the defendant has a right of appeal to the
appropriate court. A jury is completely independent of the judiciary. Once
members are sworn in, they are protected from all interference. Both the
prosecution and the defence can object to particular jurors. In England,
Wales and Northern Ireland people whose names appear on the electoral
register are liable for jury service and their names are chosen at random; in
Scotland, where the minimum age for jurors is 21, not all those on the
register are eligible to serve as the minimum voting age is 18.
At summary trials in Scotland accused people are asked to plead to the
charge at the first calling of the case and, if they plead guilty, the court may
dispose of the case. Where the plea is ‘not guilty’, the court proceeds to trial
at once or, more usually, appoints a later date.
Scotland
no
Coroners’
Courts
TREATMENT
OF
OFFENDERS
Sentencing
Non-custodial
Treatment
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In trials on indictment, the ‘pleading’ proceedings take place in the
sheriff court, where the accused person is called upon to plead guilty or
not guilty. If the plea is not guilty, the case is continued to the ‘trial’
proceedings in the appropriate court. If the plea is guilty, and the case is to
be dealt with in the sheriff court, the sheriff may dispose of it at once. If it is a
High Court case, it is continued to the ‘trial’ proceedings in the High Court
of Justiciary.
The trial proceedings are held at least nine days after the pleading
proceedings, either before the sheriff or the High Court, with a jury of 15.
Evidence is presented without opening speeches, and there are closing
speeches for the prosecution and for the defence, followed by the judge’s
charge to the jury. The jury may return a verdict of ‘not guilty’ or ‘not
proven’, both of which result in acquittal, or it may find the accused ‘guilty’,
in which case the court delivers sentence. The verdict may be reached by a
simple majority. With a few minor exceptions, no person may be convicted
without the evidence of at least two witnesses, or corroboration of one
witness by facts and circumstances which clearly implicate the accused.
Coroners’ courts investigate violent and unnatural deaths or sudden deaths
where the cause is unknown. Cases may be brought before the local coroner
(a senior lawyer or doctor) by doctors, the police, various public authorities
or members of the public, and it is the coroner’s duty to hold an inquiry into
how, when and where the deceased died. If the death is sudden and the
cause unknown, the coroner need not hold an inquest in court, but may
order a post-mortem examination to determine cause of death. Where there
is reason to believe that the deceased died a violent or unnatural death or
died in prison or in other specified circumstances the coroner must hold
an inquest. In Scotland the office of coroner does not exist. The local
procurator fiscal inquires privately into all sudden and suspicious deaths
and may report the findings to the Crown Agent.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland a person who has not previously
served a custodial sentence of a particular kind may not be sentenced to
custodial treatment of that kind unless he or she is legally represented or has
chosen not to be, and unless the court is satisfied that no other sentence will
suffice. In England and Wales, extended sentences longer than the normal
maximum term may be imposed on persistent offenders. In the case of
murder there is a mandatory penalty of life imprisonment. This is the
maximum penalty for a number of serious offences such as robbery, rape,
arson and manslaughter. Although the death penalty may still, in theory, be
imposed for certain offences, such as treason, it is no longer used.
In Scotland, unless the sentence is limited by statute, the maximum
penalty is determined by the status of the court trying the accused. In trials
on indictment, the High Court may impose a sentence of imprisonment for
any term up to life, and the sheriff court any term up to two years. In
summary cases, the sheriff may impose up to six months’ imprisonment.
Changes in the sentencing and treatment of young offenders and in the
arrangements for early release from prison in England and Wales are
among the main provisions of the Criminal Justice Bill before Parliament.
Non-custodial treatment includes fines; probation; absolute or (in England,
Wales and Northern Ireland) conditional discharge when the court con¬
siders there is no need to impose punishment; and ‘binding over’ where the
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
III
Probation
offender pledges money, with or without sureties, to keep the peace and be
of good behaviour.
In England and Wales, offenders aged 17 or over convicted of im-
prisonable offences can, with their consent, be given community service
orders (it is proposed to reduce the age limit to 16). The court may order
between 40 and 240 hours’ unpaid service to be completed within 12
months. Examples of work done include decorating the houses of old or
disabled people and building adventure playgrounds. Community service
schemes also operate in Scotland and Northern Ireland.
The sentence imposed on an offender in England, Wales and Northern
Ireland may also, with his or her consent, be deferred for up to six months to
enable a court to take into account conduct after some expected change in
circumstances.
The courts may order an offender to pay compensation for personal
injury, loss or damage resulting from an offence. Where the loss amounts to
£15,000 or more they may make a criminal bankruptcy order against an
offender.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland a judge is free to pass a
suspended sentence of not more than two years. The sentence is not served
unless the offender is convicted of a further offence punishable with
imprisonment; in that event the suspended sentence normally takes effect
and another sentence may be imposed for the new offence. An offender
receiving a suspended sentence of more than six months may be placed
under the supervision of a probation officer for all or part of the period.
Courts in England and Wales have the power, when passing a sentence of
between three months’ and two years’ imprisonment, to order that part
should be served and the rest held in suspense.
In certain circumstances courts may order forfeiture of property in¬
volved in the commission of crime. An offender convicted of a serious crime
may be disqualified from driving if a motor vehicle was used in its
commission.
In most circumstances, after a rehabilitation period of from six months to
ten years depending on the nature of the sentence imposed, a person
convicted of a criminal offence need not disclose it, and the offence will not
be held against him or her. This does not apply to those with a prison
sentence of more than 2^ years.
Probation is designed to rehabilitate an offender, who continues to live an
ordinary life with the supervision, advice and assistance of a probation
officer. Before making a probation order which lasts between six months (12
months in Scotland) and thn e years, the court must explain its effects and
make sure that the probationer understands that failure to comply with it
will make him or her liable to be dealt with again for the original offence. An
order can be made only if the offender is aged 17 years (16 years in Scotland)
or over and has given consent, and usually requires the probationer to keep
in regular touch with the probation officer, and to be of good behaviour. In
Northern Ireland an order can be made for anyone over the age of criminal
responsibility (10 years), but consent is required where the offender is aged
14 or over. It may require the offender to live in a specified place (such as an
approved hostel), or receive psychiatric treatment.
In England and Wales the probation service is administered locally by
probation and after-care committees of local magistrates and co-opted
members with legal and specialist interests. In Northern Ireland it is
112
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Prisons
Remission of
Sentence and
Parole
administered by a probation board whose membership is broadly based and
representative of the community. Probation officers are usually members
of small teams, although each has much independence in undertaking
casework.
Probation and after-care committees may provide and maintain day
training centres, bail hostels, probation hostels and other rehabilitation
centres. The service also administers the community service scheme.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland, the services of probation and
after-care officers are available to every criminal court. In Scotland, local
authority staff are similarly available.
Although the courts have made less use of prison as a penalty for criminal
activity, there has been an increase in the prison population as a result of the
rise in crime. The daily average inmate population in 1981 in England and
Wales was over 43,000. On the basis of existing trends, the population will
rise, perhaps to nearly 45,000 in 1984-85; it may, however, be affected by a
continuing move towards shorter sentences and by the use of powers
proposed in the Criminal Justice Bill. In Scotland in 1981 the daily average
inmate population was about 4,500 though existing trends indicate that this
figure is likely to rise in the next few years.
Prisons to which offenders may be committed directly by a court are
known as ‘local prisons’; all are closed. Other prisons, open or closed,
receive prisoners on transfer from local prisons (open prisons do not have
physical barriers to prevent escape). Sentenced prisoners are classified into
groups for security purposes. There are separate prisons for women.
People awaiting trial are entitled to privileges not granted to convicted
prisoners and, as far as practicable, are separated from convicted prisoners.
Prisoners under 21 are separated from older prisoners.
Many British prisons were built during the nineteenth century and are
now unsatisfactory and overcrowded. A number of new prisons have been
or are being built and existing establishments redeveloped and modernised.
All prisoners in Great Britain serving a sentence of more than five days,
except those sentenced to life imprisonment, are eligible for remission of
one-third of their sentence provided it does not reduce the sentence to less
than five days. Remission may be forfeited for serious misconduct.
Prisoners serving fixed sentences of more than 18 months become eligible
for release on parole after one-third of their sentence or 12 months,
whichever expires later. There are also emergency powers to release
offenders in England and Wales up to six months early.
The parole licence remains in force until the date on which the prisoner
would have been released but for the parole. It prescribes the conditions
with which the offender must comply. About 10 3 per cent of prisoners
granted parole in England and Wales in 1981 were recalled to prison.
Prisoners serving life sentences are also eligible for release on licence,
after consideration by the Home Secretary or the Secretary of State for
Scotland who consults the judiciary, and on the recommendation of the
appropriate Parole Board. Those released remain on licence for the rest of
their lives subject to recall at any time should the circumstances warrant.
In Northern Ireland, where there is no parole scheme, prisoners may
earn one-half remission on determinate sentences, provided remission does
not reduce the sentence to below 31 days. For those serving over a year, a
court can order all or part of the outstanding balance of the remitted period
Prison Industries
and Education
Medical and
Psychological
Services
Privileges and
Discipline
Welfare
JUSTICE AND THE LAW 113
to be served in the event of reconviction in the remitted period for an
imprisonable offence, in addition to any penalty imposed for a further
offence.
Prison industries aim to give inmates work experience which will assist
them when released and to secure a return which will reduce the cost of the
prison system. The main industries are clothing and textile manufac¬
ture, engineering, woodwork, laundering, electro-mechanical production,
farming and horticulture. Most production caters for internal needs and for
other public services but much of it is for the commercial market. A few
prisoners are employed outside prison. Small payments are made for work;
in some prisons, incentive schemes provide an opportunity for higher
earnings on the basis of output and skill.
Education is financed by the prison service and provided by local
education authorities. Prison education officers are assisted by teams of
teachers. Education is compulsory, full-time, for young offenders below
school-leaving age and part-time for those between 16 and 21. For older
offenders it is voluntary. Some prisoners study for public examinations
(including those of the Open University). Within the resources available
there is teaching in recreational and leisure pursuits. Vocational training is
provided directly by the prison service. Physical education is voluntary but
offenders under 21 have to attend a certain number of classes. Many
establishments lack the proper facilities, although there have been recent
improvements.
The prison medical service has a general responsibility for the physical and
mental health of all those in custody. Each establishment has accom¬
modation for sick people and patients can also be transferred to National
Health Service hospitals. Psychiatric care is available.
The work of psychologists includes evaluating treatment programmes,
studying management practices, contributing to the management and
treatment programmes of individuals and groups, taking part in advisory
and training work with staff and making assessments for treatment or
allocation purposes.
Prisoners are entitled to write and receive letters and to be visited by
relatives. Privileges include a personal radio, books, periodicals and news¬
papers, and the right to make purchases from the canteen with money
earned in prison. Depending on facilities prisoners may be granted the
further privileges of dining and recreation in association and watching
television.
Breaches of discipline are dealt with by the prison governor, or by the
board of visitors (visiting committee in Scotland), who have power to
order forfeiture of remission and forfeiture of privileges. Boards of visitors
(and visiting committees) consist of lay people, two of whom must be
magistrates.
The welfare of prisoners is the concern of all prison staff. Much of this work
is the responsibility of probation officers (in Scotland social workers)
stationed in prisons who help prisoners in their relations with individuals
and agencies outside and make plans for after-care on release. Prisoners
may also receive visits from specially appointed prison visitors whose work
is voluntary.
114
Discharge and
After-care
Children in
Trouble
England and
Wales
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Chaplains give spiritual help and advice to inmates and are increasingly
involved in management decisions affecting their needs and quality of life.
All prisons in England and Wales arrange pre-release preparations.
Prisoners serving four years or more are considered for outside employ¬
ment before release. For those selected, work is found outside the prison for
about the last six months of sentence; during the period prisoners may live
in a separate part of the prison or in a hostel outside. Normal wages are paid
so that they can resume support for their families. (In Scotland pre-release
arrangements differ from these in some respects.) Periods of home leave
may be granted in the last nine months of sentence to those serving two
years or more to assist resettlement.
The aim of after-care, run by the probation and after-care service (in
Scotland, the local authority and social work departments), is to assist
offenders on return to society. Compulsory supervision is given to most
offenders under 21 when released, adult offenders released on parole, and
those released on licence from a life sentence. A voluntary system is offered
to others. After-care is also provided by voluntary societies, most of which
are members of the National Association for the Care and Resettlement of
Offenders. Hostels and accommodation are provided, often with govern¬
ment financial help.
In England and Wales no child under ten years can be held guilty of an
offence. A child aged 10 to 16 years who is alleged to have committed an
offence may be the subject of criminal proceedings or of‘care’ proceedings,
both of which normally take place in juvenile courts. In care proceedings
the fact that a child is found guilty of an offence is not in itself sufficient
justification for making an order; the court must also consider the child to
need care or control which he or she is unlikely to receive unless an order is
made. In criminal proceedings a court may make a care order without
having to consider whether the child needs care or control; this applies to a
child found guilty of an offence (other than homicide) punishable in the case
of an adult by imprisonment.
A number of orders are available to courts in both care and criminal
proceedings. Under a care order a local authority becomes responsible for
deciding where the child should be accommodated, whether, for example,
with foster parents or in a community home (see p 134). For children too
severely disturbed or disruptive to be treated in local authority homes,
there are two special Youth Treatment Centres administered directly by
the Department of Health and Social Security.
Legislation introduced into Parliament at the end of 1981 included
provisions which would give courts the powers to make a residential care
order when a child, who is already under a care order as a result of an
offence, commits a further offence (for which an adult could be punished by
imprisonment). The local authority would be required to remove the child
from home for a specified period of up to six months. The authority must
review each care order every six months and consider whether an applica¬
tion should be made to the court to end it; the order normally expires when
the child reaches 18 or 19.
Under a supervision order (usually valid for three years or less) a child
normally remains at home under the supervision of a social worker or a
probation officer, but may have to live with a specified person or to comply
with directions of his or her supervisor. The child may have to undergo
Scotland
Northern Ireland
Young Adult
Offenders
JUSTICE AND THE LAW 115
‘intermediate treatment’, a compromise between measures involving com¬
plete removal from home and those which do not, and consisting of
participation, under a supervisor, in a variety of constructive and remedial
activities through a short residential course or, more usually, attendance at
a day or evening centre. An intermediate treatment fund, administered by
the Rainer Foundation with the help of government finance, has been set up
to aid individuals, groups or organisations willing to provide intermediate
treatment facilities.
A court may also make an order requiring a parent or guardian to take
proper care of the child and to exercise proper control; the order may be
made only with the consent of the parent or guardian. In care proceedings,
the court may order a stay in hospital in accordance with the mental health
legislation.
The courts may also order payments of compensation, or impose fines or
grant a conditional or absolute discharge. Offenders, both male and female,
may be ordered to spend a total of up to 24 hours of their spare time on
Saturdays at an attendance centre (up to three hours on any one occasion).
The centres which provide physical education and instruction in practical
subjects are for those found guilty of offences for which older people could
be sent to prison. Boys aged 14 to 16 may be sent to a junior detention
centre, where the regime is similar to that in senior detention centres (see
p 116). Boys and girls aged 15 or 16 may be sentenced to borstal training but
under legislation before Parliament this would be replaced by a new system
of custodial sentencing known as youth custody. In the case of a very
serious crime, detention in a place approved by the Home Secretary may be
ordered.
In Scotland the age of criminal responsibility is eight years but prosecution
of children in the criminal courts is rare and can take place only on the
instructions of the Lord Advocate; court proceedings usually apply only to
very serious offences. Instead children under 16 who have committed an
offence or need care and protection may be brought before an informal
children’s hearing which determines whether compulsory measures of care
are required and, if so, the form they should take (see p 134). An official
‘reporter’ decides whether a child should come before a hearing. If the
grounds for referral are not accepted by the child and parents, the case goes
to the sheriff court for proof. It can then come back to the hearing. The
sheriff also decides appeals against a decision of a children’s hearing.
The age of criminal responsibility in Northern Ireland is ten. Children
aged 16 and under charged with committing a criminal offence may be
brought before a juvenile court. If the child is found guilty of an offence
punishable by imprisonment if committed by an adult, he or she may be
sent to a training school, placed in the care of a ‘fit person’, possibly the area
health and social services board, or put under supervision. Alternatively
the court can order a period at an attendance centre or a remand home, or
impose a fine or compensation. A conditional or absolute discharge is also
possible. Whatever other order it makes, a juvenile court can also make an
order requiring parents to ensure the child’s good behaviour. Children
brought before the courts in need of care and protection may be placed in
care locally.
Offenders aged 17 to 20 years (16 to 21 years in Scotland) are recognised as a
category distinct from child and adult offenders. Although attendance
The Civil Law
CIVIL
COURTS
England and
Wales
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
centres are increasingly being made available in England and Wales, the
main non-custodial measures are generally the same as those for adults. In
England and Wales the custodial sentences available are: detention in a
detention centre (males only), borstal training or imprisonment. Under
legislation before Parliament, however, borstal training and imprisonment
for offenders under 21 would be abolished and a new system of custodial
sentencing introduced: detention centre orders (for males only) for from
three weeks to four months and youth custody sentences for longer periods.
The senior detention centres are for young male offenders who need to be
taught respect for the law through some form of custody. Life in a centre
demands high standards of discipline. Training comprises a full working
week, including an hour a day of physical training, with considerable
attention paid to education. After discharge, offenders are supervised for
up to a year.
Borstal training is remedial and educational, based on personal training
by selected staff. Vocational training in skilled trades is emphasised, there is
much freedom of movement and offenders are placed as near their homes as
possible. Borstals are available for offenders aged 15 to 20. Courts rarely
order borstal training unless they have already tried fines, probation or
detention centre training, perhaps all three. The training period, usually
from six months to two years, is followed by supervision.
A person under 17 cannot be sent to prison in England and Wales, and no
court may pass a sentence of imprisonment on an offender aged 17 to 20
unless satisfied that no other penalty is appropriate. A court cannot impose
a sentence of between six months and three years unless the offender has
already served a term of borstal training or at least six months’ imprison¬
ment. Sentences of up to two years may be ordered by a court to be
suspended. In Scotland no offender under 21 may be sent to prison. A
single sentence of detention is available for young offenders to be served in a
detention centre or in a young offenders’ institute. Remission of part of the
sentence for good conduct, release on parole, and supervision after release
are available. In Northern Ireland, no offender under 21 sentenced to three
years or less may be sent to prison. Such offenders would serve their
sentences in a young offenders’ centre.
CIVIL JUSTICE
The main sub-divisions of the civil law of England, Wales and Northern
Ireland are: family law, the law of property, the law of contract and the law
of torts (covering injuries suffered by one person at the hands of another
irrespective of any contract between them and including concepts such as
negligence, defamation and trespass). Other branches of the civil law
include constitutional and administrative (particularly concerned with
the use of executive power), industrial, maritime and ecclesiastical law.
Scottish civil law has its own, often analogous, branches.
The limited civil jurisdiction of magistrates’ courts extends to matrimonial
proceedings for custody and maintenance orders, adoption orders and
affiliation and guardianship orders. The courts also have jurisdiction con¬
cerning nuisances under the public health legislation and the recovery of
rates. Committees of magistrates license public houses, betting shops and
clubs.
The jurisdiction of the 300 or so county courts covers actions founded
Appeals
JUSTICE AND THE LAW 117
upon contract and tort (with minor exceptions); trust and mortgage cases;
and actions for the recovery of land. Cases involving claims exceeding set
limits may be tried in the county court by consent of the parties, or in
certain circumstances on transfer from the High Court.
Other matters dealt with by the county courts include hire purchase,
the Rent Acts, landlord and tenant and adoption cases. Undefended
divorce cases are determined in those courts designated as divorce county
courts (defended cases are transferred to the High Court) and outside
London bankruptcies are dealt with in certain county courts. The courts
also deal with complaints of race and sex discrimination. Where small
claims are concerned (especially those involving consumers), there are
special arbitration facilities and simplified procedures.
All judges of the Supreme Court (comprising the Court of Appeal, the
Crown Court and the High Court) and all circuit judges and recorders have
power to sit in the county courts, but each court has one or more circuit
judges assigned to it by the Lord Chancellor, and the regular sittings of the
court are mostly taken by them. The judge normally sits alone, although on
request the court may, exceptionally, order a trial with a jury.
The High Court of Justice is divided into the Chancery Division, the
Queen’s Bench Division and the Family Division. Its jurisdiction is both
original and appellate and covers all civil and some criminal cases. In
general, particular types of work are assigned to a particular division. The
Family Division, for instance, is concerned with all jurisdiction affecting
the family, including that relating to adoption and guardianship. The
Chancery Division deals with the interpretation of wills and the adminis¬
tration of estates. Maritime and commercial law is the responsibility of
admiralty and commercial courts of the Queen’s Bench Division.
Each of the 80 or so judges of the High Court is attached to one division
on appointment but may be transferred to any other division while in office.
The Lord Chancellor is president of the Chancery Division, administered
by the senior judge known as the Vice-Chancellor. The Queen’s Bench
Division is presided over by the Lord Chief Justice of England, who ranks
next to the Lord Chancellor in the legal hierarchy, and the Family Division
is headed by the President. Outside London (where the High Court sits at
the Royal Courts of Justice) sittings are held at 23 Crown Court centres.
For the hearing of cases at first instance, High Court judges sit alone.
Appeals in civil matters from lower courts are heard by courts of two (or
sometimes three) judges, or by single judges of the appropriate division,
nominated by the Lord Chancellor.
Appeals in matrimonial, adoption and guardianship proceedings heard by
magistrates’ courts go to a divisional court of the Family Division of the
High Court. Affiliation appeals are heard by the Crown Court, as are
appeals from decisions of the licensing committees of magistrates. Appeals
from the High Court and county courts are heard in the Court of Appeal
(Civil Division) and may go on to the House of Lords, the final court of
appeal in civil cases.
The ex officio members of the Court of Appeal are the Lord Chancellor,
the Lord Chief Justice, the President of the Family Division and the Master
of the Rolls; the ordinary members are 18 Lords Justices of Appeal.
The judges in the House of Lords are the nine Lords of Appeal in
Ordinary, who must have a quorum of three, but usually sit as a group of
five, and sometimes even of seven. Lay peers do not attend the hearing of
118
Scotland
Northern
Ireland
Civil
Proceedings
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
appeals (which normally take place in a committee room and not in the
legislative chamber), but peers who hold or have held high judicial office
may also sit. The president of the House in its judicial capacity is the Lord
Chancellor.
The main civil courts are the sheriff courts and the Court of Session. The
civil jurisdiction of the sheriff court extends to most kinds of action and is
normally unlimited by the value of the case. Much of the work is done by
the sheriff, against whose decisions an appeal may be made to the sheriff-
principal or directly to the Court of Session.
The Court of Session sits only in Edinburgh, and in general has
jurisdiction to deal with all kinds of action. The main exception is an action
exclusive to the sheriff court, where the value claimed is less than a set
amount. The Court has sole jurisdiction in divorce and certain other
actions. It is divided into two parts: the Outer House, a court of first
instance, and the Inner House, mainly an appeal court. The Inner House is
divided into two divisions of equal status, each consisting of four judges—
the first division being presided over by the Lord President and the second
division by the Lord Justice Clerk. Appeals to the Inner House may be
made from the Outer House and from the sheriff court. From the Inner
House an appeal may go to the House of Lords. The judges of the Court of
Session are the same as those of the High Court of Justiciary. The Lord
President of the Court holds the office of Lord Justice General in the High
Court (see p 108).
The Scottish Land Court, a special court dealing with agricultural
tenancies and similar matters, consists of a judge and four lay specialists in
agriculture.
Minor civil cases in Northern Ireland are dealt with in county courts,
though magistrates’ courts also deal with certain classes of civil case. The
superior civil law court is the High Court of Justice from which an appeal
may be made to the Court of Appeal. These two courts, together with the
Crown Court, comprise the Supreme Court of Judicature of Northern
Ireland and their practice and procedure are similar to those in England.
The House of Lords is the final civil appeal court.
In England and Wales civil proceedings are instituted by the aggrieved
person; no preliminary inquiry on the authenticity of the grievance is
required. An action in a magistrates’ court is begun by a complaint on
which the court may serve the defendant with a summons. This contains
details of the complaint and the date on which it will be heard. Parties and
witnesses give their evidence at the court hearing. Domestic proceedings
are heard by not more than three lay justices including, where practicable, a
woman; members of the public are not allowed to be present. The court
may order provision for the custody and supervision of children, as well as
maintenance payments for spouses and children. Actions in the High Court
are usually begun by a writ of summons served on the defendant by the
plaintiff, stating the nature of the claim. A defendant intending to contest
the claim informs the court. Documents setting out the precise question in
dispute (the pleadings) are then delivered to the court. County court
proceedings are initiated by a ‘request’ served on the defendant by the
court; subsequent procedure is simpler than in the High Court.
A decree of divorce must be pronounced in open court, but a procedure
Restrictive
Practices Court
Administrative
Tribunals
JUSTICE AND THE LAW 119
for most undefended cases dispenses with the need to give evidence in court
and permits written evidence to be considered by the registrar.
Civil proceedings, as a private matter, can usually be abandoned or ended
by compromise at any time. Actions brought to court are usually tried
by a judge without a jury, except in defamation, false imprisonment, or
malicious prosecution cases, when either party may, except in certain
special circumstances, insist on trial by jury, or a fraud case, when the
defendant may claim this right. The jury decides questions of fact and
damages awarded to the injured party; majority verdicts may be accepted.
Judgments in civil cases are enforceable through the authority of the
court. Most are for sums of money and may be enforced, in cases of default,
by seizure of the debtor’s goods or by attachment of earnings (a court order
requiring an employer to make periodic payments to the court by deduction
from the debtor’s wages). Other judgments can take the form of an
injunction restraining someone from performing an illegal act. Refusal to
obey a judgment may result in imprisonment for contempt of court. Arrest
under an order of committal may be effected only on a warrant.
The general rule is that the costs of the action (lawyers’ charges, court
fees and other payments) are within the discretion of the court. Normally,
the court orders them to be paid by the party losing the action, but in the
case of family law maintenance proceedings a magistrates’ court can order
either party to pay the whole or part of the other’s costs.
In Scotland proceedings in the Court of Session or ordinary actions in
the sheriff court are initiated by serving the defender with a summons (an
initial writ in the sheriff court). In Court of Session actions the next step is
the publication of the action in the court lists. A defender who intends to
contest the action must inform the court; if he or she does not appear, the
court grants a decree in absence in favour of the pursuer. In ordinary
actions in the sheriff court the defender is simply required to enter
appearance within a certain number of days after service of the initial writ,
and this is followed by a formal appearance in court by the parties to the
dispute or their solicitors.
In summary causes (involving small sums) in the sheriff court the
procedure is less formal. The statement of claim is incorporated in the
summons. The procedure is designed to enable most actions to be carried
through without the parties involved having to appear in court. Normally
they (or their representatives) need appear only when an action is defended.
Proceedings in Northern Ireland are similar to those in England and
Wales.
The Restrictive Practices Court is a specialised United Kingdom court
which deals with monopolies and restrictive trade practices. It comprises
five judges and up to ten other people with expertise in industry, commerce
or public life.
Administrative tribunals consist of persons or bodies exercising judicial
functions outside the ordinary hierarchy of the courts. As a rule, they
are set up under statutory powers which also govern their constitution,
functions and procedure. Their composition and procedures vary greatly.
Compared with the courts, they tend to be less expensive, less formal and
more accessible; they also have expert knowledge of their particular
subjects. The expansion of the tribunal system is comparatively recent,
most tribunals having been set up since 1945. Independently of the
120
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
GOVERNMENT
RESPONSI¬
BILITIES
England and
Wales
executive, tribunals decide the rights and obligations of private citizens
towards each other or towards a government department or other public
authority. A number of important tribunals (notably the rent and the
industrial tribunals) decide disputes between private citizens. Some (such
as those concerned with social security) resolve claims by private citizens
against public authorities. A further group (including tax tribunals) decide
disputed claims by public authorities against private citizens, and still
others decide issues in dispute which do not directly affect financial rights
or liabilities, such as entitlements to licences or the right to enter the United
Kingdom. Tribunals usually consist of an uneven number of people so that
a majority decision can be reached; some consist of one person sitting
alone. Members are normally appointed by the minister concerned with
the subject but other authorities have the power of appointment in ap¬
propriate cases. The Lord Chancellor (or the Lord President of the Court
of Session in Scotland) makes most appointments where a lawyer chairman
or member is required.
Appeals on a point of law from all the more important tribunals may be
made in England and Wales to the High Court, in Scotland to the Court of
Session and in Northern Ireland to the Court of Appeal. An appeal may also
be made to a specially constituted appeal tribunal, to a government minister
or to an independent referee. The Employment Appeal Tribunal, which
hears appeals on questions of law from decisions of industrial tribunals
(see p 315), has High Court and Court of Session status. The Council on
Tribunals (appointed jointly by the Lord Chancellor and the Lord
Advocate) exercises general supervision over tribunals, advising on draft
rules of procedure, monitoring their activities and reporting on particular
matters; those peculiar to Scotland are dealt with by the Scottish Com¬
mittee of the Council.
ADMINISTRATION OF THE LAW
The United Kingdom judiciary is entirely independent of the Government
and is not subject to ministerial direction or control. There is no minister of
justice. Responsibility for the administration of justice rests with the Lord
Chancellor, the Home Secretary and the Secretaries of State for Scotland
and Northern Ireland. Also concerned is the Prime Minister who recom-
n ends the highest judicial appointments to the Crown.
The Lord Chancellor is the head of the judiciary (and sometimes sits as a
judge in the House of Lords); he is concerned with court procedure, is
responsible for the administration of all courts other than magistrates’
courts, appoints magistrates, and has general responsibility for the legal aid
and advice scheme. He is also responsible for the administration of civil law
reform.
The Home Secretary is concerned with the criminal law (including law
reform), the police service, prisons, and the probation and after-care
service; and has general supervision over magistrates’ courts, together with
some specific responsibilities (such as approving the appointment of
justices’ clerks). On matters relating to crime prevention and the treatment
of offenders, the Home Secretary is advised by the Advisory Council on the
Penal System. Prison policy and the administration of custodial centres are
functions of the Home Office Prison Department, and the Home Secretary
appoints to each centre a board of visitors representing the local community
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
121
Scotland
Northern
Ireland
THE
PERSONNEL
OF THE LAW
Judges
to investigate and advise on the state of prison premises, administration and
treatment of inmates. The boards have disciplinary powers in relation to
serious breaches of discipline and hear applications or complaints from
inmates. The Home Secretary is advised by a special Parole Board on the
release of prisoners on licence.
Responsibility for the treatment of offenders under 17 is shared between
the Home Office and the Department of Health and Social Security. The
Home Secretary is also responsible for advising the Queen on the exercise
of the royal prerogative of mercy to pardon a person convicted of a crime or
to cancel all or part of a penalty imposed by a court.
The Secretary of State for the Environment is responsible for providing
accommodation for all the superior courts in England and Wales, except the
Central Criminal Court, which is the responsibility of the City of London.
The Attorney General and the Solicitor General (the Law Officers of
the Crown for England and Wales) are the Government’s principal advisers
on English law, and represent the Crown in appropriate domestic and
international cases. They are senior barristers, elected members of the
House of Commons and hold ministerial posts. The Attorney General is
also Attorney General for Northern Ireland.
As well as exercising various civil law functions, the Attorney General
has final responsibility for enforcing the criminal law; the Director of
Public Prosecutions is subject to the Attorney General’s superintendence.
The Attorney General is concerned with instituting and prosecuting
certain types of criminal proceedings, but must exercise an independent
discretion, and must not be influenced by government colleagues. The
Solicitor General is, in efiFect, the deputy of the Attorney General.
The Secretary of State for Scotland recommends the appointment of all
judges other than the most senior ones, appoints the staff of the High Court
of Justiciary and the Court of Session and is responsible for the com¬
position, staffing and organisation of the sheriff courts. District courts are
staffed and administered by the district and islands local authorities. The
Secretary of State is also responsible for crime prevention, and the police
and the penal system, and is advised on parole matters by the Parole Board
for Scotland.
The Lord Advocate and the Solicitor General for Scotland are the chief
legal advisers to the Government on Scottish questions and the principal
representatives of the Crown for the purposes of litigation in Scotland. The
Lord Advocate is closely concerned with questions of legal policy and
administration and is also responsible for the Scottish parliamentary
draftsmen, and for the public prosecution of all major crimes.
In Northern Ireland the judiciary is appointed by the Queen on the advice
of the Lord Chancellor. The administration of all courts is the responsi¬
bility of the Lord Chancellor, while the Northern Ireland Office, under the
Secretary of State, deals with the police and the penal system.
The courts of the United Kingdom are the Queen’s Courts since the Crown
is the historic source of all judicial power. The Queen, acting on the advice
of ministers, is responsible for all appointments to the judiciary.
Full-time judges do not engage in politics, except for the Lord Chancellor,
who is head of the judiciary, speaker of the House of Lords and a Cabinet
minister. With the exception of lay magistrates, judges are normally
appointed from practising barristers, advocates (in Scotland) or solicitors
122
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Legal
Profession
LEGAL AID,
ADVICE AND
ASSISTANCE
Advice and
Assistance
Law Centres
(see below). The judiciary is not a career service as in many other countries.
Lay magistrates in England and Wales need no legal qualifications but on
appointment undergo basic training to give them sufficient knowledge of
the law, including the rules of evidence, and to enable them to understand
the nature and purpose of sentencing. The Scottish district court justices of
the peace likewise need no legal qualifications. In Northern Ireland lay
magistrates serving on juvenile courts undertake training courses; resident
magistrates are drawn from practising solicitors or barristers. In certain
circumstances (for instance, in cases of misconduct or proven incapacity)
judges of the inferior courts may be removed from their positions but, in
order to safeguard the independence of the judiciary from the executive,
superior judges in England and Wales and Northern Ireland (other than
the Lord Chancellor who changes with the Government) are subject to
removal only by the Queen on an address presented by both Houses of
Parliament; in Scotland there is no statutory provision for removing judges
of the Court of Session or High Court of Justiciary from office and special
legislation would probably be needed to secure a dismissal.
The legal profession is divided into two branches: barristers (advocates in
Scotland) and solicitors. Barristers are known collectively as the ‘Bar’,
and collectively and individually as ‘counsel’. Solicitors undertake legal
business for lay clients, while barristers advise on legal problems submitted
through solicitors and present cases in the higher courts; certain functions
are common to both. Although people are free to conduct their own cases,
most people prefer to be legally represented in the more serious cases.
The professional organisations for barristers are: the Senate of the Inns
of Court and the Bar (in England and Wales),1 the Faculty of Advocates (in
Scotland) and the General Council of the Bar of Northern Ireland. For
solicitors they are: the Law Society, the Law Society of Scotland and the
Incorporated Law Society of Northern Ireland.
A person in need may obtain help from public funds to meet the costs of
legal advice and legal representation in court. The State is entitled to be
reimbursed from contributions which assisted people may have to pay
according to their means, and from costs and money or property recovered
or preserved in the legal proceedings.
People with moderate means may obtain help from a solicitor on any legal
matter concerning British law, either free or subject to a contribution.
The solicitor’s help includes giving advice, writing letters, drafting wills,
obtaining opinions from a barrister and, where specifically authorised by
the legal aid authorities, representing the client in certain civil proceedings
in magistrates’ courts. A solicitor may act for a client until costs and
expenses reach a total of £40 (£75 for divorce or judicial separation cases)
after which the agreement of the legal aid authorities must be obtained. A
person seeking help must give details about income and savings.
In a number of urban areas law centres provide free advice to people of
limited means. All law centres (voluntary organisations financed from
various sources, including government grants) have at least one full-time
salaried lawyer and many employ community workers. Most devote much
of their time to tenant-landlord disputes and other housing problems. Free
legal advice is also available in Citizens Advice Bureaux, consumer and
1 In England and Wales every barrister and every student wishing to become a barrister must be a member of
one of the four Inns of Court in London (Lincoln’s Inn, Inner Temple, Middle Temple and Gray’s Inn).
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
123
Aid in Civil
Proceedings
Aid in Criminal
Proceedings
LAW REFORM
housing advice centres and in specialist advice centres run by various
voluntary organisations.
' Legal aid for civil proceedings is available to people whose disposable
incomes and capital fall below certain prescribed amounts, but a con¬
tribution is payable according to the level of the applicant’s income and
capital; if they are below prescribed amounts, legal aid is given free.
An applicant for legal aid must also show reasonable grounds for taking
or defending the proceedings. If the application is successful the case is
conducted in the ordinary way, except that no money passes between the
assisted person and the solicitor—payments being made in and out of the
legal aid fund. The costs of an action which an assisted litigant loses against
an unassisted opponent may also, subject to certain conditions and if the
court so orders, be met out of the fund. Solicitors and counsel must review
the case at each stage to see that it is not being pursued unreasonably at
public expense. Legal aid is not generally available in cases where redress is
sought for alleged defamation or for representation in proceedings in most
administrative tribunals.
The civil legal aid schemes are run by the Law Society, the Law Society
of Scotland and the Incorporated Law Society of Northern Ireland, under
the general guidance respectively of the Lord Chancellor the Secretary of
State for Scotland and the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland.
In criminal proceedings in England and Wales a legal aid order may be
made by the court concerned if it appears to be in the interests of justice and
if a defendant needs financial help. An order must be made when a person is
committed for trial on a murder charge or where the prosecutor appeals or
applies for leave to appeal from the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) to
the House of Lords. No person who is unrepresented can be given a
custodial sentence for the first time unless given the opportunity to apply
for legal aid.
Voluntary duty solicitor schemes at many magistrates’ courts provide
‘standby’ help for unrepresented defendants.
The criminal legal aid scheme in England and Wales is administered by
the courts, under the overall responsibility of the Lord Chancellor.
The arrangements for aid in criminal proceedings in Scotland and
Northern Ireland are broadly similar, but in Scotland there is a statutory
duty solicitor scheme for accused people in custody in sheriff, and district,
court cases and the ‘interests of justice’ test applies only in summary cases.
The duty of keeping the law under review lies with the Law Reform
Committee, the Criminal Law Revision Committee and the Law Com¬
mission in England and Wales, and with the Scottish Law Commission in
Scotland. The Law Reform Committee and the Criminal Law Revision
Committee comprise judges and practising and academic lawyers, appointed
respectively by the Lord Chancellor and the Home Secretary, to examine
aspects of the civil and criminal law.
The Law Commission, a permanent body of five lawyers of high standing
reporting to the Lord Chancellor, scrutinises the law with a view to its
systematic development and reform, and its simplification and modern¬
isation. The Scottish Law Commission is similar, and reports to the Lord
Advocate. Law reform in Northern Ireland is a matter for the Law
Commission and the Office of Law Reform.
6 SocialWelfare
ADMINIS¬
TRATION
The British social welfare system comprises the National Health Service,
the personal social services and social security. The National Health
Service provides a comprehensive range of medical services which are
available to all residents, irrespective of means. The local authority
personal social services and voluntary organisations provide advice and
help to elderly people, disabled people and children in need of care. The
social security system is designed to secure a basic standard of living for
people in financial need by providing income during periods of inability to
earn, help for families and compensation for disablement.
Central government is responsible directly for the National Health
Service, administered by health authorities and boards acting as its agents,
and for the social security system. It has an indirect responsibility for the
personal social services administered by local government authorities.
Joint finance and planning between health and local authorities aims to
prevent overlapping of services and to encourage the development of
community services.
Spending on social welfare in 1981 was: health £13,370 million (6 3 per
cent of gross domestic product), and personal social services £2,490 million
(1 2 per cent). Expenditure on the health service and social security is being
increased in line with inflation; the personal social services is deter¬
mined by local authorities within the reduced level of spending which they
have been asked to achieve. Social security, which accounts for 27 per cent
of public expenditure, is by far the largest item in the total.
NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE
The National Health Service (NHS) is based upon the principle that there
should be a comprehensive range of publicly provided services designed to
promote improvement in the health of the people and in the prevention,
diagnosis and treatment of illness. All taxpayers, employers and employees
contribute to its cost so that those members of the community who do not
require health care help to pay for those who do. At the time of use there
may be charges (as for prescriptions and spectacles) from which, however,
children and people with low incomes are exempt, or treatment may be free
(for example, hospital care). Over 40 per cent of health authority ex¬
penditure on hospital and community services is spent on the care of elderly
people.
In considering the future use of resources, the Government has em¬
phasised the importance of preventive services, the responsibility of in¬
dividuals for their own health, the importance of the family in providing
care and support, and the whole network of support available within the
community and through the voluntary services. It stresses the need for a
partnership between the public and private health sectors and for improv¬
ing efficiency in order to secure the best value for money at a time of
economic difficulty.
The health ministers (the Secretary of State for Social Services in England
and the Secretaries of State for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland) are
SOCIAL WELFARE
125
Health Service
Commissioners
Finance
responsible for all aspects of the health services in their respective areas.
The health departments (the Department of Health and Social Security in
England, the Scottish Home and Health Department, the Welsh Office and
the Department of Health and Social Services in Northern Ireland) are
responsible for strategic planning. District health authorities in England
and Wales and health boards in Scotland are responsible for planning and
operational control of all health services in their areas. In England, because
of its greater size and population, a tier of regional authorities is responsible
for regional planning, resource allocation, major capital building work and
certain specialised hospital services best administered on a regional basis.
The authorities and boards co-operate closely with local authorities re¬
sponsible for social work, environmental health, education and other
services.
In Northern Ireland the health and social services boards act as agents for
the Department of Health and Social Services, spanning both health and
personal social services.
There are three Health Service Commissioner posts (for England, Scotland
and Wales) for dealing with complaints from members of the public about
the health service. All three posts are held by the Parliamentary Commis¬
sioner for Administration (see p 46). The jurisdiction of the Health Service
Commissioner covers the failure of a health authority to carry out its
statutory duties, a failure in a service provided, or maladministration
causing injustice or hardship, but not actions taken solely in the exercise of
clinical judgment or the actions of family practitioners. The Commissioner
reports annually to ministers who lay the reports before Parliament, and
may make other reports when necessary.
In Northern Ireland the Commissioner for Complaints (see p 67) in¬
vestigates complaints concerning the health service, but not the actions of
medical practitioners or the professions supplementary to medicine.
About 85 per cent of the cost of the health services is paid for through
general taxation; the rest is met from the National Health Service con¬
tribution paid with the national insurance contribution and from the
charges towards the cost of certain items such as drugs prescribed by a
family doctor, dental treatment, dentures and spectacles. Health authori¬
ties may raise funds from voluntary sources.
The charges for medical prescriptions do not apply to children under 16
years, expectant mothers and mothers with a child under the age of one,
women aged 60 and over and men aged 65 and over, patients suffering from
certain medical conditions, war and Service disablement pensioners (for
treatment of their disability), and families with very low incomes. Some
70 per cent of prescription items are supplied free of charge. Exemptions
from charges for dental treatment are made for examinations and denture
repairs. Some groups of patients receive free treatment, for example,
women who are pregnant or who have had a baby in the last year, anyone
under the age of 18, or 19 if in full-time education, and people receiving
supplementary benefit (see p 140) or family income supplement (see p 140).
Children’s spectacles are free.
Provision is made at certain hospitals for patients to be treated as private
patients on payment of the whole cost of their accommodation and treat¬
ment.
Hospital medical staffs are salaried and can be employed full-time or
126
PRIMARY
HEALTH
CARE
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
part-time. Hospital doctors can accept private patients. General medical
practitioners are self-employed, paid by a system of fees and allowances
designed to reflect responsibilities, work load and practice expenses.
Dentists providing treatment in their own surgeries are paid on a pre¬
scribed scale of fees. Pharmacists dispensing on their own premises are
reimbursed for the cost of the items supplied together with professional
fees. Ophthalmic medical practitioners and ophthalmic opticians taking
part in the general ophthalmic service receive approved fees for each sight
test made; opticians who dispense spectacles are paid according to the
number and type of pairs supplied.
Primary health care is in the hands of doctors, dentists, opticians and
pharmacists working within the Service as independent practitioners, and
health visitors, district nurses and midwives employed by the health
authorities; a wide range of other services is also available including the
school health service, social services and chiropody service.
Family
Practitioner
Services
Health Visitors,
District
Nurses and
Midwives
The family practitioner services are those given to patients by doctors,
dentists, opticians and pharmacists of their own choice. Family doctors
who are under contract to the National Health Service have on average
about 2,250 patients. They provide the first diagnosis in the case of illness
and either prescribe a suitable course of treatment or refer a patient to the
more specialised services and hospital consultants. Ophthalmic medical
practitioners and ophthalmic and dispensing opticians test the sight and
supply spectacles. Patients requiring treatment are dealt with through the
Hospital Eye Service.
Health visitors are responsible for the preventive care and health education
of all families, particularly those with young children. They work closely
with general practitioners, district nurses and other professions. District
nurses give skilled nursing care to people at home or elsewhere outside
hospital; they also play an important role in preventive care and health
education. Although almost all babies are born in hospital, there is a
domiciliary service for mothers having their babies at home, with mid¬
wives and general practitioners giving both ante-natal and post-natal care.
Midwives also assist births in hospital.
Group Practices
and Health
Centres
About four-fifths of family doctors in Britain work in partnerships or group
practices, often as members of health care teams which also include health
visitors and district nurses and sometimes midwives and social workers.
About a fifth in Great Britain and just over a half in Northern Ireland work
in modern and well-equipped health centres where medical and nursing
services are provided. Health centres may also have facilities for health
education, family planning, speech therapy, chiropody, assessment of
hearing, physiotherapy and remedial exercises. Dental, pharmaceutical
and ophthalmic services, hospital out-patient services and supporting
social work services may also be provided.
HOSPITALS
AND
SPECIALIST
SERVICES
The hospital services include district general hospitals with treatment and
diagnostic facilities for in-patients, day-patients and out-patients, hospital
maternity departments, infectious disease units, psychiatric and geriatric
facilities, rehabilitation facilities, convalescent homes and all forms of
specialised treatment. A number of specialist hospitals for mentally ill,
mentally handicapped and elderly people are also provided.
SOCIAL WELFARE
127
Hospitals
Rehabilitation
Hospices
Drug
Dependence
A large proportion of the hospitals in the National Health Service were
built in the nineteenth century; some trace their origins to much earlier
charitable foundations, such as the famous St Bartholomew’s and St
Thomas’ hospitals in London. Much has been done to improve and extend
existing buildings and many new hospitals have been or are being opened.
The most recent development in hospital design is the ‘nucleus’ hospital of
some 300 beds which makes a more intensive use of space and facilities; it
can be used either as the first stage of a new hospital or as an extension of an
existing hospital. The world’s first low-energy nucleus hospital, which is
expected to use less than half the energy of an ordinary nucleus hospital, is
to be built on the Isle of Wight. Recent policy had been to concentrate
‘acute’ facilities (that is, for relatively short-term or urgent treatment) in
large district hospitals and to expand the role of the small hospital in the
care of the long-stay patient, particularly the elderly (although in Scotland
more of the smaller hospitals have been retained for acute medicine). The
Government has reviewed this policy which, it considers, involves the
construction of excessively large hospitals and the risk of hospital services
becoming too remote from the local communities. As a result, more
emphasis is being placed on providing smaller hospitals for local areas.
National Health Service hospitals provide nearly half a million beds and
have over 480,000 nursing, midwifery and medical staff.
Rehabilitation is an important part of medical care, beginning at the onset
of illness or injury and aimed at helping people to live as normally as
possible. It is especially important for elderly, disabled and mentally-ill
people who need such help to become self-sufficient. Facilities are provided
in most hospitals and at special centres. The work is carried out by teams of
doctors, nurses, physiotherapists, remedial gymnasts, occupational thera¬
pists, speech therapists and social workers. The hospital departments work
closely with the Disablement Resettlement Service of the Manpower
Services Commission (the Department of Manpower Services in Northern
Ireland).
Medical services may include the provision, free of charge, of artificial
limbs and eyes, hearing aids, surgical supports, wheelchairs, and other
appliances. Very severely physically handicapped patients may be provided
with electrical control equipment which enables them to operate devices
such as alarm bells, radio and television, a telephone, and heating. Nursing
aids for the handicapped at home can be borrowed.
Social workers, home helps and occupational therapists help hospital
patients who, due to their illness, have difficulties on returning to their
homes.
Over 60 hospices provide care for the dying either directly in residential
homes or through the provision of nursing and other assistance in the
patient’s own home. Control of symptoms and psychological support for
patients and their families form the central features of the modern hospice
movement, which originated in Britain and is now world-wide. About 20 of
the hospices are administered entirely by the National Health Service; the
remainder, most of which receive support from public funds, are run by
independent charitable organisations.
Treatment for narcotic drug dependence is provided mostly on an out¬
patient basis in the drug treatment units provided by the National Health
128
Alcoholism
Parents and
Children
Family
Planning
Abortion
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Service, although some addicts have a period of in-patient treatment when
necessary. Only doctors specially licensed are allowed to prescribe heroin
and cocaine for the treatment of drug addiction. All doctors must notify the
authorities of any patient they consider to be addicted to certain controlled
drugs. The Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs advises ministers on a
wide range of matters associated with the prevention and treatment of drug
abuse and connected social problems.
A number of unofficial agencies work with and complement the Health
Service provision. Rehabilitation facilities, for example, are mainly pro¬
vided by voluntary organisations, some of which receive financial help from
local authorities. Social work help is given by the probation service and
local social services departments.
Treatment and rehabilitation for problem drinkers, provided by the
National Health Service and social services, include in-patient and out¬
patient services in general hospitals, psychiatric units and hospitals and
in specialised alcoholism treatment units. Primary care teams (general
practitioners, nurses and social workers) and voluntary organisations,
providing hostels, day centres, and counselling services, also play an
important part. Educational and research projects on alcohol misuse, and
organisations concerned with alcohol-related problems, receive financial
help from a charitable fund administered by the Alcohol Education and
Research Council.
Special preventive health services, including free dental care, are available
for expectant and nursing mothers and young children. A feature of the
services is the education of parents before and after the birth by means of
talks, discussion groups, demonstrations and classes. Pre-school-age chil¬
dren receive regular medical examinations and are tested for vision,
hearing, speech and language deficiencies. Family planning advice and help
is provided at many clinics, and welfare foods (dried milk and vitamins) are
distributed from them.
The school health service, which is part of the National Health Service,
organises health surveillance of school children including medical inspec¬
tion and dental inspection and treatment where necessary.
Child guidance and child psychiatric services provide help and advice for
children with psychological or emotional problems.
Free family planning facilities are available to everyone through family
planning clinics, hospitals and a domiciliary service. Most family doctors
provide a similar service for women only.
The Abortion Act 1967 allows the termination of pregnancy if two regis¬
tered doctors think that its continuance would involve a greater risk to the
life of the pregnant woman (or injury to her physical or mental health or that
of any existing children in the family) than if the pregnancy were ended.
Termination may also be allowed if the two doctors think that there is a
substantial risk of the child being born with severe physical or mental
abnormalities. Abortions are carried out in National Health Service
hospitals or in private premises officially approved for the purpose. About
half of the 138,000 legal abortions to women resident in Great Britain in
1981 were performed in private hospitals and clinics. The Act does not
apply in Northern Ireland.
SOCIAL WELFARE
129
Blood
Transfusion
Ambulance
Services
HEALTH
EDUCATION
SAFETY OF
MEDICINES
RESEARCH
The blood transfusion service receives over 2 million donations of blood
each year from voluntary unpaid donors. Regional transfusion centres
' recruit donors and organise donor sessions in towns and villages, factories
and offices, and within the armed forces. Donors must be between the ages
of 18 and 65. The centres are also responsible for blood grouping and
testing, maintaining blood banks, providing a consultancy service to hospi¬
tals, teaching in medical schools, and instructing doctors, nurses and tech¬
nicians. Four laboratories prepare blood products and undertake research.
Where necessary on medical grounds free transport by ambulance is
provided by the health authorities. The work of the ambulance service is
emergency work dealing with sudden illness, urgent maternity cases, and
accidents of all kinds; and non-urgent work providing transport for people
needing out-patient treatment at hospitals, clinics and day hospitals.
The London Ambulance Service is probably the largest of its kind in the
world, catering for 7 million residents and non-residents in an area of 1,580
sq km (610 sq miles). It uses over 1,100 vehicles at 77 ambulance stations
and has a staff of over 2,800. On an average day it receives 1,800 emergency
calls (over one call every minute) and carries out 8,000 non-urgent patient
journeys.
In some areas the ambulance service for non-urgent cases is augmented
by volunteers using their own cars. In Scotland an air ambulance service is
available in the islands and in the remoter parts of the mainland.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland health education is promoted by
the government-financed Health Education Council, which assists in the
development of programmes of health education with the health authori¬
ties, professional organisations, voluntary bodies and industry. Health
education services in Scotland are organised by the Scottish Health
Education Group, which is part of the Common Services Agency. Major
themes of publicity campaigns are family planning, dental health, the
importance of vaccination for children, correct diet and exercise, and the
dangers of cigarette smoking and excessive consumption of alcohol.
Under the Medicines Act 1968 the health and agriculture ministers are
responsible for licensing the manufacture, marketing and importation of
medicines for human and veterinary use. The Medicines Commission
advises the ministers on policy regarding medicines and a Committee on
Safety of Medicines gives advice on the safety, efficacy and quality of new
medicines and monitors adverse drug reactions. The Act also controls the
advertising, labelling, packaging, distribution, sale and supply of medicinal
products.
In England and Wales in 1981-82 the health departments spent about £23
million on research and development (in addition to expenditure by the
Medical Research Council, see p 357). The programme is administered by
the Chief Scientist of the Department of Health and Social Security who is
supported by independent advisers covering a wide range of scientific
disciplines. The Department is also involved in international research and
development. In Scotland about £3-9 million was spent by the Home and
Health Department on medical research and development. Both health
departments participate in the European Community’s medical and public
health research programme.
130
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
THE HEALTH
PROFESSIONS
Only people whose names are on the medical or dental registers may
practise as doctors or dentists in the National Health Service. University
medical and dental schools are responsible for teaching; the National
Health Service provides hospital clinical facilities for training. Full regis¬
tration as a doctor requires five or six years’ training in medical school and
hospital, with an additional year’s experience in a hospital; for a dentist,
four or more years’ training at a dental school is required. The regulating
body for the medical profession is the General Medical Council and that
of the dentists is the General Dental Council. The main professional
associations are the British Medical Association and the British Dental
Association.
The minimum period of hospital training required to qualify for regis¬
tration as a nurse is normally three years. Training may be in general, sick
children’s, mental or mental subnormality nursing. An enrolled nurse takes
a two-year course (in Scotland 18 months). The examining bodies of the
nursing profession in England and Wales and in Scotland are the general
nursing councils. Mid wives must have the certificate of the appropri¬
ate Midwives Board. The examining body for nurses and midwives in
Northern Ireland is the Northern Ireland Council for Nurses and Mid¬
wives. Student midwives are usually registered general nurses and undergo
18 months’ midwifery training. The Royal College of Nursing and the
Royal College of Midwives are the professional bodies for nurses and
mid wives. Health visitors are registered general nurses with midwifery or
approved obstetric experience who have completed a year’s course in health
visiting, regulated by the Council for the Education and Training of Health
Visitors. District nurses are state registered nurses who hold a district
nursing certificate awarded by the Panel of Assessors for District Nurse
Training. A United Kingdom Central Council for Nursing, Midwifery
and Health Visiting has been established and it is expected that it will
assume responsibility for regulating these professions in 1983. New
national boards for each country will take over responsibility for promoting
education and training.
Pharmacists in general practice and in hospital must be registered by the
Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain; in Northern Ireland the register
is maintained by the Department of Health and Social Services on behalf of
the Pharmaceutical Society of Northern Ireland. A three-year degree
course approved by the Pharmaceutical Society followed by a year’s
approved training is necessary before registration. The majority of medi¬
cines can be sold or dispensed only by, or under the supervision of, a
registered pharmacist.
The General Optical Council regulates the professions of ophthalmic
optician and dispensing optician; only registered ophthalmic opticians (or
registered medical practitioners) may test sight. Training of ophthalmic
opticians takes four years including a year of practical experience under
supervision. Dispensing opticians take a two-year full-time course with a
year’s practical experience or a part-time day-release course while em¬
ployed with an optician.
State registration may be obtained by chiropodists, dietitians, medical
laboratory scientific officers, occupational therapists, orthoptists, physio¬
therapists, radiographers and remedial gymnasts. The governing bodies
are eight boards, corresponding to the eight professions, under the general
supervision of the Council for Professions Supplementary to Medicine.
Professional training lasts two or four years and only those who are state
SOCIAL WELFARE 131
registered may be employed in the National Health Service and some other
public services.
Dental therapists (who have undergone a two-year training course) and
dental hygienists (who have undergone a training course of about a year)
may carry out some simple dental work under the direction of a registered
dentist.
ARRANGEMENTS The member states of the European Community have special health
WITH OTHER arrangements under which Community nationals are entitled to receive any
COUNTRIES necessary treatment immediately, either free or at reduced cost, during
visits to other Community countries. There are also arrangements to cover
people who go to work or live in other Community countries. In addition,
there are reciprocal arrangements with some other countries under which
emergency medical treatment is available. Otherwise with some exceptions
visitors are expected to pay if the purpose of their visit is to seek treatment,
and also if they should fall ill while in the United Kingdom.
PRIVATE
MEDICAL
TREATMENT
It is the Government’s policy to encourage the private sector to meet a
larger share of the nation’s health needs in the belief that this will benefit the
NHS by relieving pressure on it. The scale of private practice in relation to
the NHS is, however, small. There are some 2,800 private pay beds in NHS
hospitals in England and some 5 per cent of acute hospital beds are in
private hospitals and nursing homes. It is estimated that about half of those
receiving acute treatment in NHS pay beds or private hospitals are covered
by provident schemes which make provision for private health care in
return for annual subscriptions. In 1982 there were some i-86 million
subscribers to such schemes of whom the majority were involved in group
schemes, some arranged by firms on behalf of employees. Subscriptions
often cover more than one person (for example, members of a family) and a
total of 41 million were covered. Private practice is also undertaken by
family doctors and dentists.
ENVIRON¬
MENTAL
HEALTH
Environmental health officers employed by local authorities are respon¬
sible for the control of air pollution, noise, food hygiene and quality, the
inspection of offices, the investigation of unfit housing, and in some in¬
stances for refuse collection. Doctors who specialise in community medi¬
cine and are employed by the health authorities advise local authorities on
the medical aspects of environmental health. They may also assist the
authorities responsible for water supply and sewerage. Environmental
health officers at ports and airports carry out a range of duties concerned
with shipping, inspection of imported foods and disease control. In
Northern Ireland district councils are responsible for noise control, col¬
lection and disposal of refuse, clean air, and food composition, labelling and
hygiene.
Safety of Food It is illegal to sell food unfit for human consumption or to apply any
treatment, process or additive to food which makes it injurious to health.
Premises where food or drink is prepared, handled, stored or sold must
conform to certain hygiene standards. Environmental health officers may
take for analysis or for bacteriological or other examination samples of
any food on sale. Special regulations control the safety of particular foods
such as milk, meat and ice-cream. The Department of Health and Social
Security, the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, the Scottish
132
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
CONTROL OF
INFECTIOUS
DISEASES
Disabled
People
Office, the Welsh Office and the Department of Health and Social Services
in Northern Ireland are the central departments responsible for giving
advice and making regulations.
The health authorities have general responsibility for the prevention of
disease and co-operate with the local authority environmental health ser¬
vices. The district health authorities and health boards carry out pro¬
grammes of vaccination and immunisation against diphtheria, measles,
rubella (females only), poliomyelitis, tetanus, tuberculosis and whooping
cough. Following publicity given to cases of adverse reaction to vaccination,
particularly against whooping cough, there was a decline in the numbers
being vaccinated. Government studies have concluded, however, that the
benefits of vaccination far outweigh the risks, and parents are encouraged to
seek protection for their children. There are signs that the situation is
improving; the proportion of children being vaccinated is increasing.
Community physicians are responsible for the prevention and control of
infectious diseases and are supported by the Public Health Laboratory
Service which provides a network of bacteriological and virological
laboratories throughout England and Wales which conduct research and
assist in the diagnosis, prevention and control of epidemic diseases. Its
largest establishment is the Central Public Health Laboratory at Colin-
dale, in north-west London, which includes the National Collection of
Type Cultures, the Food Hygiene Laboratory, and reference laboratories
specialising in the identification of infective micro-organisms. A surveil¬
lance centre investigates and monitors human communicable diseases. In
Scotland bacteriological work is done mainly in hospital laboratories. In
Northern Ireland a central public health laboratory shares the bacterio¬
logical work with hospital laboratories.
PERSONAL SOCIAL SERVICES
Responsibility for personal social services rests with the social services
authorities (local authority social services departments in England and
Wales, social work departments in Scotland and health and social services
boards in Northern Ireland). Many of their services are directed towards
the same groups of people needing health services, for example, elderly or
disabled people. Other groups helped include young families with social
problems, children deprived of a normal home life, the mentally ill or
handicapped and young offenders. Close co-operation is maintained be¬
tween local authority social services departments and health authorities. In
Scotland local authorities also undertake duties similar to those of the
separate probation and after-care service in England and Wales (see pin).
Much of the care given to the elderly and disabled is provided in the
community itself, by their families, self-help groups and through the
voluntary movement. The statutory sector offers the special skilled care
needed in particular services. The Government recognises the importance
of the contribution made by the voluntary organisations, especially when
economies are being made in public expenditure and the demand on the
statutory services is heavy.
Social services authorities provide a range of personal social services for
disabled people. They are required to establish the number of disabled
SOCIAL WELFARE
133
The Elderly
The Mentally
111 and the
Mentally
Handicapped
Help to
Families
Child Care
people in their area and to publicise services. A wide range of facilities may
be available including advice on personal and social problems arising from
disability, assistance in overcoming the effects of disability, adaptations to
people’s homes (such as fitting ramps, and ground floor toilets) and various
aids to daily living. In certain circumstances a telephone or a television set
may be installed. Other facilities include social and occupational clubs,
residential homes and the organisation of outings and holidays; some
authorities make arrangements for the teaching of handicrafts and other
occupations. Voluntary organisations also provide services for disabled
people.
Help available from other sources includes social security, medical
treatment, special education, employment and training services, and
specially designed housing and means of access to public buildings.
Services for elderly people are provided by statutory and voluntary bodies
to help them to live at home whenever possible. These may include the
advice and help of social workers, domestic help, delivery of cooked meals,
sitters-in, night attendants and laundry services as well as day centres,
clubs and recreational workshops. In many areas ‘good neighbour’ and
friendly visiting services are arranged by the local authority or a voluntary
organisation. Social services authorities also provide residential accom¬
modation for the elderly and infirm and have powers to register homes run
by voluntary organisations or privately.
Local authorities, as part of their responsibility for public housing, build
flats specially designed for elderly people; some of these blocks have resi¬
dent wardens. Housing associations also build this type of accommodation.
Social services authorities must make arrangements for the provision of
preventive care and after-care services for mentally ill and mentally handi¬
capped people in the community. Developments in the treatment of mental
illness, which enable patients either to be treated at home or to be dis¬
charged from hospital more quickly provided support is available in the
community, are adding to demands for these services and particularly for
social work support. Services include training centres for the mentally
handicapped and day centres for the mentally ill, as well as social centres
and a variety of residential care for the mentally ill and mentally handi¬
capped of all ages. Social workers help patients and their families to deal
with social problems arising from mental illness or handicap and in certain
circumstances make application for compulsory admission (on a medical
recommendation) of mentally disordered people to hospital.
Social services authorities, through their own social workers or a voluntary
organisation, make available help and advice to families facing special
problems. The home help service provides practical assistance at home for
sick and disabled people, elderly people and expectant mothers.
Some authorities make direct provision for the special needs of un¬
married mothers and their babies, but most contribute to the cost of work
done by voluntary organisations and other bodies.
Day care facilities for children under five are provided by local authorities,
voluntary agencies and privately. In allocating places in day nurseries and
other facilities they themselves provide, local authorities give priority to
children with special social or health needs for day care. They also register,
134
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and provide support and advice services for, childminders, private day
nurseries and play-groups operating in their area.
The authorities must offer advice, guidance and assistance to families in
difficulties to promote the welfare of children. The aim is to intervene early
to reduce the need to receive children into care or bring the case before a
court.
The recognition, prevention and management of cases of child abuse are
the concern of many authorities, agencies and professions, and area review
committees provide a forum for discussion and co-ordination and draw up
policies and procedures for handling these cases.
Authorities must receive into their care any child under the age of 17 who
has no parent or guardian or who has been abandoned or whose parents are
unable to provide for him or her, if they are satisfied that such intervention
is in the interests of the child. The child remains in care until the age of 18
unless discharged to the care of parents, other relatives or friends. In
certain circumstances the local authority assumes the rights and duties of
one or both parents. The parents must be notified and if they object the
matter must be decided in a court of law. When taking a decision on a child
in care, the authorities have to give first consideration to the need to
safeguard and promote the welfare of the child. Where children are in care,
efforts are made to work with their families in order, where appropriate, to
enable the children to return home.
Children in England and Wales may be brought before a juvenile court if
they are neglected or ill-treated, exposed to moral danger, are beyond the
control of parents, not attending school or (if ten years or over) have
committed an offence other than homicide (see p 114). At the same time it
must be shown that the children need care or control which they are
unlikely to receive unless a care or other relevant order is made by the court.
Local authorities are responsible for undertaking inquiries through social
workers, consultation with parents, schools and the police. Children may
be committed to the care of a local authority under a care order if the court is
satisfied that they need care or control. As an alternative the court may
order supervision by a social worker or a probation officer for up to three
years.
In Northern Ireland the court may send children to a training school (see
p 115), commit them to the care of a fit person (which includes a health and
social services board), or make a supervision order. The law relating to
children has been reviewed and the intention in future is to make a
distinction between young offenders and children in need of care and
protection. Strong emphasis is placed on preventive work.
In Scotland children in trouble (see p 115) or in need may be brought
before a children’s hearing which can impose a supervision requirement on
a child if it thinks that compulsory measures of care are appropriate. Under
these requirements most children are allowed to remain at home under the
supervision of a social worker but some may be sent to a residential estab¬
lishment while under supervision. Supervision requirements are reviewed
at intervals of not more than one year until terminated by a children’s
hearing.
When appropriate, children in care are boarded out with foster parents,
who receive an allowance to cover the cost of maintenance. If foster homes
are not considered appropriate or cannot be found, the children may be
placed in children’s homes, voluntary homes or other suitable residential
accommodation. Community homes for children in care in England and
SOCIAL WELFARE
135
Voluntary
Organisations
Adoption
Social Workers
Wales comprise local authority and some voluntary children’s homes, and
include community homes with education on the premises which provide
long-term care usually for the more difficult children. In Scotland local
authorities are responsible for placing children in their care either in foster
homes, in local authority or voluntary homes, or in residential schools. In
Northern Ireland there are residential homes for children in the care of
the health and social services boards; training schools and remand homes
are administered separately. Regulations concerning community homes,
registered voluntary homes and the boarding out of children in care are
made by central government.
Voluntary organisations play a major part in providing accommodation for
children both in the care of local authorities and voluntary organisations.
Some children’s homes run by voluntary organisations which are not
within the community homes system are registered with central government.
Voluntary bodies concerned with the welfare of children in their own
homes include local family casework agencies and the Family Service
Units. The National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children and
its Scottish counterpart investigate reported cruelty or neglect.
Adoption of children is strictly regulated by legislation and some 12,000
adoption orders are made in Britain each year. The Registrars-General
keep confidential registers of adopted children. Local authorities can act as
adoption agencies and eventually will be obliged to offer such a service.
Adoption societies must be approved by the respective social services
minister.
The effective operation of the social services largely depends on the avail¬
ability of professionally qualified social workers trained in the methods of
social work. Training courses in social work are provided by universities,
polytechnics and colleges of further education; their length depends upon
previous educational qualifications and can extend from one to four years.
The Central Council for Education and Training in Social Work recog¬
nises social work courses and offers advice to people considering entry to
the profession.
Professional social workers (including those working in the National
Health Service) are employed by the social services departments of local
authorities. Others work in voluntary organisations or in the probation
service (see p 111).
SOCIAL SECURITY
National insurance, industrial injuries benefits, child benefit, family
income supplement, supplementary benefit and war pensions constitute a
comprehensive system of social security. The payment of many benefits
depends on prior payments to the national insurance scheme, while others
are available without contribution conditions. The former are paid from
the national insurance fund which consists of contributions from employed
people and their employers, self-employed people and the Government.
Non-contributory benefits are financed from general taxation revenue.
Appeals relating to claims for the various benefits are decided by indepen¬
dent tribunals.
The social security programme accounts for about 28 per cent of all
136
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
CONTRI¬
BUTIONS
BENEFITS
Retirement
Pension
public expenditure. It has grown in real terms by over £12,000 million
since 1970 and now costs the equivalent of about £1,500 a year for every
household. Part of the increase has been due to the rising numbers of the
elderly, and part to the growth in unemployment; much, however, has been
due to real improvement in the level of benefits, new benefits and increased
family support.
The Department of Health and Social Security administers the services
in Great Britain; in Northern Ireland they are administered by the
Department of Health and Social Services. Pensions and welfare services
for war pensioners and their dependants are the responsibility of the
Department of Health and Social Security throughout the United Kingdom.
Advice on social security is given to the Government by the Social Security
Advisory Committee.
The Government has changed a number of aspects of the social security
system both to make it more comprehensible and to reduce the rate of
growth of its cost to public funds. It takes steps to ensure that social security
payments go only to those for whom they are intended.
Entitlement to National Insurance benefits such as retirement pension,
sickness and invalidity benefit, unemployment benefit, widow’s benefit,
maternity allowance, death grant and child’s special allowance is dependent
upon the payment of contributions. Industrial injuries benefits are non¬
contributory, but are also payable from the National Insurance Fund.
There are four classes of contributions. Class 1 contributions, which are
related to earnings, are paid by employees and employers. The contribution
is lower if the employer operates a ‘contracted out’ occupational pension
scheme (see below). Self-employed people pay a flat rate Class 2 contri¬
bution and a Class 4 contribution which is assessed as a percentage of profits
or gains within certain limits; they are not eligible for unemployment and
industrial injuries benefit. Voluntary Class 3 contributions are payable by
people wanting to safeguard rights to some benefits.
Employees who continue working after pensionable age (60 for women
and 65 for men) do not pay contributions but the employer continues to be
liable. People earning less than the lower earnings limit are not liable for
contributions; neither are their employers. Self-employed people with
earnings below a set annual amount may apply for exemption and those
over pensionable age are excused payment of contributions.
For most benefits there are two contribution conditions. First, before
benefit can be paid at all, a certain number of contributions have to be paid;
second, the full rate of benefit cannot be paid unless contributions have
been paid or credited up to a specific level over a specified period. Benefits
are increased each November, the uprating being linked to increases in
retail prices. The main benefits (payable weekly) are summarised below.
The rates shown in Tables 5-8 are those effective from November 1982.
A state retirement pension is payable to women at the age of 60 and to men
at the age of 65. People still at work five years after the minimum pension
age are eligible to receive the pension even if they continue working. In
1978 the new state pension scheme came into operation and will mature
fully after 20 years of contributions; the retirement pension will consist of
the basic pension plus an additional (earnings-related) pension.
Rights to basic pension are safeguarded for mothers who are away from
SOCIAL WELFARE
137
Mothers and
Children
work looking after children or for people giving up work to care for severely
disabled relatives. Women contributors receive the same pension as men
with the same earnings.
Employers are free to ‘contract-out’ their employees from the state
scheme for additional pension and provide their own occupational pension
in its place, provided that the latter is at least as good as the state additional
pension. The State remains responsible for the basic pension.
A non-contributory retirement pension is payable to people over the age
of 80 who have not qualified for a contributory pension or who qualified for
one at a lower rate than the non-contributory pension.
A non-contributory maternity grant of £25 is payable for each living child
born and for a still-born child if the pregnancy lasts for at least 28 weeks.
Maternity allowance is payable normally from 11 weeks before the ex¬
pected week of confinement until the end of the sixth week following the
birth.
Non-contributory child benefit is the main social security benefit for
children. Tax free and normally paid to the mother, it is payable for
children up to the age of 16 and for those up to the age of 19 if they continue
in full-time education. A sum in addition to child benefit is payable to
certain people bringing up children alone, for the first or only child in the
family. A weekly contributory child’s special allowance is payable to a
mother on the death of a former husband if the marriage was dissolved or
annulled and he was contributing to the support of the children. A non¬
contributory guardian’s allowance for an orphaned child is payable to a
person who is entitled to child benefit for that child. In certain circum¬
stances it can be paid on the death of only one parent.
Table 5: Benefit Rates
Category Weekly rate
Retirement and widow’s pensions and
widowed mother’s allowance
Single person 32'85
Wife or other adult dependant 19-70
Child T95
Non-contributory retirement pension for people over 80
Higher rate 19-70
Lower rate ii -8o
Maternity allowance 25 00
Child benefit 5 85
One-parent benefit (for the first or only child) 3 65
Guardian’s allowance, child’s special allowance 7 95
Widow’s allowance (first 26 weeks of widowhood) 45'95
Sickness and unemployment benefit
For beneficiary under pension age
Single person 25 00
Wife or other adult dependant 15-45
Child 030
For beneficiary over pension age
Single person 3t'45
i38
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Widows
Table 5: Benefit Rates f continued)
l
Category
Weekly rate
Wife or other adult dependant
Child
Invalidity pension
Single person
Wife or other adult dependant
Child
Invalidity allowance payable with retirement or invalidity
pension
Higher rate
Middle rate
Lower rate
Injury benefit
Single person
Wife or other adult dependant
Child
Disablement benefit (100 per cent assessment)
Unemployability supplement
Single person
Wife or other adult dependant
Child
Special hardship allowance (maximum)
Constant attendance allowance
Normal maximum
Maximum in exceptionally severe cases
Exceptionally severe disablement allowance
Industrial death benefit
Widow’s pension (first 26 weeks of widowhood)
Widow’s pension (higher rate)
Widow’s pension (lower rate)
Addition for each child
Attendance allowance
Higher rate
Lower rate
Non-contributory invalidity pension, invalid care allowance
Wife or other adult dependant
Child
Mobility allowance
18-85
7'95
31-45
18-85
7-95
6-90
4-40
2-20
27-75
15-45
0-30
53-60
31-45
18- 85
7’95
21-44
21-50
43-00
21-50
45 95
33 40
9-86
7'95
26-25
17- 50
19- 70
n-8o
795
18- 30
A widow’s allowance is payable for the first 26 weeks of widowhood with an
additional sum for each child. After this a widowed mother receives a
widowed mother’s allowance with an addition for each child. Widow’s
pension is payable to a widow who is 40 years or over when her husband dies
or when her entitlement to widowed mother’s allowance ends. Payment
continues until the widow remarries or begins drawing retirement pension.
There are also benefits for widows under the industrial injuries scheme.
A man whose wife dies when both are over pension age inherits his wife’s
pension rights just as a widow inherits her husband’s rights.
SOCIAL WELFARE
139
Sick and
Disabled
People
Other Benefits
Unemployment
Benefit
There is a large variety of benefits for people unable to work because of
sickness or disablement. Contributory sickness benefit is payable for up to
28 weeks. There are additions for a wife or other adult dependant and for
each child for whom child benefit is payable.
An invalidity pension plus allowances for a wife and children is payable
when sickness benefit ends if the beneficiary is still incapable of work.
Invalidity allowance is paid with the pension to those people who become
sick more than five years before retirement age.
Various benefits are payable for injury or disablement caused by an
accident at work or a prescribed disease. Injury benefit is paid when a
person is incapable of work and payment can continue for a maximum of 26
weeks beginning on the date of the accident or development of the disease.
When injury benefit ends disablement benefit may be paid if, as a result of
an industrial accident or a prescribed disease, there is a loss of physical or
mental faculty. From April 1983 injury benefit is to be abolished and
replaced by disablement benefit which will be payable after a qualifying
period of 15 weeks. The amount depends on the extent of the disablement
as assessed by a medical board but for disablement of less than 20 per cent a
gratuity is normally paid. In certain circumstances disablement benefits
may be supplemented by unemployability supplement; constant atten¬
dance allowance; and an additional allowance payable in certain cases of
exceptionally severe disablement; a special hardship allowance for a person
who is unfit to return to his or her regular job or to do work of an equivalent
standard; and hospital treatment allowance which raises the disablement
pension or gratuity to the 100 per cent assessment rate during hospital
treatment for the industrial injury. Increases of disablement benefit for
dependants may be payable with unemployability supplement. There are
benefits for widows and their children (see p 138).
A non-contributory, tax-free attendance allowance may be payable to
severely disabled people at either a higher or a lower rate depending upon
the amount of care and attention they require. A non-contributory in¬
validity pension is payable to people of working age unable to work and not
qualifying for the national insurance invalidity pension; it is also payable to
disabled housewives incapable of work and unable to perform their normal
household tasks.
A weekly invalid care allowance may be payable to certain categories of
people (aged between 16 and pension age) who cannot go out to work
because they are caring for a severely disabled person receiving an atten¬
dance allowance.
Physically disabled people unable or virtually unable to walk may be
entitled to a tax-free mobility allowance to help to pay their transport costs.
People aged between 5 and 65 are eligible for it.
An independent organisation called Motability assists those disabled
drivers and disabled passengers wanting to use their mobility allowance to
obtain a vehicle.
Unemployment benefit at the same rate as sickness benefit is payable for up
to a year in any one spell of unemployment. Periods covered by unemploy¬
ment or sickness benefit, maternity allowance or some training allowances,
which are eight weeks or less apart, are linked to form one period of
interruption of employment. Generally anyone claiming unemployment
benefit has to be available for employment.
140
Death Grant
SUPPLEMEN¬
TARY
BENEFIT
FAMILY
INCOME
SUPPLEMENT
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
A death grant is payable on the death of a contributor or a contributor’s near
relative. It is normally £30 for an adult and a smaller sum for a child.
Supplementary benefit is payable to people of the age of 16 and over who are
not in full-time work or at school and whose financial resources fall below a
certain level. The amounts shown in the table are the weekly levels laid
down for the requirements of married couples, single householders and
others. The benefit payable amounts to the difference between a person’s
existing resources and these levels. The long-term rates apply to retirement
pensioners and to those people below pensionable age who have received
supplementary benefit continuously for one year, provided that the award
is not subject to the condition of being available for employment. Families
receiving supplementary benefit (as with family income supplement) are
automatically entitled to a number of other benefits including free school
meals, milk and vitamins for expectant mothers and for children under
school age, and exemption from National Health Service prescription
charges and charges for dental treatment and glasses.
Table 6: Supplementary Benefit
£
Category
Weekly rate
Ordinary rate
Husband and wife
Person living alone
Any other person aged
18 and over
16-17
11-15
Under 11 years
Long-term rate
Husband and wife
Person living alone
Any other person aged
18 and over
16-17 years
41-70
25-70
20-55
15-80
1315
8-75
52-30
32-70
2615
20-05
As part of its supplementary benefit responsibilities the Department of
Health and Social Security runs resettlement units in which people without
a settled way of living are provided with temporary board and lodging to
help them to lead a more settled life. The Department also makes grants
to voluntary organisations providing similar services. In addition, the
Department runs re-establishment centres where men who have been
unemployed for long periods and are receiving supplementary benefit are
given help to fit them again for work.
Family income supplement is a cash benefit for families with small incomes
where the head of the family is in full-time work and where there is at least
one dependent child. It is payable when the gross weekly income of a family
falls below a prescribed amount, which varies according to the number of
children in the family but is the same for single- and two-parent families.
SOCIAL WELFARE
141
‘Full-time’ work means, for the purpose of the benefit, work of at least 30
hours a week by the man in two-parent families or 24 hours a week for one-
parent families. The weekly rate of the supplement is half the difference
between the family’s income and the prescribed amount, up to a maximum
figure depending on the number of children in the family.
WAR
PENSIONS
AND
RELATED
SERVICES
Table 7: Family Income Supplement
£
Weekly level
Prescribed amount for family with one child (income below
which supplement is payable) 82 50
Increase in prescribed amount for each additional child 9 00
Maximum weekly amount for a one-child family 21 00
Increase in maximum amount for each additional child 2 00
The war pensions scheme is administered throughout the United Kingdom
by the Department of Health and Social Security. Pensions are payable to
people disabled as a result of service in the armed forces or from certain
injuries received in the merchant navy or civil defence during war-time, or
to civilians injured by enemy action. The amount varies according to the
degree of disablement and rank; an allowance is paid for dependants.
Table 8: War Pensions
£
Category
Weekly rate
Disablement pensions
For a private at 100 per cent rate 53'60
Unemployability allowances
Personal allowance 34'85
Wife or other adult dependant 19-70
Addition for each child 7-95
Comforts allowance 4 65 or 9 30
Allowance for lower standard of occupation (maximum ) 21-44
Constant attendance allowance I0'75 to 43-oo
Age allowance depending on degree of disability 3-70 to 11-70
Exceptionally severe disablement allowance 21-50
Severe disablement occupational allowance 10-75
Clothing allowance (peryear) 46-00 or 72 00
Death benefits
Widow’s pension (private’s widow)
Childless widow under 40
Rent allowance (maximum)
Age allowance for elderly widows
Ages 65-69
Aged 70 and over
Adult orphans
42-70
9-86
16-25
415
8-30
32-85
TAXATION
OTHER
WELFARE
BENEFITS
EUROPEAN
COMMUNITY
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
There is a wide range of supplementary allowances, the main ones being
for unemployability, the need for constant attendance, the provision of
extra comforts, and as a compensation for a lower standard of occupation.
An age allowance is payable to disabled pensioners who are aged 65 or over
and whose assessment is 40 per cent or more. Pensions are also paid to war
widows and war orphans.
The Department of Health and Social Security maintains a welfare
service for war pensioners, war widows and war orphans. It works closely
with many voluntary and ex-Service organisations who give financial
aid and personal help to disabled ex-Service men and women and their
families.
Social security benefits, other than child, maternity, sickness, invalidity
and disablement benefit, are included in the taxable income on which
income tax is assessed. On the other hand various income tax reliefs and
exemptions are allowed on account of age or liability for the support of
dependants. Supplementary benefit (with the exception of that paid to the
unemployed), family income supplement, attendance allowances, mobility
allowance and war disability pensions including supplementary allowances,
war widows’ pensions and allowances are not taxable.
Other benefits for which people with low incomes may be eligible include
legal aid and assistance (see p 122), housing benefits (comprising rent and
rate rebates or allowances—see pp 66 and 166), exemption from health
service charges (see p 125) and free school meals (see p 151).
As part of the Community’s efforts to promote the free movement of labour,
there are regulations providing for equality of treatment and the protection
of social security rights for employed and self-employed people working in
another member state. The regulations also cover retirement pensioners
and other beneficiaries who have been employed, or self-employed, as well
as dependants. Benefits affected include child benefit and those for sickness
and maternity, unemployment, retirement, invalidity, accidents at work
and occupational diseases.
VOLUNTARY SERVICES
There is a long tradition of voluntary service to the community and the
partnership between the voluntary and statutory agencies is encouraged. It
has been estimated that about 5 million people take part in some voluntary
work during the course of a year. Central and local government make grants
to voluntary agencies, and public authorities plan and carry out their duties
taking account of the work of voluntary organisations. Many services are
provided by both local authorities and voluntary agencies, for example,
residential care for elderly, disabled, mentally ill and mentally handicapped
people and for children. Voluntary provision and community self-help,
however, enable local authorities to continue the trend towards community
rather than institutional care for elderly, mentally ill and mentally handi¬
capped people. The Government is maintaining the real value of its grants
to voluntary organisations amounting to around £125 million a year. Tax
changes in the financial years 1980-81 and 1981-82 were designed to help
the voluntary movement to secure a larger flow of funds.
SOCIAL WELFARE
143
Voluntary
Organisations
Co-ordination of government interests in voluntary social service
throughout Britain is the responsibility of the Home Office Voluntary
Services Unit.
Many voluntary organisations are registered charities, and in England
and Wales the Charity Commission, a government agency, gives free advice
to trustees of charities, making schemes to modify their purposes or
facilitate their administration when necessary.
There are thousands of voluntary organisations ranging from national
bodies to small individual local groups; ‘self-help’ groups have been the
most rapidly expanding part of the voluntary sector in the last decade—
examples include play-groups, clubs which encourage their members to
give up smoking or lose weight, and organisations run by members of the
ethnic minorities. Many belong to larger associations or are represented on
local or national co-ordinating councils or committees. Some are chiefly
concerned with giving personal service, others in the formation of public
opinion and exchange of information. Some carry out both functions. They
may be staffed by both professional and voluntary workers.
The main voluntary body in England which aims to provide central links
between voluntary organisations and official bodies is the National Council
for Voluntary Organisations, which acts as a resource and development
agency for the voluntary sector. It works to extend the involvement of
voluntary organisations in dealing with social issues, to protect the interests
and independence of voluntary agencies, and to provide them with a range
of advice, information and other services. There are also the Scottish
Council of Social Service, the Council of Social Service for Wales and
the Northern Ireland Council of Social Service, which perform similar
functions.
Specialist voluntary organisations concerned with personal and family
problems include the family casework agencies like the Family Welfare
Association, Family Service Units, and the National Society for the Pre¬
vention of Cruelty to Children; marriage guidance centres affiliated to the
National Marriage Guidance Council; the National Council of Voluntary
Child Care Organisations; the National Council for One Parent Families;
Child Poverty Action Group and the Claimants’ Union, both of which
provide expert advice on social security benefits; and the Samaritans, who
help the lonely, the depressed and the suicidal.
Community service of many kinds is given by young people; this is often
channelled through national and local organisations such as Community
Service Volunteers, Task Force, Scouts and Girl Guides.
Voluntary service to the sick and disabled is given by—among others—
the British Red Cross Society, St John Ambulance, the Women’s Royal
Voluntary Service and the Leagues of Hospital Friends. Societies which
help people with particular disabilities and difficulties include the Royal
National Institute for the Blind, the Royal National Institute for the Deaf,
the Royal Association for Disability and Rehabilitation, The Disabled
Living Foundation, The Disablement Income Group, MIND (National
Association for Mental Health), MENCAP (National Society for Mentally
Handicapped Children), the Spastics Society, Alcoholics Anonymous, Age
Concern, Help the Aged and their equivalents in Scotland and Northern
Ireland.
National organisations whose work is specifically religious in inspiration
include the Salvation Army, the Church Army, Toe H, the Committee on
144
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Social Service of the Church of Scotland, the Church of England Children’s
Society, the Church of England Council for Social Aid, the Young Men’s
Christian Association, the Young Women’s Christian Association, the
Catholic Marriage Advisory Council and the Jewish Welfare Board.
A wide range of voluntary personal service is given by the Women’s
Royal Voluntary Service, which brings ‘meals on wheels’ to housebound
invalids and old people, provides flatlets and residential clubs for the
elderly, helps with family problems and assists in hospitals and clinics, and
work in emergencies.
Over 900 Citizens Advice Bureaux give explanation and advice to people
who are in doubt about their rights or who do not know about the state or
voluntary services available. There are law centres (see p 122) and housing
advisory centres in some areas.
7 Education
British education aims to develop fully the abilities of individuals, both
young and old, for their own benefit and that of society as a whole. The aim
has assumed a new importance in an age of rapid technological change.
Compulsory schooling for children takes place between the ages of 5 and
16, although some provision is made for those under 5, and many pupils
remain at school beyond the minimum leaving age. Post-school education
(mainly at universities, polytechnics and colleges of further and higher
education) is organised flexibly to provide a wide range of opportunities for
academic and vocational education and continuing study throughout life.
For many years British education has been characterised by change, and
much of the post-1945 period has also been marked by growth: large
increases in the number of pupils, the expansion of higher educational
opportunities, and increased expenditure. Although the process of change
continues, recent years have seen increasing reassessment and consoli¬
dation as well as a number of other significant developments, including the
beginning of a substantial drop in the number of school children following a
fall in the birth rate, and the need, because of economic circumstances, to
reduce public expenditure. The number of primary school children has
already fallen sharply, and the decline in numbers has begun to affect
secondary schools, although this is partly offset by the greater numbers
staying on at school because of the present high level of unemployment. It
has led to a reduced demand for new teachers (although there is still a need
for more teachers of certain specialised subjects) and teacher training has
been reorganised to cope with the new situation while retaining flexibility
for future expansion.
Policies The Government’s education policies are designed to increase parental
choice and involvement in school organisation, to allow local authorities to
organise publicly maintained schools according to local needs and to take
up places for pupils at independent schools where appropriate, and to assist
children from less well-off homes to benefit from attendance at certain non-
maintained schools. The Government has issued guidance on the school
curriculum in England and Wales, and consultations are taking place on the
replacement of the dual system of examinations taken at about the age of 16
by a single system. A further plan under consideration is to provide pupils
with a written record of school achievement and performance, which would
be of particular benefit to those who leave school without formal qualifi¬
cations. Other policies include the provision of better vocational education
and training in schools and colleges for the 16—19 age group and the
introduction, probably in 1985, of a new qualification for pupils aged
17 and over, mainly intended for those wanting to take jobs directly
after leaving school or college. Consideration is also being given to the
development of an intermediate level examination to broaden the scope of
schools’ sixth-form curricula. It is recognised that co-operation between
education and industry can help the young to acquire the skills necessary
to enable Britain to maintain its position as a leading exporter of manu¬
factured goods. Many organisations already work to improve contacts
between educational institutions and industry, and further links are being
146
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Administration
SCHOOLS
encouraged, especially locally. A four-year Micro-Electronics Education
Programme in England, Wales and Northern Ireland and a separate pro¬
gramme in Scotland aim to give young people a better understanding of the
potential applications of micro-electronic technology through the com¬
missioning of new development projects and by building on existing work.
More than four-fifths of education expenditure is incurred by local
authorities, to which grants are made by central government, with the
authorities planning their spending according to local needs and circum¬
stances. Support for the universities and certain other higher education
institutions, and grants to students, account for most of the direct ex¬
penditure by central government. Spending on education (some £13,700
million in 1981, about 7 per cent of the gross domestic product) amounts to
more than 12 per cent of all public expenditure, but planned reductions in
the years to 1983-84 have taken into account the declining number of
school children and considerable savings in the provision of school meals
and milk. In spite of cuts in expenditure, it is the Government’s policy to
maintain and improve the quality of education.
The Secretary of State for Education and Science is responsible for all
aspects of education in England, and for the Government’s relations with
and support for universities throughout Great Britain. (He is also respon¬
sible for basic civil science, p 354.) The Secretaries of State for Wales,
Scotland and Northern Ireland have full responsibility in their respective
countries for non-university education; they are consulted about (but do
not carry formal responsibility for) education in universities and civil
science.
Administration of publicly provided schools and further education is
decentralised. Responsibilities are divided between the central govern¬
ment departments (the Department of Education and Science, the Welsh
Office, the Scottish Education Department, and the Department of Edu¬
cation for Northern Ireland), local education authorities (education and
library boards in Northern Ireland), and various voluntary organisations.
The provision of maintained school education and most post-school
education outside the universities is the responsibility of local education
authorities which decide local policy. They employ teachers and other staff,
provide and maintain buildings, supply equipment and materials and, in
England and Wales, provide grants to students proceeding to further and
higher education. In Scotland the central institutions which provide most
vocational further education to degree level, and colleges of education
which provide teacher training, are administered by independent govern¬
ing bodies. Apart from three central institutions financed by the Depart¬
ment of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland, these institutions and the
colleges of education are financed directly by the Scottish Education
Department which also pays grants to students on advanced courses. In
Northern Ireland the Ulster Polytechnic (an institution of higher educa¬
tion) is likewise administered by an independent board of governors and
financed directly by the Department of Education for Northern Ireland.
Colleges of education are controlled by the Department or voluntary
agencies.
Parents are required by law to see that their children receive efficient full¬
time education, at school or elsewhere, between the ages of 5 and 16.
Just under 11 million children attend Britain’s 38,000 schools. Most
receive free education financed from public funds, but a small proportion
Management
Nursery and
Primary
Schools
EDUCATION 147
(very roughly 6 per cent) attend schools wholly independent of public
financial support.
Boys and girls are taught together in most primary schools and in an
increasing number of secondary schools. Some 85 per cent of pupils in
maintained secondary schools in England and Wales and nearly 62 per cent
in Northern Ireland attend mixed schools. In Scotland nearly all secondary
schools are mixed. Most independent schools for younger children are co¬
educational; the majority providing secondary education are single-sex,
although the number of mixed schools is growing.
No fees are charged to parents of children at maintained schools, and
books and equipment are free, although in Northern Ireland a small
proportion of grammar school pupils is admitted on a fee-paying basis.
Schools supported from public funds are of two main kinds in England and
Wales: county schools and voluntary schools. County schools are provided
and maintained by local education authorities wholly out of public funds.
Voluntary schools, mostly established by religious denominations, are also
wholly maintained from public funds but the governors of some types of
voluntary school contribute to capital costs. Nearly a third of the 30,000 or
so schools supported by public funds in England and Wales are voluntary
schools, most of them Church of England or Roman Catholic. Each
publicly maintained school has a governing body, which includes govern¬
ors appointed by the local education authority. The Education Act 1980
provides for the wider representation of parents and teachers on school
governing bodies; it is intended that all schools should have at least two
parent and two teacher governors normally elected by parents and teachers.
In Scotland most of the schools supported from public funds are provided
by education authorities and are known as public schools (in England this
term is used for a type of independent school, see p 148).
In Northern Ireland there are two main categories of school: voluntary
schools which are mainly under Roman Catholic management receiving
grants towards the capital running costs; and controlled schools owned and
managed by the area education and library boards and having all their
expenditure met from public funds. It is government policy to encourage
integration between Protestant and Roman Catholic schools where there is
a local desire for it.
Successive governments have expanded nursery education within the
constraints of limited resources, and current plans allow for some further
expansion, mainly by converting surplus primary school accommodation
to nursery use. In England over half of four-year-olds and about a fifth of
three-year-olds are receiving education in nursery schools or classes or in
infants’ classes in primary schools. In addition many children attend
informal pre-school playgroups organised by parents and voluntary
bodies.
Compulsory education begins at five when children in England and
Wales go to infant schools or departments; at seven they go on to junior
schools or departments. The usual age of transfer from primary to
secondary schools is 11 in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, but a
number of local authorities in England have established ‘first’ schools for
pupils aged 5 to 8 or 10 and ‘middle’ schools covering various age ranges
between 9 and 14. In Scotland the primary schools take children from 5 to
12, normally having infant classes for children under 7, although in a few
areas there are separate infant schools.
148
Secondary
Schools
Independent
Schools
Special
Educational
Needs
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The publicly maintained system of education aims to give all children an
education suited to their particular abilities. Over 82 per cent of the
maintained secondary school population in England and Wales attend
comprehensive schools which take pupils without reference to ability or
aptitude and provide a wide range of secondary education for all or most of
the children of a district. They can be organised in a number of ways
including schools that take the full secondary school age-range from 11 to
18; middle schools whose pupils move on to senior comprehensive schools
at 12, 13 or 14, leaving at 16 or 18; and schools with an age-range of 11
or 12 to 16 combined with a sixth-form or ‘tertiary’ college for pupils over
16. Most other children receive secondary education in ‘grammar’ and
secondary modern’ schools to which they are allocated after selection
procedures at the age of 11.
In England, Wales and Scotland parents have a statutory right to express
a preference for a particular school for their children, and have an effective
channel of appeal at local level. Schools also have to publish their public
examination results and basic information about themselves. An assisted-
places scheme enables children from less well-off homes who are capable of
benefiting from the education provided to attend certain independent
secondary schools belonging to the scheme, by means of government grant
depending on parents’ income.
Scottish secondary education is almost completely comprehensive;
almost all pupils are in schools with a non-selective intake. The majority of
schools are six-year comprehensives. Because of local circumstances there
are some comprehensive schools at which courses may extend to four years
or less; pupils may transfer at the end of their second or fourth years to a
six-year comprehensive.
Northern Ireland secondary education is organised largely along selec¬
tive lines according to children’s abilities.
Independent schools are outside the publicly supported sector but are
open to inspection and must register with the appropriate government
education department which can require them to remedy features in their
premises, accommodation or instruction and to exclude anyone regarded as
unsuitable to teach in or to be the proprietor of a school.
There are about 2,500 registered independent schools catering for pupils
of all ages. The largest and most important are the public schools,1 which
accept pupils at about 12 or 13 years of age usually on the basis of a fairly
demanding examination. There are about 500 public schools in England
and Wales, most of them single-sex (about half of them for girls) and at least
partly boarding. Local education authorities in England and Wales may
assist with the payment of fees for children at independent and other non-
maintained schools, and there is also the Government’s assisted-places
scheme (see above). A number of preparatory schools prepare children for
entry to the public schools.
The special education system is based on the concept of meeting the special
educational needs of the individual child. ‘Special educational needs’
embrace learning difficulties arising from emotional or behavioural dis¬
orders as well as physical or mental handicap. Local education authorities
1 ‘Public schools’ are usually taken to mean those schools in membership of the Headmasters’ Conference,
the Governing Bodies Association or the Governing Bodies of Girls’ Schools Association. They should not
be confused with the state-supported public schools in Scotland.
EDUCATION
149
Teachers
The
Curriculum
Religious
Education in
Schools
must ensure that children with special needs are educated in ordinary
schools provided that the parents’ wishes have been taken into account and
that this is compatible with meeting their needs, with the provision of
efficient education for the other children in the school, and with the best use
of resources.
There are some 1,600 special schools (both day and boarding), including
those run by voluntary organisations, which cater for a wide variety of
handicap.
Teachers in publicly maintained schools are appointed by local education
authorities or school governing bodies. There are more than 500,000
teachers (including the full-time equivalent of part-time teachers) in
publicly maintained and assisted schools in Britain and the pupil/teacher
ratio in primary and secondary schools is about 19 to 1. Teachers must hold
qualifications approved by the appropriate education department.
In England and Wales the secular curriculum in maintained schools is the
responsibility of the local education authority, and of the schools’ govern¬
ors. In practice, responsibility is largely devolved upon head teachers and
their staff. The Government has published guidance recommending a
wider programme of work for primary and secondary school pupils, to
ensure a balanced education and to widen educational opportunities as
much as possible. It states that secondary school pupils up to the age of 16
should follow a broad curriculum including English, mathematics and
science, religious and physical education, some study of the humanities and
opportunities for both practical and aesthetic activities. Most pupils should
also study a modern language. In Wales, the Welsh language is taught and is
used as either the main or secondary medium of teaching in some schools.
Her Majesty’s Inspectors review and report on the content and value of the
education provided in all schools, including independent schools, and
advise local education authorities, schools and the Government. Local
education authorities also employ inspectors or advisers to guide them on
maintained schools. Curriculum materials and guidance and encourage¬
ment for school-based research and development are available to teachers
through the independent Schools Council for Curriculum and Examin¬
ations (there are plans to replace the Council with two separate bodies to
deal respectively with the curriculum and examinations). The Schools
Council Committee for Wales carries out similar functions. At some 500
teachers’ centres in England and Wales teachers meet for curriculum
development work, discussion and in-service training.
In Scotland the function of Her Majesty’s Inspectors is in general the
same as in England and Wales; the content and balance of the curriculum is
kept under continuous review by the Consultative Committee on the
Curriculum. Provision is made, where appropriate, for the teaching of
Gaelic. Northern Ireland has a Council for Educational Development
which is responsible for developing the curriculum; the Inspectorate of the
Department of Education helps and advises teachers and inspects and
evaluates the work of all schools.
In England and Wales by law all children in county or voluntary schools
receive religious instruction and take part in a daily corporate act of wor¬
ship unless their parents choose otherwise. In county schools, and some¬
times in voluntary schools, non-denominational religious instruction is
given which may include the study of comparative religions. In all kinds of
150
Educational
Standards
Educational
Aids
Secondary
School
Examinations
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
voluntary schools there is opportunity for denominational instruction. In
Scotland religious instruction must be given, but the content is determined
by education authorities and the schools in accordance with the wishes of
the local community. Certain schools provide for Roman Catholic children
but in all schools there are safeguards for the individual conscience. In
controlled schools in Northern Ireland clergy have a right of access which
may be used for denominational instruction; in voluntary schools corpor¬
ate worship and religious education are controlled by the management
authorities.
There is general concern that there should be an effective means of assess¬
ing the standards of pupils’ performance. The Assessment of Performance
Unit of the Department of Education and Science promotes the develop¬
ment of methods of assessment and monitors the achievement of school
children. Annual monitoring is now being undertaken in language and
mathematics at the ages of 11 and 155 and in science at the ages of 11,13 and
15. Monitoring of the first foreign language is expected to begin in 1983.
New assessment techniques are also being developed in Scotland.
In most schools teachers and pupils use a range of aids to assist the
processes of teaching and learning, and educational broadcasting is of
major importance. Almost all schools can receive radio and television
programmes. In addition the British Broadcasting Corporation produces
radiovision programmes which, in effect, are low cost tape/slide units.
Teachers’ notes and pupils’ pamphlets accompany many broadcast series.
Each year more than 600 hours of school radio and 1,000 hours of school
television are transmitted by the BBC and the independent broadcasting
companies.
Computers are increasingly available and children are becoming familiar
with their use and applications. Teachers use them in their own work,
including the planning of timetables and the management of courses. It is
the Government’s aim that every secondary school should have its own
micro-computer by the end of 1982, and every primary school by the end of
1984.
The principal examinations taken by secondary school pupils in England
and Wales at the age of 16 and over are those leading to the General
Certificate of Education (GCE) at Ordinary (‘O’) level and to the Certificate
of Secondary Education (CSE). Both are normally taken after five years of
secondary education. The GCE Advanced (‘A’) level is normally taken
after a further two years’ study. Entries for GCE examinations are also
accepted from private candidates and those attending further education
establishments.
The highest grade in the CSE is widely accepted as being of the same
standard as at least grade C at GCE ‘O’ level, and these are the qualifying
grades for entry to further education and training. The ‘A’ level examin¬
ation is the standard for entrance to university and other higher education,
and to many forms of professional training. The Government has proposed
that the present system should be reformed by replacing the ‘O’ level and
CSE with a single system of examining at the age of 16 and over. The ‘A’
level examinations will remain.
In Scotland school pupils in the fourth year of secondary courses sit an
examination at 16 years for the Ordinary grade of the Scottish Certificate of
Education, and pupils in the fifth or sixth year for the Higher grade. Passes
EDUCATION
Health and
Welfare of
School
Children
School
Building
POST-SCHOOL
EDUCATION
Institutions
151
at the Higher grade are the basis for entry to university or professional
training. For those who have completed their main studies at the Higher
grade but wish to continue their studies in particular subjects there is a
Certificate of Sixth Year Studies.
In Northern Ireland candidates may take the Northern Ireland General
Certificate of Education or the Northern Ireland Certificate of Secondary
Education, which are equivalent to those examinations in England and
Wales.
The International Baccalaureate, offered to sixth formers by several
educational institutions in Britain, leads either to a diploma or to separate
subject certificates, the diploma being recognised for admission to higher
education in Britain and many other countries.
Physical education, including organised games, is part of the curriculum of
all maintained schools, and playing fields must be available for pupils over
the age of eight. Most secondary schools have a gymnasium.
The government health departments are responsible for the medical
inspection of school children and for advice on and treatment of specific
medical and dental problems associated with children of school age.
Local education authorities have discretion to decide what milk, meals or
other refreshment to provide at their schools, and what charges to make.
Provision has to be made free of charge, however, for pupils from families
receiving certain social security benefits. Under certain conditions the
authorities must provide free school transport, and they have discretionary
powers to assist financially in the provision of transport for pupils between
their home and school.
Local education authorities are responsible for the provision of school
buildings, under the general supervision of the central departments. Since
1945 an extensive school building programme has been carried out, to¬
gether with extensions, alterations and remodelling of existing schools.
Post-school education for young people above school-leaving age is pro¬
vided at all levels and may be part-time or full-time, vocational or non-
vocational.
More than a third of young people receive some form of post-school
education, compared with a fifth in 1965. The Government is making
additional provision to meet the cost of a large expansion in the number of
young people expected to stay on in full-time education. Further education
is usually taken to refer to all post-school education outside the universities.
Higher education (postgraduate, first degree and similar level work) is
provided at universities and on advanced courses at polytechnics and other
establishments of higher and further education.
The principal institutions of post-school education are the 46 universities
(see p 153); the 30 polytechnics in England and Wales and the 14 Scottish
central institutions; the Ulster Polytechnic in Northern Ireland; and some
760 other colleges which are maintained or assisted from public funds.
In addition, there are many independent specialist establishments, such
as secretarial and correspondence colleges and colleges teaching English as
a foreign language; a number of voluntary and private bodies providing
cultural and general education, sometimes with assistance from local edu¬
cation authorities; and a large number of other education and training
schemes run by public or private organisations.
152
Finance
Students
Higher
Education
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Most establishments for post-school education are either maintained or
assisted from public funds. Some undertake training, research or consul¬
tancy for commercial firms, making charges which broadly reflect the
economic cost of provision, and a number have endowments or receive
grants or gifts from foundations and benefactors.
Although the Government is responsible for financing well over 80 per
cent of universities’ expenditure, the universities are guaranteed as auton¬
omous institutions by a special financial arrangement. A block grant is paid
to the University Grants Committee which allocates funds to the universi¬
ties, the London Graduate School of Business Studies and the Manchester
Business School. The Department of Education and Science finances
directly the Open University (see p 153), the Royal College of Art and the
Cranfield Institute of Technology. The independent University College at
Buckingham receives no assistance from public funds although its students
can apply for mandatory grants (see below). The Northern Ireland Depart¬
ment of Education makes grants direct to the universities on recommenda¬
tions from the University Grants Committee.
Funds are provided by the Government to local authorities for advanced
courses in polytechnics and other colleges of further education. A National
Advisory Body for Local Authority Higher Education has been set up to
make recommendations on the allocation of resources in England in future
years.
Some 885,000 students take full-time and sandwich courses (courses where
substantial periods of full-time study alternate with periods of supervised
experience on a relevant job) at universities and major establishments of
further education in Britain (1980-81 figures). Of these about 307,000 are
at universities while another 228,000 follow advanced courses outside
universities, at colleges of further and higher education, polytechnics
and Scottish central institutions. More than 350,000 take non-advanced
courses, most of them studying for recognised vocational or educational
qualifications.
In addition, there are about 31 million part-time students, over 630,200
of whom are released by their employers for further education during
working hours. Many of the remainder take part in adult education classes
(seep 155).
Many full-time students are helped by grants from public funds which
are mandatory for most students taking first degree and other comparable
courses who qualify under national rules. (Grants for other courses may be
given at the discretion of a local education authority.) Grants cover tuition
fees and maintenance, but where parents can afford to contribute this is
taken into account. They are awarded by local education authorities in
England and Wales up to first degree level; in Scotland they are made by the
Scottish Education Department; and in Northern Ireland by education
and library boards. For postgraduate study and research grants are offered
by the education departments and the research councils. In all, over 90 per
cent of students on full-time and sandwich advanced courses receive help
from public funds. Some scholarships are available from endowments and
from particular industries or companies.
Following rapid expansion higher education is moving into a period of
consolidation. In order to reduce public expenditure on this form of
education while maintaining high standards with the resources available,
EDUCATION
153
Universities
The Open
University
some restructuring of courses and departments has been necessary. Some
7 5 per cent of 18-year-olds enter courses of higher education. About
442,500 full-time and sandwich course students and over 314,200 part-
time students follow courses at a variety of institutions.
There are 46 universities in Britain, including the Open University, com¬
pared with 17 in 1945.
The English universities are: Aston (Birmingham), Bath, Birmingham,
Bradford, Bristol, Brunei (London), Cambridge, City (London), Durham,
East Anglia, Essex, Exeter, Hull, Keele, Kent at Canterbury, Lancaster,
Leeds, Leicester, Liverpool, London, Loughborough, Manchester,
Manchester Institute of Science and Technology, Newcastle upon Tyne,
Nottingham, Oxford, Reading, Salford, Sheffield, Southampton, Surrey,
Sussex, Warwick, and York. The London Graduate School of Business
Studies and the Manchester Business School also have university status.
The federated University of Wales comprises seven constituent insti¬
tutions. The Scottish universities are: Aberdeen, Dundee, Edinburgh,
Glasgow, Heriot-Watt (Edinburgh), St Andrews, Stirling, and Strath¬
clyde (Glasgow). In Northern Ireland there are the Queen’s University of
Belfast and the New University of Ulster in Coleraine.
The universities of Oxford and Cambridge date from the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries, and the Scottish universities of St Andrews,
Glasgow, Aberdeen and Edinburgh from the fifteenth and sixteenth
centuries. All the other universities were founded in the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries.
Admission to universities is by examination or by selection. Of the
307,000 full-time university students in 1980-81, over 48,000 were post¬
graduate. About a half lived in colleges and halls of residence.
There were about 34,000 full-time university teachers paid wholly from
university funds. The ratio of staff to students was about one to seven, one
of the most favourable in the world.
Except at the Open University, first degree courses are mainly full-time
and usually last three or four years, though medical and veterinary courses
usually require five or six.
Degree titles vary according to the practice of each university; in
England, Wales and Northern Ireland the most common titles for a first
degree are Bachelor of Arts (BA) or Bachelor of Science (BSc) and for a
second degree Master of Arts (MA), Master of Science (MSc), and Doctor
of Philosophy (PhD); in Scotland Master is used for a first degree in arts
subjects. On the other hand, uniformity of standards between universities
is promoted by the practice of employing outside examiners for all uni¬
versity examinations, and the general pattern of teaching is fairly similar
throughout Britain.
The independent University College at Buckingham, which opened in
1976, does not yet award degrees, but its Licence has been accepted as the
equivalent of a degree by relevant professional bodies and by other
universities for admission to postgraduate studies.
The Open University is a non-residential university which provides part-
time degree and other courses, using a combination of television and radio
broadcasts, correspondence texts and summer schools, together with a net¬
work of viewing and listening centres. No formal academic qualifications
are required to register for these courses, but the standards of its degrees are
154
Teacher Training
Other Advanced
Courses
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the same as those of other universities. The university’s first degree, the BA
(Open), is a general degree awarded on a system of credits for each course
completed. The first courses began in 1971, and in 1982 some 60,000
undergraduate and over 30,000 associate students were following courses.
The university has advised many other countries on the setting-up of
similar institutions.
In England and Wales all new entrants to teaching must generally have
taken a recognised course of teacher training. Courses are offered by most
universities and by many polytechnics and other institutions of higher
education. Non-graduates usually qualify by way of a three- or four-year
course leading to the Bachelor of Education degree; graduates take a one-
year postgraduate Certificate of Education.
In response to the change in demand for newly trained teachers, caused
by restrictions on public expenditure and the decline in the size of the
school population, the number of training places has been considerably cut.
However, because of a shortage of qualified teachers of mathematics,
science, craft, design and technology, special financial arrangements are
being offered to encourage suitably qualified mature people to undertake
one-year training courses to enter the profession. Teachers qualified in
other subjects are also encouraged to retrain to teach one or more of these
subjects.
In Scotland all teachers in education authority schools must be registered
with the General Teaching Council for Scotland and all teachers of
academic subjects in secondary schools must be graduates. College of
education courses lead to the award of a Teaching Qualification (Primary
Education or Secondary Education). Graduates and holders of specialist
diplomas take a one-year course; courses in practical and aesthetic subjects
for non-graduates extend to two, three or four years. Most Scottish colleges
of education also offer four-year courses leading to the degree of Bachelor of
Education. In Northern Ireland teacher training takes place in the two
university education departments, three colleges of education, the Ulster
Polytechnic and one technical college. The principal courses are the
certificate (for three years) and the Bachelor of Education (four years) but
there are also one-year courses for graduates or holders of other appropriate
qualifications.
In 1980—81 about 430,200 students, including part-time students, were
taking advanced courses other than in universities in a wide variety of
subjects, including architecture, art and design, catering, engineering,
natural sciences, social work, business and management studies and teacher
training. An increasing proportion of the students were taking courses
leading to the awards of the Council for National Academic Awards
(CNAA). The Council awards degrees and other academic qualifications
comparable in standard with those granted by universities. The courses
range from science and technology to the arts, social studies, business
studies and law, but the proportion of technological, business or other
broadly vocational courses is much higher than in universities.
In England and Wales a major contribution to higher education is made
by the 30 polytechnics which provide courses on a wide range of subjects at
all levels, though the trend is towards a concentration on advanced work. In
Scotland similar provision is made in the 14 central institutions and a few
further education colleges, though the tendency to specialise in particular
EDUCATION
155
Adult and
Continuing
Education
subjects is greater than in the polytechnics. In Northern Ireland such
higher education provision is concentrated within the Ulster Polytechnic.
The institutes and colleges of higher education, formed by the inte¬
gration of teacher training with the rest of higher education, account for a
significant proportion of higher education students, and other further
education colleges run some, usually specialised, higher education courses.
Full-time or part-time vocational courses leading to nationally recognised
qualifications are available in further education colleges, polytechnics and
other establishments of further education.
The City and Guilds of London Institute offers qualifications in a wide
range of craft and vocational subjects. At technician level the Technician
Education Council (TEC) is developing a unified national system of
courses leading to awards at two levels: certificate and diploma; and higher
certificate and diploma. Many further education colleges also offer courses
in shorthand, typing, book-keeping, and office studies. More advanced
business studies are generally available in polytechnics and some other
colleges. The further education sector makes a major contribution to
management education at all levels.
Much business education is related to the specialised examination re¬
quirements of various professional bodies, and courses leading to them
are provided in many colleges, although numbers of candidates seeking
qualifications do so through correspondence courses. The Business Edu¬
cation Council (BEC) is developing a system of unified national vocational
courses in business studies and public administration at three levels:
general, national and higher national certificate and diploma. (The highest
awards of the TEC and BEC approach pass degree standard.) The Scottish
equivalents of the councils are the Scottish Technical Education Council
and the Scottish Business Education Council.
The scope of adult and continuing education has widened over recent years
and now includes, in addition to the development of the individual through
cultural, physical and craft pursuits, such subjects as remedial education
(for example, in literacy and numeracy); education for disadvantaged
groups and those with special needs; consumer education; health edu¬
cation; and the appreciation of new technologies. This merges into re¬
training for those in employment, to which increasing attention is being
paid, to keep pace with technological change. Courses are provided by local
education authorities, residential colleges, extra-mural departments of
universities, the Open University and various other bodies including a
number of voluntary organisations.
Most of the provision for adult and continuing education is made by the
local education authorities in a wide variety of establishments, including
schools used for adult evening classes and in some cases in ‘community
schools’ which provide educational, social and cultural opportunities for
the wider community. Most courses are part-time. Local authorities main¬
tain or aid most of the short-term residential colleges or centres which
provide courses lasting between a weekend and a fortnight.
Long-term residential colleges, grant-aided by central government de¬
partments, provide courses of one or two years. They aim to provide a
liberal education without academic entry tests. Most students admitted are
entitled to full maintenance grants.
University extra-mural departments and the Workers’ Educational
Association (WEA), the largest recognised voluntary body, provide
156
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Teaching
Methods
EDUCATIONAL
RESEARCH
extended part-time courses of more academic studies, as well as short
courses organised for special (including vocational) interests. Often the
WE A provides the organisation and the universities the tutors.
Many other organisations, national and local, provide many kinds
of education and training. Several, such as the National Federation of
Women’s Institutes, the National Union of Townswomen’s Guilds, and
the National Council of Young Men’s Christian Associations, receive
government grants; others are commercially or privately financed.
The National Institute of Adult Education is a centre of information,
research and publication for adult education, as well as a channel of
co-operation and consultation for the many interested organisations in
England and Wales. Mainly financed by local education authorities and a
government grant, the Institute administers the government-funded Adult
Literacy and Basic Skills Unit which covers proficiency in areas such as
numeracy and communication, as well as literacy. The Institute’s counter¬
part in Scotland is the Scottish Institute of Adult Education.
The Department of Education and Science has established an Advisory
Council for Adult and Continuing Education to advise on current practice
and to promote the development of future policies. There are similar
councils in Scotland and Northern Ireland.
The general pattern of teaching and learning on full-time courses at
universities and colleges remains a mixture of lectures, prescribed or
suggested reading, seminars or tutorials, exercises and tests, and, where
appropriate, practical work. Educational aids are widely available at most
universities, polytechnics and colleges.
Radio and television programmes, both specifically educational and
general, are important media for continuing education and are often linked
to a range of supplementary publications, courses and activities. BBC radio
study programmes are transmitted late at night on weekdays and on Sunday
afternoons. Educational television programmes are shown on Saturday and
Sunday mornings, during the day on weekdays with some early and late
evening transmissions. Both the BBC and independent television provide
programmes which range from basic education and progressive vocational
training to domestic, social and craft skills. The BBC also works with the
Open University (see p 153), producing and broadcasting radio and
television programmes as part of the courses.
Research into the theory and practice of education and the organisation of
educational services is supported financially by central and local govern¬
ment, philanthropic organisations, universities and teachers’ associations.
Some research is also sponsored at further education institutions and by a
few independent organisations. The Schools Council (see p 149) and the
Social Science Research Council are important channels for government
support.
The major research institute outside the universities is the autonomous
National Foundation for Educational Research in England and Wales, with
income mainly from funds received from research projects and from cor¬
porate members, including local education authorities, teachers’ organi¬
sations and universities. It receives an annual government grant. There are
also the Scottish Council for Research in Education and the Northern
Ireland Council for Educational Research.
EDUCATION
157
EDUCATIONAL
LINKS
OVERSEAS
Educational
Exchanges
School children, students, teachers and others concerned with education
come to Britain from overseas to study and British people work and train
overseas. Many opportunities for such movement are the result of inter¬
national co-operation at government level within the European Com¬
munity and within the Commonwealth, and of educational schemes,
courses and professional contacts organised in Britain by officially funded
and voluntary organisations. The British aid programme also encourages
links between educational institutions in Britain and in developing
countries.
British membership of the European Community is creating closer ties
with other countries. Both in schools and in the colleges and universities
there has been an expansion of interest in European studies and languages.
Exchanges of teachers, school children and students take place. Britain has
adhered to the Statute of the European Schools (nine of which have been
established throughout the Community including one at Culham, Oxford¬
shire) to provide school education for children of people employed in
Community institutions. Particular attention is being paid to foreign
language learning, the language and other educational needs of migrants
and their children, the relationship between education and working life and
policies of admission to higher education in member countries.
The promotion of cultural and educational relations with other countries is
a major concern of the British Council (see p 70), which plays an important
part in the management of the aid programme to education. It recruits
teachers for work overseas, organises short visits overseas by British
experts, and encourages cultural exchange visits. It is also responsible for
schemes to promote academic interchange, including the Academic Links
and Interchange Scheme between universities and higher education insti¬
tutions in Britain and other countries, and schemes to encourage exchanges
in other scientific, educational and cultural areas. The promotion of co¬
operation between universities in Britain and developing countries is
undertaken by means of staff recruitment, the secondment of staff from
British universities, inter-departmental faculty link schemes, local staff
development, short-term teaching and advisory visits, and general con¬
sultancy services.
The Central Bureau for Educational Visits and Exchanges, an indepen¬
dent foundation financed by the Government, aims to enrich British
education through international contact and exchange. It is responsible,
with the League for the Exchange of Commonwealth Teachers, for teacher
exchanges with most West European countries, a number of Common¬
wealth countries and the United States. It arranges links and exchanges
between schools, further education establishments and local authorities,
and organises study visits for teachers, education administrators, and
young workers. It also administers the language assistants scheme in
Britain and develops opportunities for exchange in special areas such as
sport and the performing arts, as well as between disabled people.
The Association of Commonwealth Universities promotes co-operation
between member universities in 28 Commonwealth countries. It organises
meetings, provides information and academic appointments services, ad¬
ministers the Commonwealth Scholarship and Fellowship Plan in Britain,
and generally promotes the movement of academic and administrative staff
and of students from one country to another.
The Commonwealth Education Liaison Committee supplements normal
158
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Overseas
Students in
Britain
The Teaching
of English
direct dealings on education between the countries of the Commonwealth.
The United Kingdom Council for Overseas Student Affairs is an indepen¬
dent body serving overseas students and organisations and individuals
concerned in student affairs.
Students come to Britain from countries throughout the world to study at
universities or other educational institutions or for professional training. In
the academic year 1980-81 there were some 31,500 overseas students at
universities and about 39,600 at polytechnics and other establishments of
higher and further education. In addition, others (around 34,500) were
training for such occupations as nursing, law, banking and accountancy,
industry and services. About 41 per cent of all overseas students were from
the Commonwealth and 70 per cent from developing countries.
Many come to Britain for advanced training. Of the 48,000 students
enrolled for full-time postgraduate study or research at British universities
in 1980, 33 per cent came from overseas. Of those working for a master’s
degree 41 per cent came from overseas and of those working for a doctorate
33 per cent. British universities, polytechnics and other further education
establishments have built up their reputation overseas by providing tuition
of the highest standards, maintaining low student-to-staff ratios, and
adopting courses and qualifications to meet present-day and possible future
needs. First degree courses tend to be shorter and more intensive than in
many countries (three years is the minimum length; two for the University
College at Buckingham Licence).
The majority of overseas students pay their own fees and expenses or
hold awards from their own governments. In addition, over 9,400 over¬
seas students were fully supported in 1981 under British technical co¬
operation with developing countries. New students from overseas in higher
and further education are charged at the level the institutions consider
necessary to meet the cost of study subject to a minimum figure. Students
from other member countries of the European Community are charged the
lower level of fees that applies to British students. There is, however, a
scheme to provide financial help for overseas research students of high
ability.
Many public and private scholarships and fellowships are available to
students from overseas (and to British students who want to study over¬
seas). Among the best known are the British Council Scholarships, the
Commonwealth Scholarship and Fellowship Plan, the Marshall Scholar¬
ships, the independently funded Rhodes Scholarships, and the Churchill
Scholarships for men and women in all walks of life. Most British univer¬
sities and colleges offer scholarships for which graduates of any nationality
are eligible. (The British Council and the Association of Commonwealth
Universities are involved in the selection of British students for awards
offered by many overseas countries.) The Atlantic College at St Donat’s,
South Wales (one of the colleges of the United World Colleges), provides
two-year residential courses for overseas students before they enter
university.
The continuing increase in interest in English as a foreign language is
reflected in the growth of the number of private language schools and the
larger proportion of these recognised by the British Council. At the same
time the British Council has greatly expanded the volume of its own
teaching of English overseas by opening new centres in many countries and
EDUCATION
159
Youth Workers
extending existing ones. Publications and other material relating to English
language teaching have also increased in number and are now a large
component in publishers’ lists, constituting a major export.
^ The BBC’s English by Radio and Television Service provides a world¬
wide facility for the individual learner at home.
THE YOUTH SERVICE
The aim of the youth service is to promote the social and informal education
of young people by offering them opportunities in their leisure time to mix
socially, to develop and enlarge their range of interests and to support their
development to adulthood. The service is provided by a partnership
between public authorities and a large variety of voluntary organisations.
Membership of groups is voluntary and there is no attempt to create
anything in the nature of a national youth movement.
The youth service forms part of the education system. Government
education departments formulate broad policy objectives for the service
and encourage their achievement through financial assistance and advice.
Local education authorities provide and run their own youth clubs and
centres (some of which are residential) which may be purpose-built or
associated with schools. They also assist local voluntary youth groups by
lending premises and equipment and by contributing to their capital and
running costs. Many authorities have youth committees on which official
and voluntary bodies are represented, and employ youth officers to co¬
ordinate youth work and to arrange in-service training. There are also
youth councils which are representative bodies of young people from local
youth organisations.
National voluntary organisations promote the larger share of youth
activities through local groups which raise most of their day-to-day
running expenses by their own efforts. These have an estimated combined
membership of over 6 million. They vary greatly in character, some
concentrating on social and recreational pursuits, others on educational or
religious activities. Most national organisations in England are members of
the National Council for Voluntary Youth Services, a consultative body. In
Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland there are similar representative
bodies.
Among the largest of the voluntary youth organisations are the Scout
and Girl Guides Associations (with about 644,000 and 892,000 members),
the National Association of Youth Clubs (about 615,000), the National
Association of Boys’ Clubs (some 200,000), the Youth Hostels Association
(about 309,000) and clubs run by the churches. The three pre-service
organisations (the Sea Cadet Corps, Army Cadet Force and Air Training
Corps), with a membership of some 142,000, combine social, educational
and physical development with training for possible entry to the armed
forces.
Full-time youth workers are supported by over 400,000 part-time workers,
many of them unpaid. Part-time workers usually have no professional
qualification in youth work but some have allied qualifications, for instance
as teachers, and a large number attend short courses and conferences on
youth work. Qualified school teachers are recognised as qualified youth
workers.
160 BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In England and Wales a basic two-year training course at certain uni¬
versities and higher education colleges leads to the status of qualified youth
and community worker. A number of colleges of higher education include
study of youth work within teacher-training courses. In Scotland one- and
three-year courses are provided at certain colleges of education and in
Northern Ireland courses are provided by the Ulster Polytechnic.
Other
Organisations
Concerned with
Young People
A substantial sum of money is awarded by the many grant-giving
foundations and trusts each year for activities involving young people. The
Royal Jubilee Trusts, formed in 1978 from King George’s Jubilee Trust
(started in 1935 at the time of the Silver Jubilee of King George V) and the
Queen’s Silver Jubilee Trust, which arose from the 1977 Queen’s Silver
Jubilee Appeal, support work involving young people aged 8 to 18 (King
George’s Jubilee Trust) and young people up to the age of 25 involved in
community service work (the Queen’s Silver Jubilee Trust). King George’s
Jubilee Trust has distributed over £4-5 million since 1935 and the Queen’s
Silver Jubilee Trust over £6 million since May 1978.
The Duke of Edinburgh’s Award Scheme, which operates through
bodies such as local authorities, schools, youth organisations and industrial
firms, is a challenge for young people from Britain and other Common¬
wealth countries to reach certain standards in leisure-time activities with
the voluntary assistance of adults.
Voluntary
Service by
Young People
Thousands of young people voluntarily take part in community service
designed to assist those in need, including the elderly and the disabled,
and many others work on conservation projects. Organisations providing
opportunities for community service such as International Voluntary
Service, Task Force and Community Service Volunteers receive grants
from the Government. Many schools also organise community service
activities as part of the curriculum.
The Community Projects Foundation is an independent body which
advises interested organisations in England and Wales on methods of
involving young people in providing service to the community. The
Foundation receives a government grant and employs teams of young
people who are available on request to assist in promoting voluntary
service.
8 The
Environment
By comprehensive land-use planning and development control Britain has
had considerable success in resolving the conflicting demands of industry,
commerce, housing, transport, agriculture and recreation and in reducing
environmental pollution. There is no ‘national plan’ for urban and land
development, but there is a statutory system of land-use planning applying
over the whole country and to virtually every kind of development, and
there are laws dealing specifically with environmental health and the
control of pollution. All development requires local ‘planning permission’,
and applications for permission are dealt with in the light of development
plans which set out strategies for each area on such matters as housing,
transport, industry and open land. The underlying approach is to identify
people’s needs and possible ways of meeting them, and there is a growing
move away from narrow land-use allocation towards broader strategic
planning recognising the community’s social and economic goals. Through¬
out Britain voluntary organisations, too, take an active interest in planning,
conservation and the control of pollution.
The system of land-use planning in Great Britain involves a centralised
structure under the Secretaries of State for the Environment, Wales and
Scotland, and compulsory planning duties for local planning authorities.
The Department of the Environment brings together the major responsi¬
bilities in England for land-use planning, housing and construction,
countryside policy and environmental protection. The Welsh Office and
the Scottish Development Department have broadly equivalent responsi¬
bilities. Large-scale planning in England and Wales is primarily the
responsibility of the county councils and the Greater London Council
while district councils and the councils of the London boroughs and the
City of London are responsible for most local plans and development
control, the main housing functions and many other environmental health
matters. In Scotland, planning functions are undertaken by regional and
district councils whose responsibilities are divided on a basis broadly
similar to that in England and Wales. In the more rural regions and the
islands, all planning responsibilities are carried out by the regional and
islands councils respectively. In Northern Ireland the Department of the
Environment for Northern Ireland is responsible for planning matters
through its local offices which work closely with the district councils. The
councils have local environmental health responsibilities.
General problems of industrial development are dealt with jointly by a
number of government departments, but each development scheme, as a
rule, requires the local planning authority’s consent. Financial incentives
encourage the location of industry in particular areas (see p 205).
The development plan system in England and Wales involves ‘structure’
and ‘local’ plans. Structure plans are prepared by county planning authori¬
ties and require ministerial consent. They set out broad policies for the
development and other use of land (including measures for the improve-
The Plans
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
ment of the physical environment and traffic management). Local plans
containing detailed proposals, including plans for ‘action areas’ where
comprehensive development is expected to start within a specified period,
are normally prepared by district planning authorities, although some¬
times by county planning authorities, and must conform generally to the
approved structure plan. In exceptional cases, with ministerial approval,
the adoption of a local plan may precede that of a structure plan. Local plans
are adopted by the planning authorities without being subject to ministerial
approval unless the Secretary of State calls in a plan for his own decision.
All plans are under continuous review and may be altered from time to
time. Scotland has a broadly similar system which can also include the
production of a regional report by regional and islands authorities, out¬
lining their priorities and policies. In Northern Ireland there is a single-tier
system; plans are prepared by the Department of the Environment for
Northern Ireland.
Public Members of the public and interested organisations are given an oppor-
Participation tunity to express their views on the planning of their areas during the
formative stages of the structure and local plans. The local planning
authorities must ensure adequate publicity for matters proposed for
inclusion in the plans; representations may be made about them to the
authorities. These opportunities for public participation are additional to
provisions for objecting to prepared plans. In the case of structure plans the
Secretary of State holds an examination in public of matters on which he
requires more information in order to reach a decision. In the case of local
plans objectors have a right to be heard, and a public local inquiry is
normally held by the planning authorities.
Where specific proposals for development differ substantially from the
intentions of a development plan, they must be publicised locally. Other
schemes affecting a large number of people are usually advertised by the
local planning authority and applications seeking permission for certain
types of development must also be advertised. The applicant has a right
of appeal to the Secretary of State if planning permission is refused or
granted subject to conditions. Most appeals are transferred for decision to
inspectors (in Scotland reporters) appointed by the Secretary of State.
The Secretary of State can direct that a planning application be referred
to him for decision. This power is exercised sparingly and usually only in
respect of proposals of national or regional importance, for example, the
inquiry being held into the proposal to site the third London airport at
Stansted in Essex. The applicant has the right to be heard by a person
appointed by the Secretary of State and a public inquiry is normally held
for this purpose. In the case of development schemes of national or
regional importance or of a technical or scientific nature, and if an ordinary
inquiry is inadequate for the purpose, the ministers responsible may
decide to set up planning inquiry commissions to carry out investigations
and hold inquiries locally. Where highway development is proposed, the
government minister concerned can hold such inquiries as he considers
appropriate; these generally relate to the compulsory acquisition of land.
Similar provision is made in Northern Ireland for public participation in
the planning process and for the hearing of objections. There is a right of
appeal to an independent Planning Appeals Commission.
For certain planning purposes England is divided into eight regions,
Housing
Characteristics
THE ENVIRONMENT 163
each with a planning board. Wales and Scotland each have an Economic
Planning Board and Northern Ireland has an Economic Council.
HOUSING
The significant general improvement in housing supply and conditions
during the last 30 years has resulted, in national terms, in a slight excess of
supply over demand, while needs and problems have become increasingly
specific and local. The emphasis of public sector housing policy is being
shifted from new building to modernisation, improvement and making
better use of the existing stock. In the private sector encouragement of
home ownership and of rented housing are central policy aims.
There are over 21 million dwellings, houses being much more common
than flats (the ratio is roughly four to one). More than two families in
every five live in a post-1945 home, but there remain a large number of old
dwellings, some of which have been kept in good repair and modernised,
but many others of which (particularly in the centres of cities) are unsatis¬
factory by modern standards.
Throughout this century pressure on housing accommodation has been
increased more by the rapid rise in the number of separate households than
by the increase in population. While the number of people has increased by
about two-fifths, the number of households has more than doubled. A
housing survey has shown a fall in England, from 800,000 to 500,000, in the
number of households sharing a dwelling between 1971 and 1977-78; a
halving, from 2-8 million to 1-4 million, in the number of households
without exclusive use of at least one of the basic amenities, such as a bath;
and a fall of two-thirds, from 219,000 to 73,000, in the number of over¬
crowded households. The survey also showed that 82 per cent of those
questioned were ‘very satisfied’ or ‘satisfied’ with their accommodation.
Over half of all dwellings are owned by their occupiers, nearly a third are
rented from public housing authorities, and most of the remainder are
rented from private landlords (see diagram below). There are variations,
however, in the distribution of tenure between different parts of the
country; in Scotland more than half the dwellings are rented from public
authorities. Private rented accommodation is generally more common in
the central parts of large towns, while owner-occupation is more frequent
in outer suburbs and in country areas.
Housing by Tenure
PUBLIC RENTED PRIVATE RENTED
164
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Administration
Home
Ownership
Mortgage Loans
New house construction is undertaken by both public and private sectors
but over the past few years the private sector has built more dwellings than
the public sector. In addition, about 7 per cent of the new building in 1981
was carried out by voluntary housing associations and societies. Public
authorities provide dwellings mainly for renting while private interests
build mainly for sale to owner-occupiers. There has been very little
building of private dwellings to rent (see p 166) but the provisions in the
Housing Act 1980 for ‘assured’ tenancies have encouraged some new
building for private letting by such bodies as building societies, pension
funds and insurance companies.
Responsibility for formulating housing policy and supervising the housing
programme is borne by the Secretary of State for the Environment in
England and by the Secretaries of State for Wales, Scotland and Northern
Ireland.
The construction or structural alteration of housing in both the public
and private sectors is subject to the Building Regulations in England
(except inner London) and Wales. They are enforced by the local authori¬
ties and are made primarily for the health and safety of people in and around
the buildings, although they also include requirements for the conservation
of energy. Different systems with the same aims are operated in inner
London, Scotland and Northern Ireland.
For building in the private sector the National House Building Council
sets standards and enforces them by inspection and certification. Almost all
new private houses are covered by the Council’s insurance scheme which
provides ten-year guarantees against major structural defects. A two-year
guarantee is also given against faulty workmanship. Most lenders will not
make a loan for the purchase of a new house unless it is covered by a Council
certificate.
Local authorities are responsible for the payment of house renovation
grants and the implementation of housing renewal programmes. Many
have housing advisory centres to provide information on aspects of housing.
Research into building materials and techniques, as well as into the
social, economic and design aspects of housing, is undertaken by the
Department of the Environment, the Scottish Development Department
and the Welsh Office.
The number of people owning their own homes has more than doubled in
the last 20 years, and the number of owner-occupied homes now amounts to
over 11 million. Most public sector tenants have the right to buy the homes
they occupy at discounts which vary according to the length of their
occupancy. Local authorities have been asked to encourage low-cost home
ownership by selling land to builders to construct homes for ‘first-time’
buyers, or to individuals or groups to build their own ‘first-time’ homes in
partnership with private builders; by improving homes for sale; by selling
dilapidated homes for improvement by the purchaser (‘home-steading’);
by offering shared ownership (part owning, part renting); and by using
local authority guarantee powers to facilitate lending by building societies.
Most people buy their homes through a mortgage which is a system of
instalment purchase through loans (for which the properties are regarded
as securities) from such sources as building societies, banks, insurance
Public Sector
Housing
THE ENVIRONMENT 165
companies, industrial and provident societies and local authorities. Some
companies also make loans for house purchase to their own employees.
Building societies (see also p 339) which are by far the largest sources
of such loans (their share of the market being about 80 per cent) do not
build houses themselves. They usually advance up to 90 per cent of
their valuation of a property but it is possible to borrow up to too per
cent with the help of an appropriate insurance guarantee. Loans are
normally repayable over periods of 20 or 25 years (up to 30 or 35 years in
certain circumstances) by equal monthly instalments to cover capital and
interest. Ordinary mortgages from building societies are usually available
to purchasers on average income or above.
Owner-occupiers are entitled to tax relief on their mortgage interest
payments arising on up to £25,000 of their mortgages (on their main home
only). An alternative form of assistance is the option mortgage scheme,
designed to help those with smaller incomes who pay little or no tax. It
allows the borrower to receive, instead of tax relief, a subsidy which has the
effect of reducing the rate of interest on the loan. Under the Home Loan
Scheme first-time home buyers who have saved for two years and are
buying a home in the lower-price range may qualify for an extra loan of
£600 interest-free for up to five years, and a tax-free bonus of up to £ 110.
The option mortgage scheme, the Home Loan Scheme for first-time
buyers and home-steading (see p 164) all operate in Northern Ireland. The
concept of shared ownership is being developed in the public sector by the
Northern Ireland Housing Executive and in the private sector by the
Northern Ireland Co-ownership Housing Association. The Executive has
offered most of its homes for sale to the tenants.
Most of the public housing is provided by 459 local housing authorities,
which are responsible for ensuring that the supply of housing in their areas
is adequate. The authorities are: in England and Wales (outside London),
the district councils; in London, the London borough councils and the
Common Council of the City of London; and in Scotland, the district
and islands councils. Other public housing authorities are the new town
authorities, the Scottish Special Housing Association which supplements
building by local authorities in Scotland, and the Development Board
for Rural Wales. The Northern Ireland Housing Executive is responsible
for the provision and management of public housing in Northern Ireland.
Subsidies are made available to the authorities to assist them with housing
costs, and guidance is given on design and layout. Public housing authori¬
ties own nearly seven million houses and flats. The number of homes owned
by each authority varies widely, several of the larger authorities having a
stock of well over 100,000.
Local authorities meet the capital costs of new house construction
and of modernisation of their existing stock by raising loans on the open
market or by borrowing from the Public Works Loan Board. Current ex¬
penditure, including maintenance and management costs and loan interest
and repayments, is met from rents, supplemented by subsidies from the
Government and, where required to balance housing revenue accounts,
from the rates (the local property tax). Local authorities are required to
charge their tenants reasonable rents (which keep a balance between the
interests of tenants and ratepayers).
Sheltered accommodation (with an alarm system and resident warden)
is provided for many elderly people who need this degree of support.
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
166
Increasing importance is also being placed on the housing needs of
physically handicapped people, and a small but growing proportion of the
new housing stock is suitable for them. Also receiving attention are the
needs of other ‘disadvantaged’ groups such as one-parent families, those
who have suffered from mental illness, and victims of violence within the
family. Local authorities have a statutory duty to ensure that accom¬
modation (not necessarily an authority house) is available for homeless
people who have dependent children or are vulnerable on grounds such as
age or disability.
The Housing Act 1980 established a charter for public sector tenants,
giving them statutory rights which include security of tenure, provision for
succession by a resident relative to the tenancy on death, rights of subletting
and taking in lodgers, and, at the landlord’s discretion, reimbursement for
improvements made by the tenant. With certain exceptions, public sector
tenants of at least three years’ standing can buy the freehold of their house,
or a long lease of their flat, at a discount which depends on the length of
occupation. Similar provisions for Scotland are contained in the Tenants’
Rights etc (Scotland) Act 1980.
A National Mobility Scheme, sponsored by the Department of the En¬
vironment and the principal bodies concerned with public sector housing,
has been introduced to assist tenants in England and Wales who need to
move to another area for employment or social reasons. Tenants who wish
to move by exchanging homes are able to make use of a computer-based
national information scheme.
Privately
Rented
Housing
During the last quarter of a century there has been a steady decline in the
number of rented dwellings available from private landlords (including
tied accommodation)—from over 50 per cent of the housing stock to about
12 per cent (2-6 million). Major factors have been the increased demand for
owner-occupation, the greater availability of public rented housing, and
the operation of rent restriction. Privately rented dwellings form a high
proportion of the older housing, most landlords being individuals with
limited holdings; some rented housing is provided by larger property
owners, including property companies.
Most privately rented dwellings are subject to rent restriction, of which
there are two kinds: regulated tenancies, where a ‘fair rent’ is fixed by
independent rent officers; and where there is a resident landlord and in a
few other types of furnished accommodation, the fixing of a reasonable rent
by a rent tribunal. Tenants have a wide degree of security of tenure, and
may not be evicted without a court order. Harassment of residential
occupiers is a criminal offence. To increase the availability of privately
rented property the Government has introduced in the Housing Act 1980
and in the Tenants’ Rights etc (Scotland) Act 1980 a new system of
‘shorthold’ lettings, under which tenants have security of tenure at a fair
rent for an agreed period of between one and five years, but not for life;
existing regulated lettings are not affected by the new legislation. In
England and Wales building of private dwellings to let is encouraged by the
system of ‘assured’ tenancies, which allows approved bodies to let property
at freely negotiated rents outside the provisions of the Rent Acts. Tenants
with incomes up to average levels are eligible for assistance with their rent
under a national scheme of rent allowances which is operated by local
authorities and financed mainly by government subsidies.
Submarine
CABLES
Submarine cable
systems provide
more than 50 per
cent of Britain’s
communications
links with the rest of
the world.
Right: The Seadog
submersible,
controlled from a
cable ship, can bury,
inspect and repair
seabed cables.
Using high-pressure
water jets it can cut
trenches up to a
metre deep.
Below: A new cable,
TAT-7, linking
North America and
Europe, being
landed in Cornwall.
The first UK-Canada
cable laid in 1961 had
80 circuits; TAT-7
will have 4,200
circuits.
ADVANCES
In 
television
Right: A medical consultant
in a Cornish hospital
examining an X-ray of a
possible limb fracture of a
patient in the Scilly Isles by
slow scan TV - a television
picture sent in digital form
over the telephone network.
Below: An advanced
computer graphics system
which provides an artist
with over 16 million shades
of colour. The images are
shown on the screen and can
be transmitted by television
or produced as slides or
printed illustrations.
Far right: This underwater
camera, carried by a diver
or mounted on a remotely-
controlled vehicle, is linked
to a visual display unit at
the surface where the
controller monitors what
the camera sees and takes
the required still or video
picture.
Below right: A microscope
connected to a television
screen facilitates the
viewing of coal samples at a
British Gas Corporation
research station. British
Gas is a world leader in
coal gasification.
Computer
CONTROL! .ED
Telex
EXCHANGE
This electronic telex exchange transmits messages
between Britain’s 90,000 telex customers and more
than a million users in 170 other countries.
It can connect users in a fraction
of the time taken by conventional exchanges
and can store messages during busy periods
for automatic transmission later.
THE ENVIRONMENT
Housing
Associations
Improving
Older Homes
167
Housing associations extend the choice of housing by providing accom¬
modation available for rent through new building or the rehabilitation of
older property. The associations normally cater for people who would
otherwise look to a local authority for a home. In addition to normal family
housing, they provide particularly for the special needs of elderly, disabled
and single people.
The associations, which are non-profit-making, have grown under
government encouragement and now own some 430,000 homes. Individual
associations range in size from a group of ‘almshouses’ for less than ten old
people to associations with more than 10,000 homes. Rented housing
schemes carried out by associations qualify for government grant if the
association is one of the 3,000 registered with the Housing Corporation, a
statutory body. Rented homes owned by housing associations come within
the fair rent and rent allowance arrangements, and some housing associ¬
ation tenants have rights under the tenants’ charter in the Housing Act
1980, including the right to buy. Housing associations also provide
accommodation on a shared ownership basis, allowing the occupier to part-
rent and part-own a home, and they can improve older properties for
outright sale. Both activities are eligible for government grants.
Modernisation and conversion of sub-standard homes, with the help of
grants from public funds, has increasingly been encouraged as an alterna¬
tive to clearing and rebuilding and as a way of preserving established
communities and of making more economic use of resources.
Home improvement grants for nearly i-6 million homes were paid to
householders in Great Britain between 1967 and 1981. A further 1 • 3 million
public sector homes were also improved in this period. There are four types
of grant: improvement grants, for carrying out improvements to a good
standard or for conversion into flats; intermediate grants, for the provision
of standard amenities (such as a bath and an inside lavatory) and associated
repairs; grants for substantial and structural repairs to pre-1919 houses;
and special grants (not available in Scotland) for providing standard
amenities, repairs and means of escape from fire in houses which are in
multiple occupation.
Declaring ‘general improvement areas’ and ‘housing action areas’ enables
local authorities in England and Wales to tackle the improvement of whole
areas of older housing systematically. General improvement areas (of
which there are about 1,400) consist of fundamentally sound houses and a
stable population. Housing action areas (about 400) are characterised by
relatively poor housing and bad physical conditions combined with social
stress. Local authorities have special powers to bring about an improve¬
ment in living conditions for the benefit of residents within a five-year
period. In both types of area government financial aid for environmental
improvement (such as tree-planting) is available to local authorities.
Grants to householders may range up to 75 per cent of the eligible expense
limit, and in certain cases of hardship up to 90 per cent.
An ‘improvement-for-sale’ scheme has also been introduced; the Govern¬
ment helps to meet any loss a local authority may make in buying,
improving and selling rundown or neglected housing.
In Scotland housing action area powers are available for areas in which at
least half the houses fail to meet prescribed physical standards and there is
no time limit on the period within which improvement must be carried out.
Outside housing action areas in Scotland local authorities have power to
i68
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
New Towns
Inner City
Policies
require the improvement of houses below the statutory tolerable standard,
or lacking a bathroom, by improvement orders. In housing action areas or
where an improvement order has been made grants of up to 75 per cent of
the eligible expense limit (up to 90 per cent in cases of hardship) may be
made.
Northern Ireland has a major problem of derelict and unfit housing,
especially in Belfast, the situation having been made worse by civil
disturbance. Concerted measures are taken in housing action areas, and
there is a continuing programme of rehabilitation in Belfast.
The 32 new towns designated since 1946 represent one of the most
successful achievements in recent British planning. Twenty-one of them
are in England, two in Wales, five in Scotland and four in Northern Ireland.
Most of them had an existing town or village as a nucleus. The policy
behind their creation was mainly one of encouraging the gradual dispersal
of industry and population from congested cities to new areas, planned in
advance to become self-contained towns with their own industry, services
and amenities within convenient distance of the whole community.
In England eight of the new towns have been substantially completed
and the development corporations, which supervised the planning and
development of the towns, dissolved. Target dates for the dissolution of a
further seven new town development corporations by the mid-1980s and of
the remainder by the late 1980s have been announced. The first Scottish
new town development corporation is expected to be dissolved at the end of
the present decade, with the others following in the 1990s. In Wales
responsibility for one of the two new towns has been taken over by the
Development Board for Rural Wales while the other is to be dissolved
in the mid-1980s. In Northern Ireland, development of the new towns has
been incorporated in a new District Towns Strategy which is the responsi¬
bility of the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland. The
Government is making substantial disposals of the completed assets of the
new towns to the private sector in order to release resources for investment
and to reduce the involvement of the public sector.
The new towns have a total population of over 2 million. Young people
form a somewhat higher proportion than in the population of the country as
a whole. Several of the more developed towns are becoming regional
centres and, as the populations grow large enough to give the necessary
support, offices, hotels and department stores, as well as art centres and full
entertainment and recreational facilities, are gradually being provided.
Town development (or ‘expanding town’) schemes involve the transfer
of people and industry from overcrowded areas to existing towns suitable
for expansion; these are arranged directly between the local authorities of
the towns concerned. Most of the towns expanded under these schemes are
well established and are providing homes, jobs and amenities for people
from large cities.
Revitalising the inner areas of many towns and cities is one of the most
important tasks in modern planning. Past policies have produced many
successes (most of the slums have been replaced, much old housing has
been improved and the clean air legislation has enhanced the general
environment and public health) but many other difficulties, some the result
of these policies, have still to be overcome. They include problems of high
inter prise Zones and New Towns
%
Orkney
Islands
Shetland
Islands
<0.
Scotland
20 40
60 80 miles
_j i
CP
—1—I—I—I—I
20 40 60 80 100 kilometres
Clydebank
Cumbernauld
Glenrothes'
O
\.
^0
Irvine
A Livingston
'East
Kilbride
Enterprise zones
(designated by summer
1982)
New towns
Boundaries of economic
planning regions
HALondonderry/
J ,, A
Ballymena^
11 Antrim ^
■ Northern n ,P
Ireland- a Belfast.
^ ’.Craigavon
Newcastle/
Gateshead'
Washington
PeterleOi
Aycliffej
Northern
Yorkshire
and
Worths Humberside
Central Lancashire/^^y\/es^
Skelmersdale q
Liverpool^ A o^Y^V^Wakefield
New Town'
'O
Runcorn
A
'Newtown'
J^Salford/Trafford
"Warrington East
Midlands
a Peterborough
East Anglia
i NnrrnamnTnn
West Redditch
Telford
Corby
AO
Wales
Swansea Cwmbran
Midlands
Dudley
O
Northampton
y v
Milton* Stevenage
KeynesAHarlowy
Welwyn /AHauit:iuA SfRamldon
Garden City 7 ±_>Basildon
Hemel Hempstead Bracknell "oock^ands
South West
South
East
Crawley
i yo
Urban
Programme
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
unemployment, decay and dereliction, and population structures with
relatively high proportions of the disadvantaged and the elderly. Govern¬
ment policy is not to seek a universal solution but to work out for each city
the package of measures that is most likely to improve conditions and
encourage, as far as possible, local voluntary action, notably by means of
‘partnerships’ (see below). The policy was given renewed impetus by the
sense of national shock which followed disorders in a number of inner city
areas in England in the summer of 1981. Various special measures, aimed at
increasing employment opportunities and the involvement of residents in
the rejuvenation of their areas, have been introduced.
The inner city areas have been given greater resources and priority for a
number of years. The urban aid programme’ has been increased from a
1977-78 level in England and Wales of under £30 million to £334 million in
1982—83, including funds for the two urban development corporations.
The programme traditionally complemented the work of major social
programmes by providing extra facilities which would otherwise not have
been available, such as day nurseries, centres for the elderly and language
classes for immigrants, but has been recast so as to cover industrial,
commercial, environmental and recreational provision as well. The urban
programme represents only a small part of the central assistance to urban,
and other, local authorities. The main contribution is through the annual
‘rate support’ grant, transport supplementary grant (in England and Wales
only), housing subsidy and other programmes.
In certain places, special schemes are in operation. A co-ordinated
partnership approach has been adopted in seven English areas whereby
central and local government work together to tackle places where the
problems are greatest. Each partnership has a three-year action programme
rolled forward annually, which is based on the needs of the area and its
particular priorities. Partnerships receive allocations of urban programme
resources ranging from £12-5 million to £23 million a year. To meet the
particular problems and opportunities of the London docklands and the
Merseyside dock area following large-scale dock closures, the Government
has set up urban development corporations, modelled on the new town
development corporations, and these are to receive some £64 million in
1982-83. The London Docklands Development Corporation has super¬
seded the London docklands partnership arrangements. Elsewhere in
England 15 areas have been identified where the problems are on a slightly
smaller scale but still merit special attention. These areas prepare their
own inner city programmes and like the partnerships receive special
allocations of urban programme resources. Additional resources are also
made available to a further 14 English and five Welsh districts designated
under the Inner Urban Areas Act 1978. National Garden Festivals, based
on the European idea of garden shows, are being introduced with the aim of
rejuvenating inner-city areas and reclaiming derelict sites. The first festival
will be held in Liverpool in 1984 near to an area where urban disorders in
1981 were followed by a special ministerial study.
In Scotland, where the urban programme amounts to £33 million in
1982—83, a major urban renewal exercise in Glasgow to regenerate the city’s
east end is organised on somewhat similar lines to the partnership areas in
England, and a further eight Scottish districts have been designated under
the Inner Urban Areas Act. In Northern Ireland a special effort is being
made to tackle Belfast’s inner city problems.
Slum
Clearance
Enterprise
Zones
Historic
Buildings and
Conservation
Areas
THE ENVIRONMENT 171
In urban areas of Britain slum clearance and redevelopment have been
major features of housing policy. Since the mid-i95os about 3 5 million
people have been rehoused in England and Wales as a result of slum
clearance programmes. Large-scale clearance is now almost at an end and
greater emphasis is placed on renewal and modernisation. Local authori¬
ties receive special financial assistance from the Government.
Housing authorities are obliged to see that other accommodation exists,
or can be provided by them, for people displaced by slum clearance.
Owners of land compulsorily acquired during slum clearance programmes
receive as compensation either the full market value or, if the property
consists of unfit houses, a sum based on the value of the cleared site;
additional payments are, however, made to most owner-occupiers of unfit
houses to bring their compensation up to market value.
Redevelopment of slums has presented considerable problems. Many of
the areas were seriously overcrowded and lacked social facilities but usually
had the advantages of the basic utilities, local employment and easy access
to town-centre facilities. In order to house as many people as possible on the
sites, large areas were cleared and high-rise flats built. Despite the high
standards of many of the homes themselves, multistorey flats have not
proved satisfactory for some types of tenant, particularly families with
children, because of the lack of safe and convenient play space. In some
cases building maintenance has also presented problems. Where there is
need to build to a high density in inner city areas it is now met by carefully
grouped low-rise blocks, including individual houses.
In 1981-82 the Government set up 11 ‘enterprise zones’ which will last for
ten years. The aim of this experimental policy is to see how far industrial
and commercial activity can be stimulated by the removal of certain tax
burdens and by relaxing or speeding up the application of a number of
administrative controls. The zones vary widely but all contain land suit¬
able for development. They range in size from about 55 to 450 hectares
(about 140 to over 1,100 acres). The zones are sited in London’s dock¬
lands, Swansea, Salford/Trafford, Corby, Dudley, Hartlepool, Wakefield,
Liverpool, Newcastle/Gateshead, Clydebank and Belfast. Benefits in the
zones include exemption from rates and development land tax; too per cent
allowances for corporation and income tax purposes for capital expendi¬
ture on industrial and commercial buildings; a much simplified planning
system in which most forms of development are automatically permitted;
and a reduction in government requests for statistical information.
Negotiations are under way for the establishment of a further 11 zones.
CONSERVATION
Britain is one of the leading countries in the conservation movement. A
wide range of groups, including many voluntary organisations, are active in
it. The Council for Environmental Conservation is a national coalition of
non-governmental organisations which focuses attention on major en¬
vironmental issues.
Lists of buildings of special architectural or historic interest are com¬
piled, as required by the planning Acts, by the Secretary of State for
the Environment and the Secretaries of State for Scotland and Wales;
over 325,000 buildings are already listed. It is against the law to demolish
172
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Architecture
or alter the character of any listed building without special consent
from the local planning authority or the appropriate Secretary of State;
where consent is given to demolish a building, the Royal Commission on
Historical Monuments (for England) and similar bodies for Scotland and
Wales have an opportunity to make a photographic record of the building.
Emergency ‘building preservation notices’ can be served by the local
planning authority to protect buildings not yet listed.
Grants and loans for the repair or maintenance of buildings (or groups of
buildings) of outstanding interest can be made by the Secretaries of State
(on the recommendation of the appropriate Historic Buildings Council),
and local authorities can make grants and loans for any building of
architectural or historic interest even if it is not listed. The Architectural
Heritage Fund, voluntary contributions to which have been matched by
the Government, provides loans for local trusts to preserve historic
buildings.
Local planning authorities have designated for special protection over
4,800 ‘conservation areas’ of particular architectural or historic interest.
Grants and loans are available for works which make a significant con¬
tribution towards the preservation or enhancement of such an area.
Maintaining royal parks and palaces is the responsibility of the Sec¬
retaries of State for the Environment, Scotland and Wales, as is the
protection of ancient monuments of which about 800 are in their care. The
Ancient Monument Boards recommend which monuments are considered
to be of national importance and therefore worthy of preservation. The
Government intends to set up a new agency by April 1984 to manage
ancient monuments and give grants for historic buildings in England; the
agency will incorporate the Ancient Monuments Board for England and
the Historic Buildings Council for England.
In Northern Ireland the Department of the Environment for Northern
Ireland is responsible for the protection of historic monuments, of which
141 are in its care. The Department, acting on the advice of the Northern
Ireland Historic Buildings Council, is also responsible for listing buildings
of special architectural or historic interest, for designation of conservation
areas, and for payment of grants.
Among the voluntary organisations which campaign for the preservation
of buildings are the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings and
the Ancient Monuments Society; the Georgian Group and the Scottish
Georgian Society; the Ulster Architectural Heritage Society; and the
Victorian Society.
Besides helping to conserve the best buildings inherited from the past, the
Government encourages high standards in new building. The Secretary of
State for the Environment, in collaboration with the Royal Institute of
British Architects (RIBA), makes annual awards for good design in both
the public and private sectors, with categories for renovation as well as new
building. Wales has a similar but separate awards scheme. The Govern¬
ment has also encouraged the use of architectural competitions, and has set
an example in the award of some of its own contracts. Royal Fine Art
Commissions for England and Wales and for Scotland advise government
departments, planning authorities and other public bodies on questions of
public amenity or artistic importance.
The RIBA, which is the principal professional body for architects,
exercises control over standards in architectural education. The Royal
THE ENVIRONMENT
173
Tree
Preservation
Green Belts
The Coast
Incorporation of Architects in Scotland is allied to it. The Civic T rust, with
associate trusts in Scotland, Wales and north-east and north-west England,
encourages high standards in architecture and planning, and the protection
and improvement of the environment. The National Trust (for Places of
Historic Interest or Natural Beauty), which has more than one million
members, owns and protects 240 historic buildings in addition to 185,000
hectares (456,000 acres) of land and large stretches of coastline. Scotland
has its own National Trust.
The local planning authorities have power to protect trees and woodlands
in the interest of amenity by means of tree preservation orders. When
granting planning permission for development, a local planning authority
must, where appropriate, impose conditions to secure the preservation or
planting of trees. Landowners generally must replace trees which die or are
removed or destroyed in contravention of a preservation order.
In order to restrict the further sprawl of large built-up areas, to prevent
neighbouring towns merging into one another, and in some cases to
preserve the character of a town and the amenities of the countryside,
‘green belts’ (areas where it is intended that the land should be left open and
free from building development and where people can seek recreation) have
been established or proposed on the fringes of certain urban areas. Much of
London’s green belt, for example, is agricultural land or woodland, some of
which is used for recreation. There are also areas specifically for recrea¬
tional use, such as country parks, public open spaces, playing fields and
golf courses. The amount of agricultural land taken for development has
been steadily reduced from about 18,000 hectares (45,000 acres) a year be¬
tween 1965 and 1970 to about 9,000 hectares (23,000 acres) a year between
1975 and 1980.
The maritime local planning authorities are responsible for planning land
use at the coast providing, for example, recreational facilities and amenities
for holidaymakers and local residents; at the same time they attempt to
safeguard and enhance the coast’s natural attractions and preserve coastal
areas of scientific interest.
A comprehensive study of the coastline of England and Wales, under¬
taken by the Countryside Commission (see p 174) in 1966-70, recom¬
mended that certain stretches of undeveloped coast of particular scenic
beauty should be treated as heritage coast. Jointly with local authorities, the
Commission has defined 35 of these coasts so far, protecting nearly 1,200
kilometres (750 miles).
In 1965 the National Trust launched its Enterprise Neptune campaign to
raise funds for the nation to acquire stretches of coastline of great natural
beauty and recreational value. More than £5-5 million has been raised so far
and as a result the Trust has under its protection 659 kilometres (410 miles)
of coastline in England and Wales. Some 127 kilometres (79 miles) of coast
in Scotland are protected by conservation agreements with the National
Trust for Scotland. In Northern Ireland 45 kilometres (28 miles) of coast
and coastal path have been acquired by the National Trust.
In exceptional cases economic arguments override conservation; de¬
velopment associated with North Sea oil and gas is occurring on remote and
unspoiled coastal areas in Scotland, for instance, but planning guidelines
drawn up by the Scottish Development Department aim to ensure that oil-
174
Outdoor
Advertising
Countryside
Commissions
National Parks
and Areas of
Outstanding
Natural Beauty
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
related activities are sited so as to make the best use of existing labour and
infrastructure and to minimise the effect on the coastline. Provision has also
been made for funds to be set aside for the restoration of sites once there is
no further need for them.
The protection of the coastline against erosion, for which the Depart¬
ment of the Environment, the Welsh Office and the Scottish Office are
centrally responsible in Great Britain, presents difficult engineering prob¬
lems and heavy costs for the maritime local authorities. Substantial grants
from central funds may be made to the authorities.
The display of outdoor advertisements is controlled by planning legisla¬
tion. General consents have been issued for certain classes of advertisement
but these can be withdrawn in particular cases where there is a serious
threat to amenity or public safety. Consent for advertisements outside these
classes must be sought from the local planning authority. Rural areas and
urban areas requiring special protection can be designated as areas of
special control which impose more restrictive standards.
Two Countryside Commissions (one for England and Wales, the other for
Scotland) are responsible for encouraging and promoting measures to
conserve and enhance the natural beauty and amenity of the countryside
for encouraging the development of facilities for open-air recreation in
the countryside. These include the provision by local authorities (some¬
times in association with other bodies) and private individuals of country
parks and picnic sites often within easy reach of towns; the provision or
improvement of recreational paths; the encouragement of amenity tree¬
planting schemes; and the increased use of reservoirs, canals and other
waterways for bathing, sailing and other activities. Some 160 country parks
and 205 picnic sites have been recognised in England and Wales by the
Countryside Commission. In Scotland a large number of local authority
schemes for the provision of a variety of countryside facilities have been
approved for grant aid. The Commissions undertake research projects and
experimental schemes, working in consultation with local authorities and
such bodies as the Nature Conservancy Council (see p 176) and the Sports
Councils (see p 393). The Commissions give financial assistance to public
bodies and individuals carrying out countryside recreation and amenity
projects. Attention is increasingly being given to small-scale amenity tree¬
planting and to techniques of countryside management to supplement the
statutory planning controls.
The Countryside Commission (for England and Wales) is empowered to
designate, for confirmation by the appropriate minister, national parks and
areas of outstanding natural beauty’; to define heritage coasts in con¬
junction with local authorities (see p 173); and to make proposals for the
creation of long-distance footpaths and bridleways. Ten national parks
have been established (shown on the map at the end of the book) covering
13,600 sq km (5,250 square miles), or 9 per cent of the area of England and
Wales. Some 33 areas of outstanding natural beauty have been designated
and confirmed, covering 14,500 sq km (5,600 square miles).
The land in these designated areas generally remains privately owned,
but agreements or orders to secure additional public access may be made by
local authorities. Steps are taken to preserve and enhance the landscape’s
natural beauty by high standards of development control, and by positive
THE ENVIRONMENT
175
Local Footpaths
and Open
Country
measures, for which grants are available, such as tree planting and the
removal of eyesores. In the national parks, other measures for the benefit of
the public include the provision of car parks, camping and caravan areas,
and information centres. All national parks and some other designated
areas have warden services. Most local authority expenditure on national
parks is met by central government grants. Twelve long-distance footpaths
and bridleways covering 2,528 km (1,580 miles) have been approved and
one more is under consideration.
In Northern Ireland the Ulster Countryside Committee advises the
Department of the Environment on the preservation of amenities and the
designation of areas of outstanding natural beauty. Eight areas of out¬
standing natural beauty have been designated covering 259,500 hectares
(641,000 acres) and six areas are being managed as country parks and one as
a regional park.
In Scotland there are no national parks as such, but there are 40 ‘national
scenic areas’ where certain kinds of development are subject to consultation
with the Countryside Commission for Scotland, and the Secretary of State
for Scotland, in the event of a disagreement. More than 98 per cent of the
land in Scotland is countryside within the jurisdiction of the Commission.
There are, in addition, seven forest parks in Great Britain, covering
some 243,000 hectares (600,000 acres) and administered by the Forestry
Commission, and six in Northern Ireland administered by the Forest
Service of the Department of Agriculture. Camping and other recreational
facilities are provided.
There are many voluntary organisations concerned to preserve the
amenities of the countryside; they include the Councils for the Protec¬
tion of Rural England and of Rural Wales, the Association for the Protec¬
tion of Rural Scotland and the Ulster Society for the Preservation of the
Countryside.
County councils in England and Wales are required to prepare and keep
under review definitive maps showing public rights of way; they are also
responsible for keeping rights of way free from obstruction and signposted.
If a path is not shown on the map, a private citizen may claim that it is a
public right of way if it has been used and regarded as such without
hindrance for at least 20 years. Public footpaths are maintained by local
authorities which also supervise landowners’ duties to repair stiles and
gates. Local authorities in Great Britain can create paths, close existing
paths no longer needed for public use and divert paths to meet the needs
of either the public or landowners. Local planning authorities can also
convert minor roads into footpaths or bridleways to improve the amenities
of their area. Voluntary organisations concerned with footpaths include the
Commons, Open Spaces and Footpaths Preservation Society, the Scottish
Rights of Way Society and the Ramblers’ Association.
There is no automatic right of public access to open country, although
many landowners permit such access more or less freely. Local planning
authorities can secure access by means of agreements with landowners; if
agreements cannot be obtained, authorities may acquire land or make
orders for public access. Similar powers cover Scotland, while comparable
legislation is being prepared in Northern Ireland.
Common land, a large proportion of which is open to the public, totals an
estimated 600,000 hectares (15 million acres) in England and Wales.
(There is no common land in Scotland or Northern Ireland.) This land is
I?6
Nature
Conservation
Land
Reclamation
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
usually privately owned, but people other than the owner have various
rights on or over it, for example, of pasture for farm animals. Commons are
protected by law and cannot be built on or enclosed without the consent of
the Secretaries of State for the Environment or Wales.
The official body responsible for nature conservation in Great Britain is the
Nature Conservancy Council which has the functions of establishing,
maintaining and managing nature reserves, advising ministers, providing
general information and advice, and commissioning or supporting research.
There are 171 national nature reserves covering 133,640 hectares (330,090
acres). Some 3,900 sites of special scientific interest have been scheduled
for their flora, fauna or geological or physiographical features.
About 10,000 hectares (25,000 acres) of Foresty Commission land are
managed as areas in which nature conservation is the main object. Local
authorities have declared about 80 local nature reserves. Nature conserva¬
tion trusts and the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds play an
important part in protecting wildlife, having established between them
some 1,200 reserves. The trusts are affiliated to a parent organisation,
the Royal Society for Nature Conservation. The Royal Society for the
Protection of Birds, with more than 350,000 members, is the largest
voluntary wildlife conservation body in Europe.
In Northern Ireland the Nature Reserves Committee advises the
Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland on the designation of
national nature reserves and areas of scientific interest; there are 37 and 46
respectively.
The Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 extends the list of protected
species and restricts the introduction into the countryside of animals or
plants not normally found in the wild. Other provisions relate to areas of
special scientific interest, to the making of grants and loans by the Nature
Conservancy Council and to the powers of the Countryside Commission
with respect to experimental schemes. The Act also contains a number of
measures designed to enhance and promote the national parks and amends
the law relating to public rights of way. In Northern Ireland a wildlife
protection order is being prepared which would bring legislation into line
with the rest of Britain on species and habitat protection.
Derelict land, often concentrated in places associated with nineteenth-
century industrial development, presents special problems to planners. It
includes mineral waste tips, old mineral workings, obsolete industrial
buildings and disused railways and docks. In England most derelict land
reclamation is undertaken, with the help of central government grant, by
local authorities, which have the power to acquire derelict land and bring it
back into use or improve its appearance. Mainly as a result of government
encouragement, local authorities have shown an increasing interest in
reclaiming derelict land, and greater emphasis is being placed on grant
assistance for the reclamation of derelict land in urban areas for industrial
and other development. In addition, grants have recently been made
available to people and public bodies other than local authorities.
In Scotland and Wales responsibility for derelict land reclamation rests
with the respective development agencies, which may acquire and reclaim
land, employ local authorities as their agents (in Scotland) or make grants to
local authorities for the purpose (in Wales). In Northern Ireland grants
may be paid to landowners who restore or improve derelict sites.
THE ENVIRONMENT
I??
Land Registers
Administration
To prevent new dereliction, planning controls require that when per¬
mission is given for mineral working various measures must be taken to
minimise the disturbance caused by the work and to secure whatever
restoration is practicable, either progressively or when working ceases. The
use of land for disposal of waste materials is also subject to conditions
restricting height or requiring treatment on completion.
In England, following a pilot scheme in 33 areas, the Government has
instituted, and made available for inspection, registers of under-used land
held by local authorities, nationalised industries and other public bodies.
There is power to direct a public body to dispose of registered land.
CONTROL OF POLLUTION
Government measures to control environmental pollution, in which
industry and voluntary organisations co-operate, are long established, and
are seen as complementary to the planning system and the various measures
to conserve amenities and the country’s heritage.
The Control of Pollution Act 1974, which applies to England, Scotland
and Wales, sets out a wide range of powers and duties for local and water
authorities, including control over wastes, air and water pollution and
noise, and contains important provisions on the release of information to
the public on environmental conditions. In particular, it introduced a new
system for the comprehensive planning of waste disposal operations so as to
ensure that disposal is carried out to satisfactory standards and that where
practicable waste materials are recovered and recycled. The Act also
increased the penalties for a large number of pollution offences. The
provisions relating to noise and air pollution are fully in force in England,
Scotland and Wales, as are a substantial number of those relating to waste
on land; most of the part dealing with water pollution is being im¬
plemented. Similar legislation applies in Northern Ireland.
Responsibility for the control of pollution is shared by various central
government departments, local and water authorities and statutory agencies.
Industry co-operates with these authorities and voluntary organisations
help to focus public interest on the process of control. An independent
standing Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution advises the
Government on national and international matters concerning the pollu¬
tion of the environment, on the adequacy of research and on the future
possibilities of danger to the environment. In England and Wales the
Secretary of State for the Environment has a co-ordinating role concerning
pollution matters as a whole, exercised through a Central Directorate on
Environmental Pollution within his department. In Scotland a similar role
is exercised by the Secretary of State for Scotland through the Scottish
Development Department.
Local authorities are responsible for matters such as collection and
disposal of domestic wastes; control of air pollution from domestic and
certain industrial premises; and noise abatement measures. Sewerage and
sewage treatment and disposal are the responsibilities of water authori¬
ties in England and Wales, of local authorities in Scotland and of the De¬
partment of the Environment in Northern Ireland. The regional water
authorities in England, the Welsh Water Authority, the river purifica¬
tion boards and islands councils in Scotland and the Department of
i78
The Land
Recycling and
Materials
Reclamation
Water
Pollution
Marine
Pollution
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the Environment for Northern Ireland are responsible for control of
water pollution.
The main risks of land pollution lie in the indiscriminate dumping of waste
materials on land, careless disposal of pesticides and chemicals, fall-out of
materials from the atmosphere and the deposition of materials from flood-
water. The use of sewage sludge on farms, too, involves risks as well as
benefits to the land.
The Control of Pollution Act places a duty on waste disposal authorities
(county councils and the Greater London Council in England, for example)
to ensure that there are adequate arrangements to dispose of controlled
wastes. It requires them to draw up and revise periodically a waste disposal
plan and establishes a licensing system for all waste disposal sites, treatment
plants and storage facilities receiving controlled wastes. In addition, it
provides for a more intensive control system for certain specially hazardous
or difficult wastes.
It is a criminal offence to leave litter in any public place in the open air or
to dump rubbish except in designated places.
The Government encourages the reclamation and recycling of waste
materials wherever this is practicable and economic in order to reduce
imports and waste disposal costs and to help to conserve natural resources.
Industry already makes considerable use of reclaimed waste material such
as metals, paper and textiles. Local authorities collect about 200,000 tonnes
of waste paper and about 100,000 tonnes of ferrous scrap annually. In an
increasing number of areas there are ‘bottle banks’ where the public can
deposit used glass containers. Waste disposal authorities are required
under the Control of Pollution Act to take full account of opportunities for
waste reclamation in drawing up their waste disposal plans. Voluntary
organisations also organise collections of waste material.
The Department of the Environment has provided financial and tech¬
nical help to South Yorkshire and Tyne and Wear County Councils for two
full-scale prototype plants for the mechanical sorting of household refuse at
Doncaster and Byker.
There has been a steady and significant improvement in water quality: the
level of pollution in the tidal Thames, for example, has been reduced to a
quarter of the 1950s’ level and 100 different kinds of fish have been
identified there since 1964. Discharges of polluting matter into rivers,
lakes, estuaries and some coastal waters are already controlled by law.
Powers will be extended to lakes underground and all coastal waters when
the Control of Pollution Act is fully implemented. More than 90 per cent of
the British population is provided with main drainage, and public authority
sewage treatment works serve over four-fifths of the population—a very
high proportion by international standards.
Control of marine pollution from ships is based largely on international
conventions drawn up under the auspices of the International Maritime
Organisation, a United Nations agency with headquarters in London, and
implemented for British ships by domestic legislation. The Prevention of
Oil Pollution Act 1971 makes it an offence for ships of any nationality to
discharge any oil into British territorial waters and for British registered
ships to discharge persistent oil anywhere at sea, except in accordance with
very stringent regulations.
THE ENVIRONMENT
179
Clean Air
To deal with spillages of oil or chemicals at sea, which may cause coastal
pollution or threaten wildlife, the Department of Trade has established a
Marine Pollution Control Unit and can also call upon the resources of the
Marine Survey and Coastguard services. The main treatment method is to
spray dispersant from aircraft or surface vessels, and emergency cargo
transfer equipment is available to remove oil from a damaged tanker. Local
authorities have a primary role in dealing with oil and chemical pollution of
beaches and in inshore waters, and receive government advice and support.
The development of the offshore oil industry has brought an increased
risk of oil pollution in the North Sea. Offshore operators are required to
ensure that oil does not escape into the sea and are also expected to have
contingency plans for dealing with oil spills. Not all traces of oil can be
removed from water separated from crude oil before its discharge from
production platforms into the sea, and these discharges from offshore
installations are normally granted exemption from the 1971 Act subject to
strict controls laid down by the Department of Energy. The Department of
the Environment, the Welsh Office, the Scottish Development Department
and the Northern Ireland Department of the Environment have powers to
grant exemptions subject to similar controls for discharges from land-
based sources.
Under the Dumping at Sea Act 1974 a licence has to be obtained for the
permanent deposit of any substance or article into tidal waters and the sea.
Dumping at sea is permitted on the basis of the scientific criteria set out in
the annexes to the Oslo Convention (International Convention for the
Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping from Ships and Aircraft 1972)
and the London Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by
Dumping Wastes and Other Matter 1972.
Responsibility for clean air rests primarily with local authorities. Under the
provisions of the Clean Air Acts 1956 and 1968 they may declare ‘smoke
control areas’ within which the emission of smoke from chimneys con¬
stitutes an offence. About two-thirds of the premises in conurbations are
now covered by smoke control orders. Emissions from most industrial
premises are also subject to the control of local authorities under the Clean
Air Acts. The emission of dark smoke from any trade or industrial premises
or from the chimney of any building is in general prohibited, and new
furnaces must be capable as far as practicable of smokeless operation. The
height of the chimney serving a new furnace must generally be approved by
the local authority, and approved grit and dust arrestment plant has to be
installed. Regulations have been made which prescribe specific limits to the
quantities of grit and dust which may be emitted from certain furnaces.
Industrial premises that give rise to particularly offensive or dangerous
emissions are, in England and Wales, under the control of the Alkali and
Clean Air Inspectorate of the Health and Safety Executive (p 320). In
Scotland this function is discharged by the Industrial Pollution Inspec¬
torate. The Inspectorates require the best practicable means to be used
to prevent or abate emissions. Similar legislation and controls apply in
Northern Ireland. Controls are also in force on emissions from motor
vehicles, such as the maximum permitted lead content of petrol which was
reduced to 0 40 grammes per litre at the beginning of 1981, and will be
reduced further to 015 grammes per litre by 1985.
Considerable progress has been made towards the achievement of
cleaner air and a better environment, especially in the last 20 years or so.
i8o
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Noise
Radioactivity
Total emissions and average concentration of smoke in the air have fallen by
80 per cent since i960. The domestic smoke control programme has been
particularly important in achieving this result. London no longer has the
dense smoke-laden ‘smogs’ of the 1950s and in central London winter
sunshine has been increasing since the 1940s when average hours a day were
about 40 per cent less than at Kew in outer London; the levels are now
virtually the same. Similar improvement has been achieved in other cities
including Glasgow and Sheffield. Since i960 average concentrations of
sulphur dioxide in urban areas have fallen by over 60 per cent.
The Control of Pollution Act 1974 (and similar legislation in Northern
Ireland) requires local authorities to inspect their areas for noise nuisance
and gives them the power to deal with it. It also enables them to designate
‘noise abatement zones’ within which registered levels of noise from
classified premises may not be increased without their permission. The
Act contains specific provisions to control noise from construction and
demolition sites.
Transport is one of the main offenders in noise pollution, and control
measures are aimed at reducing noise at source, through requirements
limiting the noise that aircraft and motor vehicles may make, and by
protecting people from its effects. The Motor Vehicles (Construction and
Use) Regulations 1978 set out the permissible noise levels for various
classes of vehicles when new and when in use and more stringent limits will
apply for vehicles coming into use during 1983.
Under the Land Compensation Act 1973 and similar legislation in
Scotland compensation is payable for loss in property values caused by
physical factors including noise arising from the use of new or improved
public works such as roads and airports. Regulations made under the Acts
also enable highway authorities to carry out or make grants for insulation of
homes subject to specified levels of increased noise caused by new or
improved roads. Noise insulation may also be provided where construction
work for new roads is likely seriously to affect nearby homes.
Noise emission levels of most aircraft on the United Kingdom Register of
Civil Aircraft are regulated in accordance with standards agreed by the
International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO). Subsonic jets acquired
by British operators after September 1978 must already meet the noise
certification criteria agreed by ICAO, and all those on the United Kingdom
Register will have to do so from 1 January 1986. Various operational
restrictions have been introduced to reduce noise disturbance further, and
people living in the worst affected areas round a number of airports may be
eligible for noise insulation grants.
In Britain radiation resulting from industrial and other processes repre¬
sents only a small fraction of that to which the population is exposed from
the natural environment. Nevertheless, that fraction is subject to stringent
control because of possible effects on health or longer-term genetic effects.
Under the Radioactive Substances Act i960 users of radioactive materials
other than those subject to licence under the Nuclear Installations Act 1965
must be registered by the appropriate department and authorisation is also
required for the disposal of radioactive waste, with exemption for very
minor users and disposals. The Health and Safety Executive, through its
Nuclear Installations Inspectorate, is the authority concerned with the
granting of nuclear site licences for commercial nuclear installations. No
THE ENVIRONMENT
181
such installation may be constructed or operated without a licence granted
by the Executive. The National Radiological Protection Board established
under the Radiological Protection Act 1970 provides an authoritative point
of reference on radiological protection.
Various methods are used to store radioactive wastes, depending pri¬
marily upon their physical form and radioactivity. Wastes of sufficiently
low radioactivity are dispersed safely direct to the environment. For those
of higher activity a comprehensive, international research programme is
being carried out with government assistance and with the participation of
the nuclear industry into methods of treatment, storage, transport and
disposal. The Government has announced its intention of setting up a
Nuclear Industry Radioactive Waste Executive, which will develop and
manage radioactive waste disposal facilities and accept solid waste from
those who create it.
Fhe Churches
Everyone in Britain has the right of religious freedom (in teaching, worship
and observance) without interference from the community or the State.
Churches and religious societies may own property, conduct schools, and
propagate their beliefs in speech and writing. There is no religious or
denominational bar to the holding of public olfice.
Clergy of the established churches of England and Scotland work in
services administered by the State, such as the armed forces, national
hospitals and prisons, and are paid a salary by the State. Clergy of other
denominations are also appointed. Voluntary schools provided by any
religious denomination may be wholly or partly maintained from public
funds.
There is no precise or uniform information about the number of church
adherents since no inquiries are normally made about religious beliefs in
censuses or other official returns, and each church adopts its own criteria in
counting its members. Membership figures in this chapter are therefore
approximate.
The Church of The established Church of England’s relationship with the State is one of
England mutual obligation—privileges accorded to the Church balanced by certain
duties which it must fulfil. The Sovereign must always be a member of the
Church, and promises to uphold it; Church of England archbishops,
bishops and deans are appointed by the Sovereign on the advice of the
Prime Minister; all clergy take an oath of allegiance to the Crown. The
Church can regulate its own worship. The two archbishops (of Canterbury
and York), the bishops of London, Durham and Winchester, and 21 other
bishops (according to their seniority as diocesan bishops) sit in the House
of Lords. Clergy of the Church (together with those of the Church of
Scotland, the Church of Ireland and the Roman Catholic Church) are not
allowed to sit in the Elouse of Commons.
The Church has two provinces: Canterbury, comprising 30 dioceses,
and York, 14 dioceses. The dioceses are divided into parishes, of which
there are some 13,600. The Archbishop of Canterbury is ‘Primate of All
England’, and the Archbishop of York ‘Primate of England’. In 1980 of the
population born and resident in the two provinces (roughly 46 million)
about 58 per cent were baptised into the Church and some 19 per cent were
confirmed members.
The central governing body, the General Synod, has both spiritual
authority and legislative and administrative powers; and bishops, clergy
and lay members are involved in decisions. Certain important issues
must be referred for the approval of the dioceses before being decided by
the Synod. Lay members are associated with church government in the
parishes through the ancient office of churchwarden and the modern
parochial church councils.
The General Synod is the centre of an administrative system dealing
with such matters as education, mission, inter-church relations, social
questions, recruitment and training for the ministry, church work at home
and overseas and the care of church buildings, particularly those of historic
and architectural interest. The Synod is also concerned with church
The Anglican
Communion
The Church of
Scotland
The Free
Churches
THE CHURCHES i83
schools; church colleges of education; theological colleges; and establish¬
ments for training women in pastoral work.
The Church has its own courts whose jurisdiction today extends only to
matters of purely ecclesiastical concern.
Church finance is administered locally by the parishes and the dioceses,
with contributions to a central fund for the maintenance of central services,
including capital expenditure on training and theological colleges and
grants for training candidates for ordination. The State makes no direct
financial contribution to church expenses. The Church’s endowment
income is mainly administered by the Church Commissioners, the body
largely responsible for the payment of clergy stipends and pensions.
The Anglican Communion comprises 27 autonomous provinces in Britain
and overseas and three regional councils overseas with a total membership
of about 65 million. In the British Isles, there are four provinces: the
Church of England (established), the Church in Wales, the Scottish
Episcopal Church in Scotland, and the Church of Ireland.
Every ten years the Lambeth Conference meets for unofficial consulta¬
tion among all Anglican bishops (the last meeting was in 1978); presided
over by the Archbishop of Canterbury, it has no executive authority, but
enjoys great prestige, and its findings on doctrine, discipline, relations with
other communions, and attitudes to political and social questions are
widely studied. The Anglican Consultative Council—an assembly of lay¬
men and clergy as well as bishops which meets every two or three years—is
designed to provide consultations within the Anglican Communion and to
serve as an instrument of common action. The Council last met in 1981.
The Church of Scotland has a presbyterian form of government. Its status
as the national church derives from the Treaty of Union 1707 and the
Church of Scotland Act 1921 which confirmed its complete freedom in all
spiritual matters. It appoints its own officers, and its decisions on questions
of doctrine and discipline are not subject to parliamentary discussion or
modification.
All ministers have equal status, each of 1,829 churches being governed
locally by the Kirk Session, consisting of the minister and the elected elders
of the Church; above the Kirk Session is the Court of the Presbytery, then
the Court of the Synod, and finally the General Assembly, consisting of
elected ministers and elders, which meets annually under the presidency of
an elected moderator who serves for one year. The Sovereign is represented
at the General Assembly by the Lord High Commissioner. The adult
communicant membership of the Church of Scotland is estimated at over
938,000.
The expression ‘Free Churches’ is commonly used to describe those
Protestant churches in England and Scotland which, unlike the Church of
England and the Church of Scotland, are not established. In the course of
history they have developed their own convictions in church order and
worship.
The Methodist Church, the largest of the Free Churches with nearly
500,000 adult full members, originated in the eighteenth century following
the evangelical revival under John Wesley, and is based on a 1932 union of
most of the separate Methodist Churches. The Methodist Churches which
184
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
did not join the union include the Independent Methodists (4,500 members)
and the Wesleyan Reform Union (with some 3,700 members). The
Methodist Church in Ireland has some 39,000 members in Northern
Ireland.
The Baptists are nearly all grouped in associations of churches, most of
which belong to the Baptist Union of Great Britain and Ireland (formed in
1813), with a total membership of about 170,000; in addition, there are
separate Baptist Unions for Scotland, Wales and Ireland and other Baptist
churches.
The United Reformed Church, with some 148,000 members, was
formed in 1972 when the Congregational Church in England and Wales
(the oldest community of dissenters in Britain) and the Presbyterian
Church of England merged—the first transdenominational union of
churches in Britain since the Reformation in the sixteenth century. In 1981
there was a further union with the Re-formed Association of the Churches
of Christ.
Among the other Free Churches are the Presbyterian Church in Ireland
(with some 133,000 regular communicants in Northern Ireland); the
Presbyterian (or Calvinistic Methodist) Church of Wales, which arose
from the revivalist movement led in 1735 by Howell Harris; the Union of
Welsh Independents; the Free Church of Scotland; the United Free
Church of Scotland; the Free Presbyterian Church of Scotland; the
Reformed Presbyterian Church of Scotland; the Reformed Presbyterian
Church of Ireland; and the Non-Subscribing Presbyterian Church of
Ireland.
Other Protestant denominations include: the Churches of Christ (known
also in the United States as Disciples of Christ), which have been an
organised community in Britain since early in the nineteenth century;
the British Province of the Moravian Church, which is an international
missionary church; the Free Church of England (or Reformed Episcopal
Church), which was formed in 1844 as a direct result of the Oxford
Movement; and the Congregational Federation, formed from Congrega¬
tional churches which did not enter the United Reformed Church. There
are also the Pentecostalists, who are increasing in numbers. Their two main
bodies operating in Britain are the Assemblies of God and the Elim
Pentecostal Church, many of whose members are of West Indian origin.
There are a number of small West Indian churches, whose membership
together amounts to well over 80,000, and various African churches with a
membership of 22,000.
The Religious Society ofFriends (Quakers), with about 18,550 members
in Britain and over 440 places for worship, came into being in the middle of
the seventeenth century under the leadership of George Fox and works for
peace and the relief of suffering in many parts of the world.
The Salvation Army, founded in Britain in 1865, has since spread to 86
other countries and has a strength of about 2 million. Within Britain it has
some 75,000 active members operating from more than 1,000 centres of
worship. Believing in a very practical expression of Christian concern, the
Salvation Army has 200 centres to help people in need.
There are also a number of other religious organisations with churches
or assemblies in Britain, including the Unitarian and Free Christian
Churches, the Jehovah’s Witnesses, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-
Day Saints (the Mormon Church); and the Christian Scientists with 262
branch churches and societies in the British Isles.
THE CHURCHES
185
The Roman
Catholic
Church
Jewry
Other
Religious
Communities
Co-operation
among the
Churches
The Roman Catholic hierarchy in England and Wales, which became
temporarily extinct during the sixteenth century, was restored in 1850; the
Scottish hierarchy became extinct in the early seventeenth century and
was restored in 1878. There are now seven Roman Catholic provinces in
Great Britain, each under an archbishop, 29 episcopal dioceses, and over
3,000 parishes. In Northern Ireland, there are six dioceses, some of which
have territory partly in the Irish Republic. It is estimated that there are
some 5 million adherents (including children) to the Roman Catholic faith
in the whole of Britain. In 1982 Pope John Paul II paid a pastoral visit to the
Roman Catholic community in Britain, the first by a reigning pontiff.
The Roman Catholic Church attaches great importance to the education
of its children and requires its members to try to bring up their children in
the Catholic faith. Many schools for Catholic children are staffed by
members of the religious orders who also undertake other social work such
as nursing, child care, and the conduct of homes for old people.
Jews first settled in England at the time of the Norman conquest, but the
community in Britain dates from 1656; consisting of some 400,000 people,
including both Sephardi (originally from Spain and Portugal) and Ashkenazi
(from Germany and Eastern Europe), it has become one of the largest
groups of Jews in Europe. The community is divided into two schools of
thought—the Orthodox, to which about 80 per cent of practising Jews
belong; and the Reform, which originated in 1840 and was followed in 1901
by the Liberal Jewish movement. The Chief Rabbi is the head of the largest
group (Ashkenazi) within Orthodox Jewry; the Haham is the head of the
Sephardi group. Jewish congregations in Britain number about 300. Jewish
denominational schools are attended by about one in four Jewish children.
Immigrants to Britain from Commonwealth and foreign countries have
established centres of worship, especially in London, for their own com¬
munities. Among the Christian communities represented are Orthodox,
Lutheran and Reformed Churches of various European countries and the
Armenian Church.
The principal non-Christian communities in Britain, apart from the
Jews, are the Muslims, Hindus, Sikhs and Buddhists. For the many
Muslims there are mosques or Islamic centres in London, Birmingham,
Manchester, Cardiff, Glasgow and in many other large cities. The com¬
munity’s most important institution is the London Central Mosque and
Islamic Cultural Centre. There are several hundred Hindu and Sikh
temples in places where Indians have settled, and arrangements have been
made in many places of work to allow the members of eastern religions to
follow their religious observances.
The Buddhist Society, with headquarters in London, publishes and
makes known the principles of Buddhism and encourages their study and
practice. It adheres to no one school of Buddhism.
The British Council of Churches, with representatives or observers from
all the main Christian churches in the British Isles, facilitates common
action and seeks to further Christian unity. It works through five divi¬
sions : Christian Aid (which has a separate constitution); Conference for
World Mission; Ecumenical Affairs; Community Affairs; and Inter¬
national Affairs.
The Free Church Federal Council (which has a concordat with the
i86
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
British Council of Churches) comprises most of the Free Churches of
England and Wales. It promotes unity and joint action among the Free
Churches and is a channel for communication with central and local
government.
The permanent Anglican-Roman Catholic Commission explores points
of possible unity between the two communions.
The Anglican and the main Free Churches also participate in the World
Council of Churches (of which the British Council of Churches is an
associated national council) which links together some 300 churches in over
100 countries for co-operation and the study of common problems. The
Council of Christians and Jews works for better understanding among
members of the two religions and deals with problems in the social field.
The British Council of Churches has also established a Committee for
Relations with People of Other Faiths.
The Sharing of Church Buildings Act 1969 enables agreements to be
made by two or more churches for the sharing of church buildings.
io National
Economy
Britain is a trading nation, exporting a higher proportion of its production
of goods and services than any other industrial country of comparable size
(31 per cent of gross domestic product—GDP). This is a far higher share
than in the United States or Japan and is also higher than in two of Britain’s
larger partners in the European Community (France and the Federal
Republic of Germany).1
Britain accounts for 5-6 per cent of world exports, and is fourth in its
share of world exports (after the United States, the Federal Republic of
Germany and Japan). It is one of the world’s largest importers of agri¬
cultural products, raw materials and semi-manufactures and is among the
largest exporters of aerospace products, motor vehicles, electrical equip¬
ment, finished textiles and most types of machinery. Britain is also self-
sufficient in oil in overall terms.
The British economy is primarily based on private enterprise and govern¬
ment policy is aimed at encouraging the private sector. There are some
major public corporations, accounting for about 9 per cent of all employees,
while the public sector as a whole employs about 34 per cent.
The traditional economic strength of Britain, as a pioneer in the Indus¬
trial Revolution, was based on manufacturing. More recently there has
been a decline in the relative importance of manufacturing and a rise in that
of services. This pattern is in evidence throughout the industrialised world,
where the industrial sector accounted for 32 per cent of total employment in
1980 compared with 36 per cent in the late 1960s. The trend has coincided
with a rise in the relative importance of manufacturing in the developing
countries.
Less than 3 per cent of Britain’s employed labour force is engaged in agri¬
culture—a lower proportion than in any other major industrial country.
However, because of a high level of productivity, Britain is able to produce
more than half of its own food.
Britain’s energy position has been transformed in the last decade. With
the discovery and exploitation of oil and natural gas from the Continental
Shelf under the North Sea, the country has become self-sufficient in energy
in net terms. The output of the petroleum and natural gas industry
amounted to about £ 12,000 million in 1981, equivalent to nearly 6 per cent
of GDP. It has also been of great importance to the balance of payments,
and substantial revenues from taxation have helped to ease the pressure of
government borrowing and other forms of taxation, thus making an im¬
portant contribution to the Government’s medium-term strategy against
inflation. Coal has traditionally played an important role as a source of
energy and still accounts for some 37 per cent of Britain’s needs; its value
has been enhanced by the substantial increase in world oil prices since 1973.
1On the basis of relative prices in the major industrial countries, Britain was tenth in terms of GDP per head
in 1980.
i88
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
ECONOMIC
BACKGROUND
Post-war
Developments
Inflation and
Competitiveness
The most significant change in Britain’s trading patterns over the last
decade has followed from its joining the European Community in 1973.
Between 1972 and 1980 the proportion of Britain’s visible exports going to
other Commonwealth countries fell from 18 per cent to 13 per cent while
that going to other Community countries rose from 31 per cent to 43 per
cent. Trade with the newly industrialising countries, including Singapore,
South Korea, Taiwan and Malaysia, has also risen substantially.
The broad historical pattern of Britain’s overseas trade has been a deficit
on visible trade offset by a surplus on invisible transactions (but there was a
surplus on visible trade in 1980 and 1981); these include, for example,
transactions relating to international investment, travel, shipping and
financial services. In 1981 earnings from invisibles comprised over one-
third of Britain’s earnings on current account. In 1980 Britain accounted
for 9 per cent of world invisible receipts (excluding government trans¬
actions). The significant contribution made by invisibles to the current
account is largely a reflection of Britain’s position as a major financial
centre. The banks, insurance underwriters and brokers, and other financial
institutions of the City of London provide world-wide financial services,
and the City contains perhaps the most comprehensive and advanced
capital market in the world.
In the period since the end of the second world war in 1945 there has been a
marked rise in living standards, the emergence of new industries and the
renewal and improvement of much of the country’s infrastructure. At the
same time, in spite of short periods of rapid economic growth, the rate of
growth has been low in comparison with the rates in most other industria¬
lised countries, averaging 2-3 per cent annually up to 1973 but only about
1 per cent in subsequent years. Although attention has been paid throughout
the period to achieving higher levels of exports (with considerable success,
the proportion of GDP exported rising from under 20 per cent in 1950 to 31
per cent in 1981), the economy, during the years of fixed exchange rates and
before the growth of North Sea oil production, was vulnerable to balance-
of-payments problems, with a strong rise in imports at times of expansion.
The effects bore most heavily on the reserves of gold and foreign currencies
and led repeatedly to the imposition of restraints on home demand, as part
of a pattern which became known as ‘stop-go’.
Since the late 1960s the rise in wage and price inflation has had adverse
effects on competitiveness, profitability and business confidence. This has
been associated with an increase in unemployment over the same period. At
various times governments have attempted to control pay rises by means of
voluntary or statutory controls on incomes and also, periodically, on prices
but such policies have been largely unsuccessful. Following the five-fold
increase in world oil prices in 1973-74, which was accommodated by a rapid
growth in money supply and public spending, the annual inflation rate
reached a peak of 24 per cent in 1975. After falling into single figures in 1978
and early 1979, inflation again rose rapidly, reaching 22 per cent in May
1980, partly as a result of the doubling of oil prices in 1979. The growth in
earnings also accelerated, particularly in the 1979-80 pay round when they
rose by 22 per cent. Subsequently, restrictive monetary and fiscal policies,
reflected partly in a generally strong exchange rate assisted by the general
weakness of world commodity prices in 1981 and 1982, have resulted in a
sharp fall in the rate of inflation, to 8 per cent in August 1982. Pay
Output
and
Employment
Overseas
Sector
NATIONAL ECONOMY J89
settlements have also moderated sharply; average earnings rose by an
underlying rate of about 9 per cent in the year to July 1982.
In the late 1970s British manufacturers’ unit wage and salary costs rose
more than in competitor countries, but the depreciation of sterling until
1978 more than offset this. Between 1978 and 1980, however, sterling
appreciated, adding to the decline in competitiveness. Since the end of 1980
British manufacturers’ unit wage and salary costs have risen very little; in
the year to July 1982 they rose by just 5 per cent, an increase comparable to
that of major competitors. This reflects the greater moderation in pay
settlements and the substantial rise in manufacturing productivity since the
end of 1980. By the second quarter of 1982 manufacturing productivity was
7 per cent higher than a year earlier, a far larger increase than would
normally have been expected at this stage of the cycle.
The rate of growth of industrial output (apart from North Sea oil—see
below) and, within this, of manufacturing output, has declined in recent
years relative to the rest of the economy. Industrial output rose by some
3 per cent a year in the decade or so to 1973 (much the same as for the
economy as a whole) but has since fallen. The relative decline partly reflects
strong competition in overseas markets from newly industrialising as well
as from other developed countries. Many industries have undergone con¬
siderable reorganisation to improve competitiveness. A number of them,
such as aerospace, chemicals, oil, gas and electronics, have gained strength
while textiles and some other traditional industries, including steel and
shipbuilding, have contracted, shifting emphasis to more profitable or
specialised products. Regional policies, promoted by successive govern¬
ments, have encouraged the development of newer manufacturing and
service employment and improved the environment to attract firms to areas
of high unemployment.
Total output fell by 6 per cent between the second half of 1979 (the
previous cyclical peak) and the second quarter of 1981 (the trough of the
current recession). The fall was concentrated in the manufacturing and
construction industries, where output fell by about one-sixth over the
period. After recovering during the second half of 1981, output remained
broadly unchanged in the first half of 1982. By the second quarter of 1982
total output was about 1 per cent higher than in the second quarter of 1981.
Although total employment was still falling in early 1982, the rate
of decline was generally smaller than it had been at the end of 1980. Other
labour market indicators have improved. Total hours worked and overtime
in manufacturing have risen and short-time working has fallen. The
number of registered vacancies in June 1982 was 34 per cent higher than the
low point in December 1981.
The strength of overseas invisible earnings has been maintained by the
continued adaptation to new conditions and growth in world markets of
insurance, banking, tourism, construction, consultancy and other services.
Direct investment overseas which, until the abolition of exchange controls
in 1979 had usually to be financed in foreign currency, has helped to build
up inflows of interest, profits and dividends. All constraints previously
imposed on portfolio investment have also been removed and in 1981
private portfolio investment overseas by British residents was over four
times the 1979 figure.
190
Oil and Gas
Sterling
ECONOMIC
POLICY
ECONOMIC
MANAGEMENT
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The beneficial effects of growing North Sea oil and gas production on the
balance of payments were apparent over the second half of the 1970s, when
a deficit on the oil account of nearly £4,000 million in 1976 was turned into a
favourable balance of over £250 million by 1980. In 1974 oil accounted for
some 4 per cent of Britain’s exports and 19 per cent of imports; by 1980
both proportions were 13 per cent. Exports, mainly to other European
Community countries, account for about half of domestic production.
They are largely offset in balance-of-payments terms by imports of other
grades of crude oil from the Middle East and elsewhere.
These developments contributed to the strengthening of the pound in
foreign exchange markets where, to some extent, it has the status of a
‘petro-currency’, with the attendant risks of fluctuations, in both direc¬
tions, in its value. During 1980 sterling appreciated markedly but it fell
back in 1981 before stabilising again. Government policy is to prevent
undue fluctuations in the level of sterling but to allow the rate to be
determined primarily by the balance of market forces. By July 1982 the rate
against the dollar was £1 = $1 -73.
The Government’s main policy objectives are to reduce the rate of inflation
over the medium term and to create conditions necessary for a sustainable
growth in output and employment. It is committed to a continuing reduc¬
tion in the growth of the money stock and to the pursuit of complementary
fiscal policies to maintain downward pressure on interest rates. This
requires moderating public sector expenditure and seeking to reduce
public borrowing as a proportion of GDP. The strategy also entails policies
to improve the supply side of the economy, such as a reduction in direct
taxation, the encouragement of small firms and new enterprise, the pro¬
vision of a more effective framework for industrial relations and the re¬
moval of administrative controls on prices, wages, dividends and outward
capital movements.
Monetary policy is directed towards a reduction in the annual rate of
growth of both broad and narrow measures of the money supply in the
medium term. The target range for the growth of the money supply in
1982-83 is 8 to 12 per cent. Other factors, such as progress in reducing
inflation and movements in the exchange rate, are taken into account in
assessing monetary conditions. The ratio of the Government’s borrowing
requirement to GDP in 1982-83 is forecast at some 3 5 per cent, similar to
the estimated outturn in 1981-82.
The Treasury has prime responsibility for the formulation and conduct of
economic policy, which also involves the Departments of Trade, Industry,
Employment, Energy, the Environment and Transport and the Ministry of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food. Other bodies are concerned with specific
aspects of economic policy. These include the Bank of England (the central
bank), the National Economic Development Council, which brings to¬
gether representatives of government, management and trade unions under
the chairmanship of the Prime Minister, the Office of Fair Trading (see
p 208) and the Monopolies and Mergers Commission (see p 208).
On matters of major public policy such as the broad economic strategy,
and on the economic problems it faces, the Government makes known its
purposes and keeps in touch with developments throughout the economy
NATIONAL ECONOMY
NATIONAL
INCOME AND
EXPENDITURE
Output
Use of
Resources
Personal
Income and
Expenditure
191
by means of informal and continuous links with the chief industrial,
financial, labour and other interests. Final responsibility for the broad lines
of economic policy rests with the Cabinet.
In 1981 gross domestic product at factor cost (the total value of goods and
services produced at home) is estimated to have been £211,000 million.
After allowing for price changes the increase since I971 was l3 Per cent.
Production in Britain is relatively heavily orientated towards services,
which in 1981 accounted for 64 per cent of GDP. Table 9 contains an
analysis of GDP by industry; the general features of industrial activity in
Britain are described more fully in Chapter 11.
Table 9: Gross Domestic Product by Industry0
1971
£ million per cent
1981
£ million per cent
Agriculture, forestry and fishing 1,435 2 9 43867 2 3
Petroleum and natural gas 18 0 0 n>972 5'7
Other mining and quarrying 668 13 33455 I-6
Manufacturing 153712 31-7 4939^ 237
Construction 33431 69 133545 6-4
Gas, electricity and water C575 3'2 6,670 3 2
Transport 2,932 59 10,935 52
Communication 1,166 24 53858 28
Distributive trades 53321 10 7 20,088 9 5
Insurance, banking and finance 33631 7 3 9'1
Ownership of dwellings 2,627 5'3 !33869 6-6
Professional and scientific
services 53044 10-2 28,467 135
Miscellaneous services 35747 7'6 20,057 9 5
Public administration and
defence 33385 6-8 153988 76
Adjustment for financial
services - T586 -3-2 -12,370 -5 8
Residual error 432 0 9 —1,780 — o-8
Gross domestic product at
factor cost
49,538 ioo-o 210,788 ioo-o
SourceNational Income and Expenditure 1982 Edition
"Before provision for depreciation but after deducting stock appreciation.
The diagram shows that in 1981 Britain consumed 67 per cent of what it
produced (final consumption of general government added to consumers’
expenditure). Between 1971 and 1981 the proportion of final expenditure
devoted to exports rose from 19 per cent to 22 per cent.
Personal incomes at current prices before tax, rose rapidly and fairly steadily
from £48,000 million in 1971 to £220,000 million in 1981. In real terms
(that is, excluding the effects of inflation), however, personal disposable
income was 2 per cent lower in 1981 than in 1980.
192
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Final Expenditure at Market Prices in 1981
Total: £309,000 million
% Consumers'
50 j- expenditure
0
-5
20
30
40
10
Final consumption at market prices is equal to
gross domestic product at market prices plus imports.
-1.3%-£4,000m
Physical increase
in stocks and
work in progress
Sources of
Income
Consumers’
Expenditure
Current
Government
Expenditure
That part of personal pre-tax income which is not taken in taxes or
national insurance is used for consumption or else is saved (see Chapter 18
for some channels for personal savings). Consumers’ expenditure amounted
to 69 per cent of pre-tax income in 1981 compared with 74 per cent in 1971;
there was a rise in saving as a percentage of income from 7 • 5 per cent in 1971
to 13 -4 per cent in 1981. (A rise in the personal savings ratio during periods
of inflation may reflect people’s wish to compensate for the decline in the
real value of assets fixed in money terms.)
The proportion of total personal income accounted for by income from
employment was 67 per cent in 1981; average gross weekly earnings in
April 1981 in Great Britain were £137 f°r full-time adult male workers (21
and over) and £89 for full-time adult female workers (18 and over). The
three other main sources of personal income were self-employment (8 per
cent), income from rent, dividends and interest (10 per cent) and grants
from general government (14 per cent). The diagram on page 193 shows the
effect of taxes on the distribution of income.
The diagram on page 194 shows the pattern of consumers’ expenditure in
1981. Food, alcoholic drink, housing, fuel and light, and clothing and foot¬
wear together accounted for over half the total. Consumers’ expenditure
increased hardly at all in real terms between 1980 and 1981. The changes in
the pattern between 1971 and 1981 in Britain were paralleled in other
industrialised countries with declining proportions spent on food, tobacco,
and clothing and footwear.
Current expenditure on goods and services by central government and local
authorities rose by 24 per cent in real terms over the period 1971-81, when
it amounted to 21 per cent of gross domestic product. The main cause of
this was the growth over the period of the social services, especially
education and the National Health Service.
In addition to their expenditure on goods and services, public authorities
transfer large sums to other sectors, mainly the personal sector, by way of
national insurance and other social security benefits, grants, and interest
and subsidies. Central government also makes grants to local authorities to
finance about one-half of their current expenditure.
Sources of
Income
Consumers’
Expenditure
Current
Government
Expenditure
NATIONAL ECONOMY
193
Investment
THE EXTERNAL
POSITION
Gross domestic fixed capital formation (total fixed investment) represents
13 per cent of total final expenditure. Excluding the value of the physical
change in stocks and work in progress, the private sector accounted for
71 per cent of gross domestic fixed capital formation in 1981 and the public
sector for 29 per cent, compared with 58 per cent and 42 per cent re¬
spectively in 1971.
Britain’s overseas trade performance fluctuated during the 1970s. In
general, imports of food, energy, raw materials and manufactured goods
were greater than visible exports, which were largely manufactured goods.
This deficit on visible trade was wholly or partly offset by a surplus on
invisibles which covers earnings from services, together with interest,
profits and dividends, and transfers. However, in 1980 and 1981 there was a
considerable surplus on visible trade. Non-oil trade recorded a surplus in
1980 as exports increased and the volume of imports fell. Imports rose
Distribution of Incomes Before and After Tax: 1978-79
10
Number of incomes millions
Before
After
Ml
MM
MuKt
MfflfflM
^ rv V
Annual income in £
cr
c?" Q-
co
.O' .O'
SV A'
194
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Components of Consumers’ Expenditure in 1971 and 1981
1971 1981
Food
(household
expenditure)
Alcoholic drink
Tobacco
Housing
Fuel and light
Clothing
and footwear
Durable goods
Running cost of
motor vehicles
Travel
Catering (meals
and accommodation)
Other services
Other
1 % items*
1%
^Consumers’ expenditure abroad plus wages, salaries, etc paid by
private non-profit-making bodies (apart from those in catering)
plus capital consumption of assets owned by private non-profit-
making bodies plus income in kind not included elsewhere minus
expenditure by foreign tourists, etc in Britain.
during 1981 with a fall in destocking. However, oil exports exceeded oil
imports for the first time in 1980 and Britain now has a small surplus on
trade in oil.
The surplus of £3,023 million on invisibles in 1981 contributed further
to an estimated surplus on current account of some £6,000 million.
Following the abolition of exchange controls in 1979, there was a sharp rise
in portfolio investment overseas and overseas lending by British banks
increased. These capital flows will provide Britain with assets that will
produce revenue in future years.
ii Framework
of Industry
Among the most prominent trends in industrial activity in Britain during
the 1970s and early 1980s have been the growth of the offshore oil and gas
industries together with related products and services; the rapid develop¬
ment of electronic and microelectronic technologies and their application
to a wide range of other sectors; and a continuous rise in the service
industries’ share of total employment. Following the increase in world oil
prices in 1979, Britain, along with most other countries with similarly
advanced economies, experienced an industrial recession. Until the middle
of 1981 output fell, then recovered somewhat while productivity increased
strongly.
In order to support re-expansion in the economy, the Government is
encouraging industry to become more competitive, and strengthening the
small firms sector. It is reducing state involvement in industry and con¬
centrating regional aid on a smaller area to make it more effective. It
continues to contribute to the formulation of European Community in¬
dustrial policies.
This chapter describes some of the general features of industrial activity
in Britain such as the forms of enterprise, trends in production and
investment, and aspects of efficiency such as research and development,
technological advance and management education. It also outlines the
framework of incentives for general industrial development provided by
the Government, and by Community institutions, together with the regu¬
latory framework within which industry operates. The chapters following
cover the main areas of industrial activity.
ORGANISATION The forms of industrial organisation and the pattern of ownership and
AND control are varied. Unincorporated, corporate (including co-operative) and
PRODUCTION public sector enterprise all assume a number of different forms, and all are
important in the economy. (For a definition of ‘incorporation’, see p 210.)
The Government is encouraging employees to take a financial interest in
the profitability of their companies. Employees in public sector concerns
into which private capital is being introduced (privatisation) are being
given a preferential right to buy shares in their new companies and em¬
ployee share-ownership in general has been facilitated by changes in legis¬
lation. Although still not numerous, co-operative schemes are becoming
more common and since 1980 there has been a rise in the number of ‘buy¬
outs’ in which the staff, or management, of a company raises the finance to
purchase it. In some sectors a small number of big companies and their
subsidiaries are responsible for a great proportion of total production (see
p 212). However, it is rare for a few shareholders to have a controlling
interest since shares in these companies are usually distributed among
many holders or held by insurance companies or pension funds represent¬
ing a broad cross-section of the community.
The private sector accounts for nearly three-quarters of gross domestic
product in Britain and for the greater part of activity in the agricultural,
196
Industrial
Association
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
mining and quarrying (apart from coal), manufacturing (except steel and
shipbuilding), construction, distributive, financial and miscellaneous ser¬
vice industries. Industries in public sector ownership include most of the
energy, transport and communications industries.
The private sector comprises some 2 million unincorporated businesses
(sole traders and partnerships) and 800,000 corporate enterprises (com¬
panies), with a combined labour force of 16 million in 1981. There are about
17 major public corporations and the labour force in the public sector is
about 2 million. Unincorporated businesses, corporate enterprises and
public sector enterprises contribute about 19, 51 and 11 per cent of gross
domestic product respectively (the remainder being accounted for by
central and local government).
Most of Britain’s large firms in the private sector are classified, under
company law, as ‘public’ companies, while the great majority of small
companies are ‘private’ (see p 211). At the end of 1981 there were about
8,000 public companies and 792,000 private companies.
The largest organisations are shown in Table 10. Altogether about 60
companies registered in Britain each had net assets of over £500 million in
1981. In terms of annual sales four of the top 20 industrial groups in Europe
were British, with British Petroleum first and Shell Transport and Trading
third. Alongside these large organisations the many hundreds of thousands
of small firms play an essential part in the economy.
Voluntary associations representing private enterprises, and covering, with
varying completeness, most of British industry, exist for a number of
different purposes, including the provision of common services, the ex¬
change of information and representation of their members’ point of view,
and negotiation with trade unions on wages and conditions of work. The
majority are either trade associations or employers’ organisations. Trade
associations, concerned mainly with representation to the Government, the
provision of common services and the regulation of trading practices, are
normally composed of concerns manufacturing or retailing a particular
product or group of products. Employers’ organisations established on a
national basis are usually concerned with negotiation of wages and con¬
ditions of work; they normally consist of concerns engaged in the same type
of operation or manufacturing process. In an industrial sector concerned
wholly with an allied group of products, one association may undertake the
functions of both a trade association and an employers’ organisation.
The central body representing British business and industry nationally is
the Confederation of British Industry (CBI), recognised by the Govern¬
ment as a channel for consultation between government departments and
representatives of both private and public sector employers.
The CBI represents directly and indirectly more than 300,000 com¬
panies through parent companies, subsidiaries, employers’ organisations,
trade and commercial associations and the majority of the nationalised
industries. For its members it acts as an advisory and consultative body
providing them with information and statistics, ascertaining their collec¬
tive views and representing them nationally to the Government and the
public and also internationally (see p 317). CBI representatives sit on
bodies such as the National Economic Development Council, the Man¬
power Services Commission, the Health and Safety Commission, and the
Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service. The Institute of Directors
has a representative role for directors of all types of company.
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY
197
Table 10: Largest Industrial Organisations
r Ranked by assets
Ranked by turnover £ million employed £ million
Private sectora
British Petroleum
Company 30,624
Shell Transport and
Trading 18,782
BAT Industries 93265
Imperial Chemical
Industries 6,581
Esso Petroleum Company 53324
Shell UK 53182
Unilever 43935
Imperial Group 45526
General Electric Company 3,462
Grand Metropolitan 33221
Czarnikow Group 33123
Ford Motor Company 33O73
Public sector6
Electricity Council and
Boards 8,471
British National Oil
Corporation 53?52
British Telecom 537°8
British Gas Corporation 53235
National Coal Board 43728
British Steel Corporation 35443
Private sector^
British Petroleum
Company 16,614
Shell Transport and
Trading 93198
Imperial Chemical
Industries 53294
Rio-Tinto Zinc
Corporation 33828
BAT Industries 33524
Shell UK 3,520
Esso Petroleum Company 33044
Unilever 2,377
Grand Metropolitan 2,264
General Electric Company 1,796
Ford Motor Company 13638
BOC Group I3432
Source: Ex tel Statistical Services and annual reports of public corporations.
“Financial year ended in 1981.
^For year ended March 1982.
Chambers of commerce are open to all kinds of producers and traders and
exist to promote the interests of local, regional and national industry and
commerce. The chambers provide export facilities, including export docu¬
mentation and the sponsorship of outward trade missions and visits, as well
as information services and training courses. The Association of British
Chambers of Commerce is the co-ordinating body for 87 affiliated local
chambers, whose member companies represent a majority of Britain’s
exporters and a significant number of the largest companies. British
chambers of commerce also operate in 18 overseas countries. In Scotland
there is an additional central organisation, the Association of Scottish
Chambers of Commerce, and in Northern Ireland the Northern Ireland
Chamber of Commerce and Industry, to which local chambers are affili¬
ated. Other voluntary associations include industrial development associ¬
ations for particular areas or regions, sponsored by local authorities, trade
associations and individual firms.
198
Output
Productivity
and Investment
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Industrial output in Britain has twice been affected by recession in the last
decade, partly as a result of fluctuations in oil prices. The index of output
indicates a decline for two years after 1973, a steady recovery between 1975
and 1979, and a further fall in 1980, and also in 1981, stabilising in the
middle of the year. Manufacturing was especially affected in the more
recent decline (see also p 213), together with construction, while the service
industries experienced a less marked downturn in activity. In contrast,
mining and quarrying output continued to rise (owing to the North Sea oil
and gas industries). Table 11 shows the trend of output in 1980 and 1981
and the index of employment in 1981 revealing the shift away from
employment in production industries and towards services.
Among traded services, growth in employment was especially strong in
financial and business services (including insurance, banking, leasing and
real estate) and in miscellaneous services, particularly hotels and catering.
Table 11: Industrial Output and Employment (Indices: 1975 = too)
Output
per cent
1975
Index of Output
1980 1981
Employment
per cent index
1981 1981
565 1074 1067
Agriculture 28 1226 121 7
Production industries" 40 7 105 7 100 3
of which:
Manufacturing 283 952 892
Mining and quarrying 1-7 312-9 332 4
Services
of which:
Transport and
communications 8-8 108-3 1070
Distribution 101 104-6 104-1
Finance and business 7 3 114 0 119 0
Miscellaneous 73 1130 1090
Whole economy 100 1071 104 5
1-7
37 o
28-5
i-6
61 3
6-8
12-4
5-8
n-4
100
90 7
82-5
8o-6
94'3
101 5
949
954
111-8
105-0
93 3
Sources: National Income and Expenditure 1982 Edition and Monthly Digest of Statistics
“The other production industries are gas, electricity and water; and construction.
The improvement of productivity is recognised as being of prime import¬
ance for the economy. Although output per head has generally been low in
Britain by international standards, it rose sharply in 1981; the index for the
whole economy was 111-7 (I975 = I00)- Among the factors influencing
productivity are capital investment, innovations and improvements in
products and processes, and the performance of management and labour.
The proportion of gross domestic product invested in Britain is about the
same as that of other industrialised economies. Investment in some of the
major sectors between 1977 and 1981 is shown in Table 12 (see also p 215).
The figures for manufacturing industry do not include expenditure on
leased assets, since these are attributed to the service industries on the basis
of ownership. The practice of leasing has grown rapidly since the early
1970s.
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY
199
Technological
Advance
Table 12: Gross Domestic Fixed Capital Formation in Major Sectors
1977-81 (1975 prices)
1977 1978 1979 1980 1981
Mining and quarrying C975
Manufacturing
Gas, electricity and water 1,055
Transport and communications 2,065
D istributive trades 1,160
Other traded services'2 2,462
1,942
35769
1,012
1,961
1,219
2,923
1,669
3.969
972
1.972
I.4I9
3,568
1,687
3,573
989
2,154
1,297
3,929
i,747
2,938
086
1,786
1,296
4,195
Source: National Income and Expenditure 1982 Edition
"Financial and business services and miscellaneous services.
Advanced applications of information technology (a major new sector in
computing and telecommunications which have been brought together
through advances in microelectronics) and biotechnology (the industrial
application of biological organisms, systems or processes) are having
profound effects on the pace of technological change. Extensive use of
electronics and automated controls is to be found across the whole range of
industry, both in production and services.
Britain was a pioneer in computers and has one of the largest computer
industries outside the United States. It is ahead of most other countries in
micro- and mini-computers. There are many advanced applications of
computerised control in operation in both the public and private sectors of
industry (for example, in steel mills, coal mines, oil refineries and chemical
plants) and Britain is among the world’s leading nations in the provision of
‘software’ services and systems (that is, the preparation of instructions for
computer operations and related services). The importance of develop¬
ments in microelectronics, in particular microprocessors, has been widely
recognised, partly through government initiatives. In 1981 a campaign
began to promote the awareness and use of information technology, which
is providing the basis of a wide range of new products and services, and
there are special schemes of support for the fibre-optics and opto-elec-
tronics industries, computer-aided design and manufacture, and industrial
robots.
The use of robots in manufacturing industry is increasing rapidly,
notably in the motor industry. According to the British Robot Association,
Britain was the world’s fifth largest user of robots in 1981, with more than
700 programmable robots installed in manufacturing plants, nearly double
the figure for 1980. There are expected to be some 3,000 by 1985.
British industry has a long-standing involvement in biotechnology.
Examples of processes in use or being developed are fermentation methods
to manufacture penicillin; cell culture techniques to prepare interferon
drugs; recombinant DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) techniques to modify
micro-organisms for the production of animal feed; the development
of microbiological sources of protein and other chemicals from carbo¬
hydrates; and the biological processing of sewage and waste, including
biogas, an alternative source of energy produced by anaerobic digestion.
An interdepartmental committee was set up in 1982 to provide a govern¬
mental focus for biotechnology.
200
Research and
Development
Management
Education
Engineering
Design
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Industrial research and development is carried out mainly by firms
themselves. Some 40 research associations, covering all areas of technology,
conduct work mainly for member companies. Work is also done by in¬
dependent contract research laboratories, universities and government
research establishments, especially those for which the Department of
Industry is responsible (see pp 203-4).
Industrial expenditure on research and development in 1978 was £2,324
million. The major part, £2,061 million, was accounted for by private
sector companies. Public corporations spent a further £213 million and
research associations £51 million. The main industrial sectors incurring
expenditure on research and development were electronics (£650 million),
chemicals and allied products (£432 million), aerospace (£425 million),
mechanical engineering (£182 million) and motor vehicles (£130 million).
The British Institute of Management, which is playing an increasingly
representative role for the management and administrative professions,
provides a wide range of information services and has a particular interest
in management education and training. There are also a number of pro¬
fessional bodies concerned with standards and training in specialised
branches of management.
A large proportion of management education is provided by polytech¬
nics and many of the colleges of further education throughout Britain;
12 regional centres of management education have been established in
England and Wales through the association of polytechnics and colleges
which have high reputations for management and business studies. Univer¬
sities also make an important contribution, especially the full-time post¬
graduate programmes at the business schools of London and Manchester
Universities. Training courses for higher management are offered by
several independent colleges including the Administrative Staff College,
Henley-on-Thames, and Ashridge College of Management, Berkhamsted.
Many firms provide general management courses for senior executives or
systems of informal training. (Industrial training and education below
management level are summarised on pp 309 and 155.)
An Engineering Council was set up under Royal Charter in 1981. Its
objectives are to advance education in, and to promote the science and
practice of, engineering for the public benefit and thereby promote
industry and commerce in Britain. The Council has a duty to set up a
register of professional engineers, technician engineers and engineering
technicians and will set standards for education, training and experience
which qualify people for entry on to the register. The Council is an
independent body although the Government is providing initial funding of
up to £ 1 million a year for the first three years, and during that period is
responsible for approving the members of the Council.
Design is a crucial factor in maintaining and improving the quality and
competitiveness of manufactured goods. It receives continuous attention
from industry and assistance is available from the government-sponsored
Design Council, while the Computer-Aided Design Centre (see p 204) also
provides assistance to individual firms. The Design Council has centres in
London, Cardiff and Glasgow, and its services include advice on design
matters, the organisation of product displays and overseas trade fairs,
conferences and seminars on design, help for design education and the
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY
201
Specification
Standards
Measurement
Standards
THE GOVERN¬
MENT AND
INDUSTRY
publication of a range of materials. The Council also provides annual
awards for consumer and engineering products and for medical equipment
and motor vehicles. The Society of Industrial Artists and Designers is the
representative professional body in Great Britain of industrial designers.
The British Standards Institution (BSI) prepares and publishes standards
which specify dimensions, performance and safety criteria, testing methods
and codes of practice for a large range of products and processes in most
fields of production. It is a voluntary non-profit-making body, funded by
sales of standards, subscriptions and government grant. Voluntary accept¬
ance of the standards by manufacturers, buyers and sellers reduces un¬
necessary variety and simplifies the specification of requirements. The
board of BSI includes representatives of the main organisations of em¬
ployers and workers, professional institutions, consumers and the larger
government departments.
The National Physical Laboratory (NPL, see p 203), a research establish¬
ment of the Department of Industry, is responsible for providing the
measurement standards and calibration facilities necessary to ensure that
measurements in Britain are made on a common basis and to the required
accuracy. Measurement standards bear directly on quality control in manu¬
facture, efficiency in commerce and on health and safety. The NPL main¬
tains links with national standards laboratories all over the world to ensure
international compatibility in measurements essential for overseas trade
and technological co-operation. Much of the dissemination of measure¬
ment standards is provided by the NPL’s British Calibration Service
(BCS), which comprises over 95 independent approved laboratories
located in industry, universities and government establishments. These
offer authenticated calibrations of scientific instruments and official certi¬
ficates for electrical, mechanical, flow, optical, pressure, thermal and time
interval measurements. BCS measurements are linked directly or indirectly,
within known and approved uncertainties, to the national measurement
standards at the NPL. The National Testing Laboratory Accreditation
Scheme (NATLAS), also based at the NPL, grants official recognition to
laboratories shown by independent assessors to carry out specific types of
test. Many areas of objective testing are covered by the scheme. Its purpose
is to enhance the standing of British testing laboratories and secure inter¬
national acceptance of test results from accredited laboratories.
The chief aim of the industrial policy of the Government elected in 1979 is
to encourage industrial enterprise and initiative in a flexible and competi¬
tive market economy. The extent of state ownership is being reduced, a
review of industrial subsidies has been carried out (see p 205) and industrial
investment agencies in the public sector have been encouraged to secure
private sector participation in their projects. Competition policy (see p 208)
has been strengthened in order to create a climate in which commerce can
flourish. A further policy to promote efficiency and competitiveness takes
the form of a campaign to enhance the status of standards and quality
assurance. The Government is also encouraging the development of small
businesses (see p 207) by reducing the administrative burdens laid on them
and through taxation and other policies.
Successive governments have aimed to provide an environment favour¬
able to industrial expansion. Encouragement for investment throughout
202
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Public
Enterprise
the economy is given by means of the tax system (see pp 326-30). For areas
and industries with special needs and difficulties, there are schemes of
financial and other aid, administered by a number of bodies, chiefly the
Department of Industry. Aid provided by the Department in 1981—82
amounted to about £2,050 million, compared with £1,590 million in the
previous year. The 1980-81 total comprised £800 million for regional and
general support, £210 million for scientific and technological assistance,
and £1,040 million for manufacturing activities directly sponsored by the
Department (in aerospace, steel, shipbuilding and motor vehicles) but
excluding the general financing of nationalised corporations. The largest
component of regional and general industrial support has been the regional
development grant scheme (£600 million in 1981-82). Various other
agencies in the public sector provide aid, either for specific geographical
areas, or for more closely defined activities (for enterprise zones, new towns
and other urban area schemes, see pp 168-71). These national industrial
aids are supplemented by assistance from European Community funds.
Direct investment from overseas is encouraged, and overseas firms
are generally offered the same facilities and incentives as British-based
companies.
Official recognition of outstanding industrial performance is conferred
by the Queen’s Awards for Export and Technology which are made
annually to firms in all sectors of industry (including services) on the advice
of a committee composed of businessmen, trade union representatives and
civil servants.
Direct state participation in industry is mainly effected through public
corporations known as nationalised industries. The major nationalised
industries are the National Coal Board; British Gas; the electricity in¬
dustry; the British National Oil Corporation; the British Steel Corpora¬
tion; British Shipbuilders; the Post Office; British Telecom; British Rail;
the National Bus Company; British Airways; and the British Airports
Authority. These industries and services, which employ about 7 per cent of
all employees, are described in their relevant sections.
As part of its economic policy the Government has introduced private
capital into British Aerospace (see p 222) and the National Freight
Corporation (now the National Freight Consortium, see p 285) and has
taken powers to introduce private capital into the British National Oil
Corporation’s oil-producing business (see p 249).
To stimulate efficiency the Government has relaxed the statutory mono¬
poly of some nationalised industries, including the Post Office, British
Telecom and British Gas, and is considering legislation to carry the policy
further.
The managing boards and staffs of the nationalised industries are not
generally civil servants although they are responsible to ministers who in
turn are accountable to Parliament for their actions in a variety of ways. The
nationalised industries are responsible for their management, not the
minister of the sponsoring departments. Ministers appoint (and may
dismiss) the chairman and members of each board, and have power to give
general directions as to how the industry should be run, but do not interfere
in day-to-day management. In practice, there is very seldom occasion for a
general directive to be issued. The Government’s policy is to keep inter¬
vention to a minimum and to encourage the nationalised industries to
behave as far as possible as commercial enterprises.
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY
203
Fiscal
Investment
Incentives
Financial
Investment
Incentives
Research and
Development
Support
The Government does, however, set a financial framework within which
the industries are expected to operate. A key feature of this is the setting,
each year, of external financing limits on individual industries, which place
a ceiling on the industries’ ability to raise finance for capital expenditure
from other than internal sources and thus on their contribution to public
expenditure and the public borrowing requirement. Finance which cannot
be found from internal sources is provided mainly by interest-bearing loans
and grants from the Exchequer. Other sources of finance include short¬
term market borrowing, overseas borrowing, leasing, and public dividend
capital on which dividends are paid to the Government. In addition
financial targets have been set by the Government for most industries. The
main form of target, usually set for three to five years, is a real return before
interest on average net assets employed. It is the Government’s policy to
negotiate performance aims with each of the industries, expressed in terms
of measures such as real unit costs.
Ministers are usually required to see that the interests of the industry’s
customers are protected (see p 210).
Government policy towards the nationalised industries is subject to the
approval of Parliament and nationalised industry matters are investigated
by parliamentary committees such as the Treasury and Civil Service
Committee and the Public Accounts Committee.
Incentives to encourage capital expenditure by industry on plant and
machinery include a system of free depreciation enabling the whole of such
expenditure to be written off- against profits for tax purposes in the year in
which it is incurred; there is in addition a 79 per cent allowance in the first
year on new industrial buildings and structures and an annual writing down
allowance of 4 per cent thereafter. Corporation tax relief on the inflationary
increase in the value of stocks is also allowed (see p 328).
The Department of Industry provides selective financial assistance for
major investment projects in manufacturing industry which are judged to
be in the national interest and which would not proceed without assistance.
The Department also operates schemes of selective assistance to support
the introduction by private industry of new products and processes.
Particular importance is attached to encouraging industry to equip itself
with modern aids to design and manufacture based on microelectronics.
Guarantees are provided for the repayment of loans and interest incurred
in the purchase of new ships and mobile off-shore installations built in
Britain.
Expenditure on research and development supported by the Department is
aimed at the rapid exploitation of technology, emphasis being placed on
partnership with the private sector. A growing proportion of expenditure is
going towards work carried out in industry; other work is done at research
associations and in government research establishments. The Department
of Industry’s research establishments are the National Physical Laboratory
(responsible for measurement standards, see p 201, and for research and
development in related fields of national importance, which include work
on the properties of industrially important materials, computer technology
and mathematical applications), the National Engineering Laboratory
(research in mechanical engineering, including manufacturing systems and
robotics), the Warren Spring Laboratory (control engineering, materials
204
British
Technology
Group
National
Research
Development
Corporation
National
Enterprise
Board
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
handling, metal extraction, mineral processing, waste materials processing
and environmental technology), the National Maritime Institute (which is
to be converted into a non-governmental research body), the Computer-
Aided Design Centre (development of computer software for use by
manufacturing and process industries) and the Laboratory of The Govern¬
ment Chemist (providing analytical services mainly to central and local
government, public institutions and international organisations).
‘Support for Innovation’, a scheme of assistance for industrial research
and development, is provided by the Department on the advice of five
sectoral requirements boards, whose members are mainly drawn from
industry. The scheme, introduced in 1982, brings together the system of
grants and shared-cost contracts for industrial research and development
operated by the boards and the selective assistance scheme for new
products and processes.
An Advisory Council for Applied Research and Development, whose
members include representatives of industry, industrial research and the
engineering profession, is a source of independent advice to ministers
collectively on applied research and development in both the public and
private sectors, the linkage between this research and scientific research
supported by the Department of Education and Science, the development
and application of technology, and on the role of Britain in international
collaboration in such activities. The Council has published a number of
reports on aspects of new technology. It is served by a secretariat in the
Cabinet Office.
Following the appointment in 1981 of a chairman common to the National
Research Development Corporation and the National Enterprise Board, it
was announced that the two bodies would merge. Legislation will be
required to effect this. In the meantime a combined board of directors has
been appointed and the bodies are operating in partnership as the British
Technology Group.
The National Research Development Corporation (NRDC) is an in¬
dependent public corporation which was set up in 1949 to promote the
development and the exploitation of new technology. Its two main activi¬
ties are to exploit inventions developed in the universities and research
council and government establishments, and to provide finance for in¬
novation by industrial companies. The NRDC has a portfolio of 6,400
British and overseas patents and about 620 licensees, and also some 700
investments in development projects of which about 320 are joint ventures
with industrial companies. It is expected to operate as a commercial
organisation and has been profitable for many years. Some of the major
technical achievements which it has exploited or supported include cepha¬
losporin antibiotics, pyrethroid insecticides, glass-reinforced cement, car¬
bon fibres, printed circuit boards, computers and computer software,
computer-aided design, electric motors and hovercraft.
A public corporation established in 1975, the National Enterprise Board
(NEB), was issued with new guidelines in 1980 giving it an investment role
in connection with: companies exploiting or developing advanced tech¬
nologies; industrial undertakings in the English assisted areas; loans of up
to £50,000 to small firms; and its existing investments. The NEB is
expected to encourage maximum private sector participation in its ventures
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY
205
Regional
Development
Assisted
Areas
Incentives
Other Assisted
Area Measures
Administrative
Arrangements
and wherever practicable to make share investment only in conjunction
with private share investment. It is also required to dispose of its share¬
holdings to private ownership as soon as it is commercially practicable,
having regard to the interests of the companies concerned.
Economic imbalance between different parts of the country is due partly to
the steady decline over the years, in certain regions, of older industries,
such as coal, steel, shipbuilding and textiles, and partly to the tendency of
the newer and expanding industries to develop elsewhere. Thus the tradi¬
tional industrial areas, mainly in Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and
some parts of England (particularly in the North and on Merseyside), have
experienced higher unemployment rates than regions such as the Midlands
and the South East, and have suffered from net outward migration and
industrial dereliction. In order to restore the economies of these regions,
the Government offers incentives to encourage industrial development. In
Great Britain these regions are designated as ‘assisted areas’; Northern
Ireland is treated separately.
There are three categories of assisted area: special development, develop¬
ment, and intermediate, the need for assistance being considered most
urgent in the first and least in the last. Following a review of the areas in
1979, when they covered more than 40 per cent of the working population,
the Government reduced them until in August 1982 they covered about 27
per cent of the working population, in order to concentrate the available
resources more effectively.
Incentives to encourage industrial investment include regional develop¬
ment grants towards the cost of new fixed assets for manufacturing in¬
dustries at the rate of 22 per cent in special development areas and 15 per
cent in development areas; regional selective assistance for projects in
manufacturing, mining or construction which safeguard or create jobs in
any part of the assisted areas and strengthen the regional and national
economy; grants for office and service industry jobs created in assisted areas
together with employee removal grants; grants of 80 per cent of training
costs (half of which is normally provided by the European Social Fund) for
manufacturing and service projects where the training programme is
essential to the project’s success; and government factories and workshops
at favourable rents.
Apart from direct incentives to industry in the assisted areas, firms in the
special development and development areas may be given preferential
treatment when tendering for public sector contracts, and special grants are
available towards the improvement of the infrastructure in the assisted
areas and towards the clearance of derelict land (see p 176).
The Department of Industry takes the lead in the formulation of regional
industrial policy and administers the regional development grant scheme
throughout Great Britain. Regional selective assistance is administered in
England by the Department (with some powers delegated to its regional
offices) and by the Scottish and Welsh Offices. Factories in the assisted
areas are provided, often in association with the private sector, by the
English Industrial Estates Corporation, and by the Scottish and Welsh
Development Agencies.
206
Northern
Ireland
Development
Agencies
Rural
Industries
Tourism
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Industrial Development Board, formed in 1982 under the aegis of the
new Northern Ireland Department of Economic Development, offers a
similar range of incentives to those available in the assisted areas, some¬
times at higher rates. Incentives automatically available to manufacturing
industry include grants of up to 30 per cent of the cost of new fixed assets,
training grants, grants for key workers moving to Northern Ireland, and the
lowering of local authority rates for industrial premises. Manufacturing
and service industry projects which create jobs may be eligible for grants of
up to 50 per cent of the cost of new fixed assets, interest relief grants,
factories on favourable rental terms, and grants to assist with setting-up
costs and research and development costs. The Board can also provide
equity and loan capital for new expanding businesses, assist the develop¬
ment of new high-technology products and processes, and promote joint
ventures with overseas companies.
The Scottish and Welsh Development Agencies promote industrial de¬
velopment in their respective countries. They encourage investment by
overseas companies, provide equity and loan capital for industrial projects
(which they are expected to do with a maximum of private sector parti¬
cipation), provide government factories, and have powers to assist small
firms and undertake land reclamation.
In the rural areas of England, assistance towards any scheme likely to
benefit the local economy can be provided by the Development Commis¬
sion. Through its agency, the Council for Small Industries in Rural Areas
(CoSIRA), the Commission provides managerial and technical advice,
training facilities and a credit service to small manufacturing and service
industries in rural areas. Loans and advice are also provided by CoSIRA for
small tourism enterprises in the rural parts of the assisted areas and in areas
designated by the Commission as priority action areas. In addition, the
Commission provides factory premises and support for pioneering and
experimental schemes bearing on the rural economy and for voluntary
bodies aiming to enrich social and cultural life in the countryside.
In Scotland and Wales these services are provided generally through the
development agencies, but separate bodies cater for two particular rural
areas. In north-west Scotland the Highlands and Islands Development
Board provides loans and grants for viable projects in manufacturing,
agriculture, fisheries and services, makes available training grants and
advice, and builds factories. In mid-Wales the Development Board for
Rural Wales provides factories, key worker housing and advice for small
businesses. It has a general responsibility to promote the economic and
social well-being of its area and a particular responsibility for the new town
(Newtown, Powys) in its area.
Government support for the tourist industry is provided by four statutory
bodies: the British Tourist Authority, responsible for the overseas pro¬
motion of tourism in Great Britain and for providing advice to the Govern¬
ment on matters affecting tourism; and the English, Scottish and Wales
Tourist Boards, which promote tourism in their respective countries
within Britain, encourage the development and improvement of tourism
accommodation and amenities, and administer grants or loans for projects
improving tourist amenities, and interest relief grants. The Northern
Small Firms
European
Community
Regional
Policy and Aid
European
Regional
Development
Fund
European
Investment Bank
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY 20y
Ireland Tourist Board has a promotional role similar to that of the other
boards.
The Department of Industry has a separate division which is the focal point
for the formation of policy towards the small business sector. The division,
together with the Scottish Development Agency and the Welsh Office,
administers the Small Firms Service which provides advice and guidance
on a wide range of business problems affecting small firms and those
seeking to set up business.
The Government has been particularly concerned since the late 1970s to
encourage small firms. Recent measures include a pilot loan guarantee
scheme and a business start-up scheme under which tax reliefs are available
to private individuals investing in small businesses; other tax concessions
have also been provided for small firms in recent years (see p 328). A one-
year scheme to encourage small engineering firms to purchase advanced
equipment has been introduced, a technical inquiry service has been set up
and there have been experimental schemes to provide new premises. The
development of new sources of venture capital has been encouraged.
Among venture capital schemes are those run by public sector bodies,
including the British Technology Group. A number of private sector
initiatives have been made by the clearing banks and by groups of large
firms and financial institutions. An export award for smaller manufacturers
is made annually. Assistance for small firms is also provided by the
development agencies and by the agencies for rural industry (see above). In
Northern Ireland the Local Enterprise Development Unit, established to
promote the development of smaller industries, provides grants, loans,
premises and management advice to new and expanding companies.
European Community regional policy has two major aims: the reduction of
existing regional imbalances; and the prevention of new imbalances arising
from the adoption of Community policies. Although the principal respon¬
sibility for helping depressed areas remains with the national authorities
concerned, the Community may complement schemes through aid from a
number of sources.
The Regional Development Fund is the principal European Community
instrument for regional development and assists regions affected by in¬
dustrial change, structural under-employment and an over-reliance on
agriculture. The Fund offers support for public works contributing to the
improvement of the regional infrastructure, normally of up to 30 per cent of
public authority costs, and grants of up to 50 per cent of assisted area funds
paid to projects in manufacturing, service or handicraft industries.
Britain’s share of the Fund in the period 1975-81 was over £760 million.
The European Investment Bank (EIB) is a self-governing institution set up
by the Treaty of Rome with member states of the European Community
subscribing to its capital. The Bank’s aims are to help to stimulate de¬
velopment in less favoured regions, to modernise or convert industries, to
help to create new activities and to offset structural difficulties affecting
certain sectors. The EIB also serves projects of common interest to several
member states or the Community as a whole. It has loaned over £2,000
million since 1973 for projects in Britain, mostly for public works such as
the Sullom Voe oil terminal, and manufacturing projects in the assisted
areas.
208
European Coal
and Steel
Community
Exchange Risk
Guarantee
Scheme
COMPETITION
POLICY AND
CONSUMER
PROTECTION
Competition
Policy
Monopolies and
Mergers
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) makes loans to com¬
panies in the coal and steel industries, and for manufacturing projects
which create new employment opportunities for redundant coal and steel
workers. Non-repayable aid may be available for workers who have been
made redundant. The ECSC can lend up to 50 per cent of the fixed capital
costs of a project.
Exchange risk cover may be provided by the Government on EIB and
certain ECSC loans for projects qualifying for regional selective assistance.
The British borrower takes on only a sterling liability.
A major feature of the Government’s economic policy is the stimulation of
competition and the control of practices which are restrictive or anti¬
competitive. Linked to this policy is the encouragement of fair trading,
with the particular aim of helping consumers and safeguarding their rights.
The Minister of State for Consumer Affairs, who is answerable to the
Secretary of State for Trade, has special responsibilities for competition
policy and consumer affairs (although certain matters, such as safety of
foodstuffs and road vehicles, are the concern of other departments).
The Office of Fair Trading, an independent government agency headed
by the Director General of Fair Trading, has various executive respon¬
sibilities relating to competition policy and consumer protection.
Competition policy has led to the development of machinery for scrutinis¬
ing and regulating monopolies, mergers, anti-competitive practices and
restrictive trade practices and of powers to regulate any structural changes
or anti-competitive practices which operate against the public interest. The
Director General of Fair Trading administers the Fair Trading Act 1973,
which deals with monopolies and mergers, the Restrictive Trade Practices
Act 1976, which deals with restrictive trading agreements, and the Com¬
petition Act 1980, which deals with anti-competitive practices.
The Secretary of State for Trade and the Director General of Fair Trading
can refer monopolies for investigation by the Monopolies and Mergers
Commission. The legislation defines a monopoly as a situation where at
least a quarter of a particular kind of goods or service is supplied by or to a
single person, or two or more people acting in a way which prevents,
restricts, or distorts competition. Local monopolies and public sector
industries can also be referred to the Commission. If the Commission finds
that a monopoly operates against the public interest, the Secretary of State
for Trade has powers to remedy or prevent the harm which the Commission
considers may exist. Alternatively the Director General may be asked to
negotiate undertakings to remedy the adverse effects identified by the
Commission.
Proposals for a merger (defined as occurring when two or more enter¬
prises are brought under common ownership or control) may be referred to
the Commission by the Secretary of State for Trade if the merger would
result in or intensify a monopoly or if the total value of gross assets taken
over exceeds £15 million. If the Commission finds that a merger or
proposed merger may be expected to operate against the public interest, the
Secretary of State can prevent it from taking place or, if it has already taken
place, require it to be reversed. There are special provisions for newspaper
and certain other mergers.
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY
209
Anti-competitive
Practices
The Public
Sector
Restrictive Trade
Practices
European
Community
Consumer
Protection
Subject to limited exemptions, the Director General can investigate any
business practice (whether in the public or private sector) which may
restrict, distort or prevent competition in the production, supply or acqui¬
sition of goods or services in Britain. If the Director General concludes
that a practice is anti-competitive he may either accept an undertaking
from the business responsible for the practice or, in default of such an
undertaking, refer the matter to the Commission to establish whether it
operates against the public interest. On an adverse finding by the Commis¬
sion, the Secretary of State has powers to take remedial action.
The Competition Act also empowers the Secretary of State to refer to the
Monopolies and Mergers Commission any questions on the efficiency and
costs of, the service provided by, or the possible abuse of a monopoly
situation by, particular named bodies in the public sector. It is the
Government’s intention that at least one major examination of each in¬
dustry should take place every four years.
Under the Restrictive Trade Practices Act 1976 restrictive trading agree¬
ments have to be registered with the Director General of Fair Trading.
Broadly, an agreement is registrable if two or more parties to it, engaged
in business in Britain in the supply of goods or services, accept some
limitation on their freedom to make their own decisions about matters such
as prices or conditions of sale. Failure to register an agreement means that
the restrictions are void and the parties are liable to legal proceedings.
Having placed an agreement on the register, the Director General has the
duty of referring it to the Restrictive Practices Court and the Court must
declare the restrictions in it contrary to the public interest unless the parties
can satisfy the Court by reference to criteria laid down in the Act that this is
not the case. Restrictions declared contrary to the public interest are void
and the Court can order the parties not to give effect to them or make any
similar agreement. In practice, however, many agreements do not need to
be referred to the Court because, for example, the parties choose to give up
the restrictions rather than go to Court, or the Secretary of State accepts the
Director General’s advice that the restrictions are not significant enough to
warrant reference to the Court.
The objective of the competition policy of the European Community is to
promote free and fair competition in areas of economic activity that may
affect trade between member states. The Community’s rules of competi¬
tion, which are set out in the Treaty of Rome, prohibit all agreements
between undertakings, or actions by a single undertaking enjoying a
dominant position in the market, which affect or are likely to affect trade
between member states and which restrict, distort or prevent competition.
Agreements falling within the scope of the prohibition must be notified
to the European Commission, which has powers either to order the agree¬
ment to be suspended or, where certain specific conditions are met, to
grant exemptions. The Commission has its own Competition Department,
which may take the initiative in investigating suspected infringements of
the competition provisions of the treaty.
The Fair Trading Act 1973 provides machinery (headed by the Director
General of Fair Trading) for the continuous review of consumer affairs,
for action to deal with trading practices which unfairly affect consumers’
210
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Advice and
Information
COMPANY LAW
interests and with persistent offenders under existing law, and for the
negotiation of self-regulatory codes of practice to raise trading standards.
The Director General is also responsible for the working of legislation
which regulates consumer credit and hire business and estate agency work.
The consumers’ interests with regard to the purity of foods, the de¬
scription and performance of goods, and pricing information are safe¬
guarded by the Food and Drugs Acts 1955 and 1956, the Medicines Act
1968, the Trades Descriptions Acts 1968 and 1972, the Prices Act 1974, the
Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 and the Sale of Goods Act 1979. The
marking and accuracy of quantities are regulated by the Weights and
Measures Acts 1963 and 1979, the latter introducing a system of average
weights for certain pre-packed goods. The Consumer Protection Acts 1961
and 1971 and the Consumer Safety Act 1978 empower the Government to
control the supply of any goods in the interests of safety.
Provision of consumer information and advice is an important function
of those in local and central government, and of several independent
organisations concerned with consumer protection. The local outlets are
the Citizens Advice Bureaux (see p 144) and in some areas Consumer
Advice Centres.
The independent, non-statutory National Consumer Council (and associ¬
ated councils for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland), which also
receives government finance, ensures that the consumer’s view is made
known to those in government and industry whose decisions alfect the con¬
sumer’s interest.
Consumer councils for the energy, rail and communications nationalised
industries investigate questions of concern to the consumer, while some
trade associations in industry and commerce have established codes of
practice. In addition, several private organisations work to further con¬
sumer interests. The largest is the Consumers’ Association, funded by the
subscriptions of its membership of over 630,000. The Association conducts
an extensive programme of comparative testing of goods and investigation
of services; its views and test reports are published in its monthly magazine
Which ? or its satellite publications. The Association also provides an advice
service on subscription. Local consumer groups, many belonging to a
national federation, also promote consumers’ interests and provide infor¬
mation and advice.
The European Community’s consumer programme covers a number of
important topics, such as health and safety, protection of the consumer’s
economic interests when purchasing goods and services, promotion of
consumer education and strengthening the representation of consumers.
The views of British consumer organisations are represented by the Con¬
sumers in the European Community Group (UK).
The formation and conduct of private sector corporations is regulated by
the Companies Acts. ‘Incorporation’ means registering an enterprise with
an official registrar of companies, with related obligations such as those
concerning the capital structure of a company, the rights and duties of its
directors and members, and the preparation of accounts. Nearly all cor¬
porate businesses are ‘limited liability’ companies, which means that each
company is a legal entity distinct from its members, who are not as such
liable for its debts. The members’ liability is limited to contributing an
amount related to their shareholding. In unincorporated businesses, such
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY
211
INDUSTRIAL
PROPERTY
as sole proprietorships or partnerships, by contrast, individuals are per¬
sonally liable for any business debts.
The European Community is pursuing a programme for the harmonis¬
ation of company law among member states. In accordance with the
programme, the Companies Act 1980 provides for new arrangements for
the classification and registration of companies and their capital structure
and distribution of profits and assets. The Act sets out new criteria for
public companies (that were previously defined as those not meeting one or
other of the tests for private companies) and, by exclusion, defines private
companies as those which are not public. It continues to be the case that
private companies may not offer shares to the public. After registering
under the Act a public company must put ‘Public Limited Company’ or
PLC after its name. The Act also lays down rules concerning the conduct of
company directors, and makes illegal share dealings that depend upon
certain privileged kinds of information.
The Companies Act 1981 implements a European Community directive
that sets out the statutory framework for the disclosure of company
accounts, while allowing for less disclosure by small- and medium-sized
companies. It also makes provision to enable companies to purchase their
own shares (mainly in order to assist small businesses); extends the law
requiring disclosure of interest in a company’s shares; and alters the law
controlling company names and business names.
There is a substantial body of legislation designed to secure the rights of the
originators of inventions relating to manufacture, new industrial designs
and trade marks. These matters are administered respectively by the Patent
Office, the Design Registry and the Trade Marks Registry, while govern¬
mental responsibility is exercised by the Department of Trade. Protection
is also available under the European Patent Convention and the Patent Co¬
operation Treaty, and benefits may be claimed in other countries by virtue
of the International Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property.
The Government is reviewing the law on copyright and related matters,
with particular attention to the problems raised by private tape recordings
of sound or video copyright works, the application of copyright to in¬
dustrial designs, the use of photocopying and the need for remedies to
combat piracy.
i2 Manufacturing
and Service
Industries
Manufacturing plays a vital role in the economy. It accounts for some 25
per cent of gross domestic product; about 28 per cent of the employed
labour force is engaged in manufacturing; and around 74 per cent of visible
exports consists of manufactured or semi-manufactured goods. Develop¬
ments of particular note in manufacturing in the last decade have been
fluctuations in output generally in line with international trends, and rises
both in export performance and import penetration. Growth in output and
exports was strongest in chemicals and electrical, electronic and instrument
engineering, while the food industries as a whole reduced the extent of
import penetration. Utilisation of advanced technologies in industry,
especially micro-electronics, is steadily increasing (see p 199).
The proportion of gross domestic product contributed by service in¬
dustries continues to increase. Among traded services financial and busi¬
ness services and tourism show the greatest growth.
The manufacturing industries are described by sector or group of sectors
in this chapter, together with construction and services.
The statistics in the following sections, relating to the main sectors of
manufacturing industry, are supplied by the Statistical Divisions of the
Departments of Industry and Trade. Unless otherwise stated, export and
manufacturers’ sales figures include parts. (The tables contain a selection of
leading activities within each sector and are not comprehensive.) Figures in
the text are for 1980.
MANUFACTURING
Most manufacturing is carried out by private enterprise. Though the
greater parts of the iron and steel and shipbuilding industries are in public
ownership, the Government is reducing the extent of state ownership of
industry. Table 13 shows the size distribution of manufacturing establish¬
ments. About 56 per cent of the largest establishments were in engineering
and metals and vehicle manufacturing. Within the private sector, the 100
largest companies accounted for 37 per cent of manufacturing employment
in 1979. (A company may consist of one or more establishments.) In each of
the following sectors over 90 per cent of net output was attributable to the
five largest companies: tobacco, cement, man-made fibres, coke ovens and
manufactured fuels, margarine, surgical bandages, wheeled tractors, ferti¬
lisers, wines, ciders and perry, explosives and fireworks, locomotives and
railway equipment, and ordnance and small arms; and over 80 per cent in
batteries, asbestos, watches and clocks, electrical equipment for vehicles,
industrial engines, cans and metal boxes, electronic computers, biscuits,
photographic chemical materials, insulated wire and cables, and dyestuffs
and pigments.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
213
Output and
Investment
Table 13: Manufacturing: Size Distribution of Establishments
Number of
employees
Number of % of total % of total
establishments establishments employment
under 20
20 to 499
500 to 1,499
1,500 or more
76,888
28,164
1,778
563
71-6
262
i-7
0-5
7-6
384
21-2
329
Source: Report on the Census of Production 1979
The largest manufacturing companies (by £ million turnover in the latest
financial year) are BAT Industries (9,265), Imperial Chemical Industries
(6,581), Unilever (4,935), Imperial Group (4,526), General Electric
Company (3,462), Ford Motor Company (3,073), BL (2,869), George
Weston Holdings (2,585), Allied-Lyons (2,268), Thorn EMI (2,229),
Rothmans International (2,188), Thomas Tilling (2,050), Gallaher Group
(1,929), Bowater Corporation (1,728), and Courtaulds (1,710).
The figures in the diagram below show the relative size of the sectors of
manufacturing and their growth rates. Manufacturing output as a whole
fell after 1973, following the rise in international oil prices, but grew again
gradually between 1975 and 1979, most evidently in those industries
employing advanced technology such as electronics, instrument engineer¬
ing, most sectors of the chemical industry, paper, printing and publishing,
and food processing.
Manufacturing Gross Value Added and Index of
Production
Gross value added 1980 Total £59,026 million
(£ million)
Metals, mechanical engineering
and small metal goods
Index of Production
(1975 = 100)
1978 1979
97.6
107.6
98.3
115.0
106.2
101.3
108.1
96.5
112.9
95.3
117.4
107.6
99.9
109.6
1980
82.4
113.3
88.5
107.7
106.6
84.1
100.1
1981
76.4
108.0
81.5
105.5
104.2
75.7
92.3
All Manufacturing 103.9 104.4 95.4 89.5
214
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
METALS,
MECHANICAL
ENGINEERING AND
METAL GOODS
Metals
Iron and Steel
Products
Between 1979 and 1981 output declined sharply, owing to further rises in
energy costs, which produced a recession in manufacturing affecting nearly
all the industrialised market economies. Additional factors depressing
output in Britain were high domestic interest rates and, for exporters, a rise
in the exchange value of sterling which raised the prices of British goods in
overseas markets. Output stabilised in mid-1981.
A major stimulus has been provided by the various needs of the offshore
oil and gas industries. In long-established industries (for example, ship¬
building and marine engineering) extensive reorganisation, re-equipment
and modernisation are being undertaken to meet changing economic
conditions.
Since manufacturing industry lies mainly in the private sector, invest¬
ment in manufacturing tends to be determined by market considerations
and to reflect expectations of profitability. Since 1965 there have been
regular fluctuations in the level of investment and three discernible cycles.
The diagram on p 215 shows investment in 1981.
1980
Labour0 Sales6 Exports Imports
,000s £ m £ m £ m
Total
of which:
iron and steel products and
castings
non-ferrous metals
metal-working machine tools
industrial plant and steelwork
pumps, valves and compressors
construction and mining
equipment
mechanical handling equipment
wire and wire manufactures
L754 27,083 9,289 7,170
297
109
59
140
82
39
57
34
4,254
5,630
860
2,182
1,376
1,635
1,190
919
1,062
L750
428
699
602
950
460
131
1,382
2,403
403
178
280
300
263
88
“Employees in employment at June 1980.
* Manufacturers’ sales.
The manufacture of metals is an important activity in Britain, covering
both iron and steel and non-ferrous metals such as aluminium.
Most of the early developments in iron and steel production originated in
Britain, still one of the world’s major steel-producing nations. Britain takes
part, as a member of the European Coal and Steel Community (see p 72), in
joint efforts with other member countries to rationalise the structure of the
industry and improve the profitability of operations.
The British Steel Corporation (BSC), formed as a public corporation in
1967, has accounted in recent years for some 85 per cent of Britain’s crude
steel production by volume.
BSC invested heavily in modernising its production capacity in the 1960s
and 1970s. The obsolete open hearth process was replaced by basic oxygen
steelmaking (for bulk production) and the electric arc process (for more
specialised tasks). Because of a marked fall in demand for steel, BSC has
had to accelerate the closure of its older steelworks and reduce capacity at
some of the more modern works. Further restructuring of the industry has
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
215
Capital Expenditure by Manufacturing Industry 1981
Total Expenditure: £6,227 million
BYSECTOR
Food, drink & tobacco
Chemicals & related
products
Metals, metal goods,
mechanical engineering
Vehicles & shipbuilding
Electrical & Instrument
Textiles etc
Other manufacturing
£m BYASSET
4,797 Plant & machinery
994 New building
436 Vehicles
Estimated additional
assets leased 990
included the transfer of assets and businesses between BSC and the private
sector and the closure, both in the public and private sectors, of plants that
cannot be made profitable. The private sector accounts for about 30 per
cent of the value of the industry’s turnover and is particularly strong in the
manufacture of alloy and stainless steels and of finished products for the
216
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Castings
Non-ferrous Metals
engineering industry. The main steel producing areas are Yorkshire and
Humberside (34 per cent of crude steel output in 1981), Wales (28 per cent),
the Northern region (18 per cent) and Scotland (13 per cent).
About 70 per cent of British steel producers’ deliveries of finished steel
products are used by home industry and the remainder for direct export to
all parts of the world. A large part of the steel used by industry in Britain is
also subsequently exported as part of other finished products.
The castings industry plays an important role in meeting the needs of
manufacturers for essential components for products sold both in Britain
and abroad. Its main customers are the vehicle, mechanical engineering,
and building and construction industries. The larger mechanised foundries
are dominant, but many smaller craft foundries meet needs for specialised
and low-volume castings. Output (by volume) has been falling and the
industry has been progressively changing. While some foundries have been
closing, many others have been investing in new melting equipment,
moulding equipment and processes, and process and quality control equip¬
ment, both to meet demands for castings of higher quality and strength and
to improve working and environmental conditions.
Britain’s non-ferrous metal processing and fabricating industry is one of
the largest in Europe. Its major products are aluminium (both virgin and
secondary metal), secondary refined copper and lead, and primary zinc.
Tin mining in Cornwall supplied about 30 per cent of Britain’s tin require¬
ments in 1981 but otherwise British metal smelting and refining indus¬
tries are based on imported ores and concentrates except for substantial
secondary production from scrap metal. Britain is also a major producer of
specialised alloys for high technology requirements in the aerospace, elec¬
tronic, petrochemical, and nuclear and other fuel industries. Titanium and
titanium alloys are also produced and used in aircraft production, power
generation and North Sea oil production, where their lightness, resistance
to stress, flexibility and resistance to oxidisation are especially valued.
Nearly half the industry is situated in the Midlands. Other centres include
Wales, where Europe’s largest nickel refinery and only titanium sponge
plant are situated, London, Tyneside and Avonmouth, where there is a zinc
smelter of some 100,000 tonnes capacity. Two large-scale aluminium
smelters provide 55 per cent of Britain’s requirements for primary alu¬
minium. The large non-ferrous metals fabricating industry uses large
quantities of imported refined metals such as copper, lead, zinc and alu¬
minium. A wide range of semi-manufactures is produced in these metals
and their alloys, and, particularly in aluminium, firms are engaged in
smelting, casting and fabrication by rolling, extrusion and drawing; ad¬
vanced techniques of powder metallurgy and pressure die-castings are also
employed, which help to conserve energy and materials. In recent years
considerable progress has been made in the development of‘superplastic’
alloys, which are more ductile and elastic than conventional alloys.
The main products exported, including alloys and semi-finished pro¬
ducts, are copper, nickel, aluminium, lead, tin and zinc. Exports of alu¬
minium and aluminium alloys reached £300 million in 1980 while exports
in the same year of copper, brass and other copper alloys reached £255
million. Exports of silver, platinum and other metals of the platinum group
totalled over £913 million in 1980. The major export markets for the whole
industry are the United States and the rest of the European Community.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
21?
Mechanical
Engineering
Machine Tools
Industrial Plant
and Machinery
The mechanical engineering industry comprises a group of industries
manufacturing all types of non-electrical machinery, machine tools, in¬
dustrial engines, mechanical handling equipment, construction equipment
and industrial plant. Over half the industry’s production is for the home
market. The major customers for the heavy equipment sectors are the
nationalised fuel industries, the chemical industry and the British Steel
Corporation. A wide range of equipment is supplied to the building and
construction industry. Demand for other types of equipment comes from
all the production industries in Britain.
Other companies in the mechanical engineering industry manufacture
parts and components (including bearings, chains and gears) and undertake
general sub-contracting, fabricating and repair work.
Britain was the birthplace of the machine tool industry and provides a very
wide range of machine tools. Almost all of those produced are purchased by
engineering, vehicles and metal goods industries.
The most important types of metal cutting machine tools are milling,
grinding and turning machines. Britain is an important producer of
numerically controlled machine tools, which are programmed to carry out,
electronically, operations previously undertaken by a human operator. The
largest export markets for the industry in 1980 were the United States, the
Federal Republic of Germany, South Africa and France. The Machine
Tool Trades Association represents most of the industry and is responsible
for the international machine tool exhibition held in Britain every four
years, the next being due in 1984.
British industry manufactures almost every type of industrial (including
process) plant and steelwork (for nuclear power station construction, see
Chapter 13). Of particular importance are fabricated products such as
pressure vessels, heat exchangers and storage tanks for chemical and oil
refining (process) plant, steam-raising boilers (including those of high
capacity for power stations), sintering plant, metallurgical furnaces and
plant, lime and cement kilns, nuclear reactors, water and sewage treatment
plant and fabricated steelwork for bridges, buildings and industrial
installations. The industrial plant industry comprises both equipment
manufacturers and contractors responsible for the design, engineering,
construction and commissioning of complete plants for process industries.
British manufacturers have contributed to advances in process technology
and British contractors are carrying out major plant projects in many
countries.
Britain is an important manufacturer of industrial engines, including
those derived from aero-engines. Industrial pumps, valves and compres¬
sors are vital components in many industrial processes, particularly in the
chemicals, oil and electric power industries. The fluid power industry
makes oil hydraulic and pneumatic equipment for operating machinery and
construction and other equipment. There are many new areas where these
powerful and flexible systems may be used.
Textile machinery produced in Britain includes machines and accessories
for the manufacture and processing of yarns and fabrics from all types
of natural and man-made fibres. British inventions have remained the
foundation of many textile processes in use internationally and progress has
been made in applying automated techniques (including the use of micro¬
electronics) in the industry. In 1980 over 88 per cent of the industry’s total
sales were to export markets.
218
Construction,
Mining and
Mechanical
Handling
Equipment
Agricultural
Machinery
Office Machinery
Other Machinery
Metal Products
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Machinery for food and drink preparation, processing and sterilisation is
another important sector. Refrigerating machinery (excluding domestic
equipment) is used for food and drink processing, but the industry also
covers plant for ships and vehicles and equipment for conserving drinks,
food and ice-cream for the distributive and catering industries.
Almost the whole range of plant required by the construction industry is
produced, including excavating, earth-moving and road-making equip¬
ment, pile drivers, and quarry crushing and screening plant. Overseas sales
of construction equipment and mining machinery and equipment, including
coal cutting and coal face loading machinery, are substantial. Mechanical
handling equipment is used not only for construction and related activities
but throughout industry generally. It extends from individual units and
accessories to complete operating systems, the main products being cranes
and transporters, lifts, escalators, conveyors, elevators, hoists and powered
industrial trucks. Electronically controlled and completely automatic hand¬
ling systems are also available.
Britain produces a wide range of agricultural equipment for general and
special use, including many special purpose machines such as fruit and
vegetable harvesters and improved root harvesters (for tractors, see p 222).
Mechanised equipment is extensively used in the arable farming and dairy
farming sectors. Much of the new machinery is designed for use in a variety
of conditions to meet the needs of overseas farmers. A large-scale annual
exhibition of the industry’s products is the Royal Smithfield Show and
Agricultural Machinery Exhibition held in London in December. The
annual Royal International Agricultural Show is held in July at the
National Agricultural Centre, which also provides regular demonstrations
of technical developments in agriculture.
The industry covers a wide range of products including duplicators,
photocopiers, typewriters, word processors, microfilm, dictation and mail-
room equipment, and cash registers. A large proportion of the industry is
owned by multinational companies, and is likely to continue to be so, as the
rapidly advancing technologies involved require a heavy commitment to
research and development. In particular, the incorporation of micro¬
electronics into office products is rapidly increasing. The industry is strong
in microfilm readers/printers, duplicators, and office offset litho and rapid
high volume photocopiers.
The other major products of the mechanical engineering industry include
printing, bookbinding and paper goods machinery, space heating, ventilat¬
ing and air-conditioning equipment, packaging and bottling machinery,
hand tools, garden tools, portable power tools and miscellaneous non¬
electrical machinery, such as boot- and shoe-making machinery, laundry
equipment, automatic vending machines, plastics working machinery and
other types of specialised equipment.
A range of metal products other than those described in previous sections is
produced by a group of industries made up of a very large number of firms.
One of the main groups, in which small firms predominate, manufactures
engineers’ small tools and gauges, which include jigs and fixtures, press
tools and moulds, hard metal-tipped tools and other metal cutting tools.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
219
Another group manufactures cutlery and tableware (including safety
razors and blades).
A wide variety of domestic utensils, such as saucepans, buckets and
dustbins, made mainly from aluminium and wrought steel, are produced
by the hollow-ware industry, together with industrial hollow-ware, such as
kegs, drums and barrels. Five major firms which dominate the can and
metal box industry began a co-ordinated can recycling campaign in 1981.
The manufacture of hand tools, including files, saws, hammers, axes and
spades, is a long-established industry. About half of its total production is
for export. Jewellery, gold and silverware and the refining of precious
metals is an industry in which British craftsmen are world famous. The
Royal Mint makes coins for some 70 overseas countries. Other main groups
of metal goods are bolts, nuts and screws, metal furniture, metal windows,
metallic closures, metal small-ware such as needles and pins, safes, locks
and keys, domestic gas appliances and drop forgings.
ELECTRICAL,
ELECTRONIC AND
INSTRUMENT
ENGINEERING
Electrical and
Electronic
Engineering
Electrical
Engineering
1980
Labour0 Sales6 Exports Imports
’ooos £ m £ m £ m
Total
of which:
electrical machinery
insulated wire and cables
electronic equipment
telecommunications
components
consumer goods
computers
capital goods
scientific and industrial
instruments
860 12,947 5)4l8
126
40
68
121
102
44
101
94
1,809
863
940
L457
1,602
1,022
1,652
T455
894
164
97
730
397
938
502
705
5,004
361
67
70
773
881
1,082
291
600
“Employees in employment at June 1980.
* Manufacturers’ sales.
The electrical and electronic engineering industry is engaged in the manu¬
facture and installation of a wide variety of equipment, including all types
of power generation, transmission and distribution equipment, motors,
telecommunications and broadcasting equipment, capital electronics equip¬
ment and systems, industrial controls, computers, electronic components,
consumer electronics and domestic electrical appliances. Electronics,
which makes a vital contribution to the efficiency of many branches of the
country’s economy, is one of the most important sectors of British industry.
The main product categories are power equipment (generators, turbines,
motors, converters, transformers and rectifiers) and switchgear, starting
and control gear.
The industry produces cables and wires for the distribution of electric
power, for telecommunications networks and other purposes; its products
include submarine cables and cables insulated by a great variety of
materials. Optical fibres (hair-thin strands of glass) for use in telecommuni¬
cations (see also p 302) were invented in Britain in 1964; they can carry
much more ‘traffic’ than copper cables.
220
Electronic
Equipment
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
A few large firms dominate the market for other electrical goods, in¬
cluding domestic appliances such as heating and cooking equipment,
washing machines and dryers, refrigeration appliances, vacuum cleaners,
irons and electric kettles. Other major sectors are electrical equipment for
motor vehicles and aircraft, electric lamps and light fittings, and batteries
and accumulators.
The British electronics industry is one of the largest and most compre¬
hensive in the world and British scientists and companies have made
important contributions to electronics technology. Because the appli¬
cations of electronics technology are continuing to multiply rapidly, defi¬
nition of the industry must be arbitrary, but the sectors included are radar
and navigational aids, telecommunications equipment, security systems,
components, consumer goods, computers and communications and other
capital equipment, as well as electronic process control and industrial
instrumentation.
The dependence of the telecommunications industry on electronic tech¬
niques is increasing as new switching systems are introduced. The main
products are switching and transmission equipment for telephone, telex
and telegraph systems and subscribers’ apparatus such as telephones,
private automatic branch exchanges, teleprinters and facsimile systems.
British Telecommunications (see p 302) is the main customer in the home
market, which is largely supplied by four companies (GEC, Plessey,
Standard Telephones and Cables and Pye TMC) and carries out research
and development work in co-operation with companies.
The components sector manufactures a wide range of both active and
passive electronic components. In addition to a comprehensive indigenous
industry, a number of large United States companies are manufacturing
components in Britain. The sector meets requirements for components in
Britain, and is also very active in international trade. The manufacture
of integrated circuits (in which many components are fabricated within a
tiny chip of semi-conductor material) is an area of particularly rapid
change. Britain is improving its position in the manufacture of advanced
components.
The major consumer goods produced are radio and television sets, music
centres and high-fidelity audio and video equipment. In the audio field,
British manufacturers have a reputation for high-quality goods but are less
strong in the mass market. Equipment is also being manufactured for
reception of Britain’s ‘Prestel’ and ‘teletext’ services (see pp 301 and 391).
In the computer sector, Britain produces an extensive range of computer
systems, central processors and peripheral equipment, from large com¬
puters for large-scale data processing and scientific work to mini- and
micro-computers for use in control and automation systems and for home
and office use, and in these, British manufacturers are particularly com¬
petitive internationally. Essential to the sector is the ‘software’ industry, in
which Britain is especially strong, which provides programs and associated
services and complements the hardware industry, enabling the systems
manufacturers to provide complete solutions to meet the requirements of
users.
An expanding sector of the industry is that which covers the manufacture
of radio communications equipment, radar and radio navigational aids for
ships and aircraft, alarms and signalling equipment, public broadcasting
equipment and other capital goods. British equipment is used extensively
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
221
Instrument
Engineering
VEHICLES,
AIRCRAFT AND
SHIPS
Motor Vehicles,
Tractors and
Cycles
overseas, for defence, civil aviation, shipping, health, educational and other
purposes.
An important advance in medical diagnosis was the development in
Britain, in the 1960s and early 1970s, of the tomographic X-ray scanner.
This has made a world-wide impact by providing images of sections of
brain or whole body on living subjects. Further advances in medical
diagnosis in Britain have been made using nuclear magnetic resonance
machines linked, like X-ray scanners, with computers to display digitised
images on a television screen.
Instrument engineering is a particularly important sector of the engineer¬
ing industry. Electronic techniques are widely used, particularly in the
industrial instrument sector, which comprises integrated control systems
and equipment, optical instruments, electronic measurement and test
equipment, analytical instruments and a diverse group of others. The
chemicals, power, petroleum and iron and steel industries account for
about 80 per cent of process control applications, the largest sector of the
industry and one which is expanding. Major advances have been made in
automatic testing equipment and analytical instruments for non-destructive
testing, medical diagnosis and pollution control. Other sectors of the
instrument industry include photographic, cinematographic and repro¬
graphic equipment, watches, clocks and time recorders, and surgical in¬
struments and appliances.
1980
Labour0 Salesfc Exports Imports
’000s £ m £ m £ m
Total
of which:
cars and commercial vehicles
wheeled tractors
aerospace
shipbuilding and
marine engineering
860 14,529 6,038 5,148
436 8,158
32 893
200 3,755
147
1,266
3,!90
744
1,516
404
3,214
192
1,223
3ii
“Employees in employment at June 1980.
^Manufacturers’ sales.
The motor vehicle industry comprises the manufacture of cars and com¬
mercial vehicles, caravans and trailers, and parts and components. Output
of cars and commercial vehicles is dominated by four large groups: BL, in
which there is a majority public shareholding, Ford, Vauxhall and Talbot
(formerly Chrysler UK), which account for 99 per cent of car production
and some 98 per cent of commercial vehicle output; the remainder is in the
hands of smaller, specialist producers of cars, heavy commercial vehicles,
buses and coaches. There has traditionally been a substantial positive
balance of trade in the industry, maintained by surpluses on components
and commercial vehicles olfsetting increasing deficits on cars. The balance
of trade was largely restored in 1980 after an overall deficit was recorded for
the first time in 1979. The principal trade association for the industry is the
Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders. Motor industry shows are
held in alternate years at the National Exhibition Centre, Birmingham, and
in London.
222
Railway
Equipment
Aerospace
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Britain is a leading world producer and exporter of agricultural tractors,
which account for the bulk of wheeled tractors produced. Production is
dominated by four multinational companies.
In recent years the motorcycle industry has contracted and the domestic
market is largely supplied by imports, although large-capacity motor¬
cycles are still manufactured in Britain. The market for pedal cycles has
increased significantly in the last decade and is mainly supplied by British
firms, the largest of which is TI Raleigh.
British Rail builds most of its locomotives and rolling stock in its own
workshops using components from the private sector; it also supplies
equipment and provides consultancy services to many overseas countries.
The large private sector supplies a full range of equipment, including
components, traction and control gear, signalling, heating and ventilating
systems and track equipment to British Rail; it also builds trains for
London Transport and rapid transit networks. All this equipment is also
supplied to overseas railway and rapid transit authorities. In addition, the
private sector undertakes electrification and other major works overseas
and provides overseas consultancy services.
Britain’s aerospace industry is one of the largest and most comprehensive in
Western Europe and the Western world. The products of the industry
include civil and military aircraft, helicopters, aero-engines, guided
weapons, hovercraft and space vehicles, supported by a comprehensive
range of aircraft and airfield equipment and systems.
The main British airframe manufacturer is British Aerospace (BAe).
During the three years 1978-80, BAe (which brought together the former
separate companies British Aircraft Corporation, Hawker Siddeley Avia¬
tion, Hawker Siddeley Dynamics and Scottish Aviation), was a nationalised
corporation. In 1981 it was transformed into a public limited company and
the Government sold just over half of its shareholding in BAe to private
investors. Special arrangements were made for employee shareholdings.
The Government, which has a maximum shareholding of 48-43 per cent,
does not intend to use its rights as a shareholder to intervene in BAe’s
commercial decisions.
The major publicly owned companies are Rolls-Royce and Short
Brothers. Rolls-Royce is responsible for almost the entire output of aero¬
engines in Britain; it is one of the world’s three leading aero-engine
manufacturers and over 10,000 of the world’s civil and military aircraft are
powered by Rolls-Royce engines.
The remainder of the industry is in private ownership and comprises a
number of aircraft companies, including Westland Aircraft and its sub¬
sidiary, Westland Helicopters (which specialises in helicopter design and
manufacture and, in addition, performs a wide range of aviation equipment
work), and all of the aviation equipment sector.
Production of BAe includes such civil aircraft as the HS748 feederliner
and the HS125 business jet, while the new BAe 146 feederjet and Jetstream
31 transport aircraft are expected to be in service in 1983. BAe is a full
partner in the European consortium Airbus Industrie; it is continuing to
manufacture the wings for the A300 Airbus and is designing and manu¬
facturing the wings for the A310 derivative. Military aircraft include the
unique Harrier vertical/short take-off and landing aircraft (which has
achieved substantial sales to the United States), the Hawk advanced
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
223
trainer, the Anglo-French Jaguar tactical fighter/operational trainer and
the Tornado multirole combat aircraft, which is a collaborative venture by
Britain, the Federal Republic of Germany and Italy.
BAe is also a major producer of guided weapons including a number
which have been sold overseas, in particular the Rapier ground-to-air
missile. Collaborative guided weapon projects between Britain and its
NATO partners are becoming increasingly important.
Short Brothers, which is based in Belfast, produces the Skyvan, the
SD 330 and 360 commuter airliners, airframe components and missiles.
Westland Helicopters manufactures the successful Sea King and is the
British partner in the Anglo-French collaborative programmes on the
Puma, Gazelle and Lynx helicopters, which are being produced for the
armed forces of a number of countries besides Britain and France. West-
land has also introduced a Lynx derivative intended mainly for the civil
market.
Rolls-Royce aero-engines in production include the collaboratively pro¬
duced RB199 for the Tornado, the RB211 civil engine and its more
powerful derivative the RB211-524, the Pegasus vectored-thrust engine
for the Harrier and the Gem helicopter engine. More advanced versions of
the RB211-524 are under development, as is another RB211 derivative, the
RB211-535, which will be the launch engine for the new Boeing 757
airliner. Industrial versions of aero-engines such as the RB211 and the
Olympus (developed for Concorde) are being produced for use in oil and
gas transmission and as stand-by power generators. Versions for marine
use, in particular of the Olympus and the Tyne, are being used to power a
new generation of warships for the Royal Navy and many overseas navies.
The aviation equipment manufacturers provide a wide range of systems
essential to engines and aircraft, including engine and flight controls,
electrical generation, mechanical and hydraulic power systems, cabin
furnishings, flight decks and information displays including ‘head up’ dis¬
plays (which project electronically the information the pilot needs to fly and
navigate the aircraft without his having to look down at the instruments);
all are sold both in domestic and overseas markets. They also supply
equipment for ground operation including that needed for radar and air
traffic control, ground power suppliers and flight simulators, to airports
and airlines throughout the world.
The space sector’s main effort in the manufacture of satellite systems and
space hardware is for the programmes of the European Space Agency
(ESA, see p 363), although the industry also meets Britain’s own require¬
ments and contributes as manufacturers of sub-systems in, for example, the
satellite system of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organi¬
sation (INTELSAT). The Dynamics Group of BAe has acted as prime
contractor for all the ESA’s telecommunications satellite projects, which
include the Orbital Test Satellite (OTS), launched in 1978 and still in
operation, the European Communications Satellites (ECS), procured for
EUTELSAT (the European telecommunications satellite authority), and
the maritime series of communications satellites (MARECS), leased to the
International Maritime Satellite Organisation (INMARSAT), the first of
which was launched in 1981. BAe will also be prime contractors for the
ESA’s L-SAT large telecommunications satellite to be launched in 1986.
Marconi Space and Defence Systems (MSDS) concentrates on satellite
communications payloads and launcher guidance systems. MSDS is pay-
load contractor for the MARECS satellites and for L-SAT. Both BAe and
224
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Shipbuilding
and Marine
Engineering
MSDS are involved in the development of defence satellites and the world¬
wide supply of satellite sub-systems, and, with British Telecom, have
formed a consortium to build satellites for direct television broadcasting
(see p 391). The British space industry continues to contribute to ESA’s
scientific satellites, through BAe’s prime contractorship for the GEOS
satellites and principal contractorship for the development of the Giotto
satellite, which will investigate Halley’s comet in 1986. British firms also
built the later satellites in the Ariel series (see p 263) and manufacture all
types of ground stations (including those on the INTELSAT network)
both to meet the requirements of British Telecom (see p 301) and for
business and data communications and television transmission.
The industry is thus extensively involved in the manufacture of space
systems and in scientific research in other European collaborative pro¬
grammes. It carries out an extensive programme of research and develop¬
ment on airframes, aero-engines and equipment, including avionics, while
considerable research is also undertaken by universities and government
research establishments.
Aerospace production and exports, which are fairly evenly divided
between aircraft, engines and equipment (including avionics), have made
considerable progress over the past few years and now stand at record
levels. The principal destinations for exports are the United States and
countries with which Britain is involved in collaborative ventures such as
France and the Federal Republic of Germany. However, markets in the
developing world may become increasingly important for sales of satellite
equipment.
The main trade association for the industry is the Society of British
Aerospace Companies which organises a major international air show at
Farnborough, Hampshire, every two years.
Britain has a long-established tradition of shipbuilding and remains one of
the leading countries in the world for the construction, conversion and
repair of merchant vessels, warships and offshore structures. A wide variety
of ships is produced from the simplest series-built vessels to the most
sophisticated nuclear submarines. Most of the major British shipyards
have been reorganised in recent years, with the construction, in several
cases, of covered-berth ship ‘factories’ which are among the most modern
and efficient in the world.
The public sector, which mainly comprises British Shipbuilders and the
Belfast company Harland and Wolff, accounts for 99 per cent of output in
merchant shipbuilding, for all slow-speed marine diesel engines and for
over 50 per cent of turnover in ship-repairing. The public sector also
includes a number of companies engaged in general engineering work
connected with the marine industries.
The continuing recession and over-capacity in shipbuilding throughout
the world has led to the closure of a number of shipyards and a reduction in
the number employed in the industry.
A number of yards in the private sector build smaller vessels, including
patrol boats, fishing and harbour craft, supply vessels, tugs, cargo ships,
small tankers, ferries, pleasure boats and yachts.
Orders for merchant ships improved in 1981 and orders for Royal Navy
vessels are expected to remain strong. About 45 per cent of merchant ship
output is for overseas registration. British shipbuilders also export a
significant volume of naval vessels and associated products and services.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
225
Offshore
Equipment
CHEMICALS AND
COAL AND
PETROLEUM
PRODUCTS
Chemicals
General Chemicals
British Shipbuilders provides the offshore oil and gas industry with con¬
sultancy services (including advice on exploiting hydrocarbons under
difficult conditions) and has two modern and well-equipped shipyards, able
to build semi-submersible units for drilling, production and emergency/
maintenance support, drillships, jack-up rigs, modules and offshore load¬
ing systems. Conventional yards within British Shipbuilders can also
supply both traditional and specialised support vessels. Private sector yards
build jack-up rigs, fixed platforms, submersibles (the world’s first manned
submersible, made largely of glass-reinforced plastic, was built by a British
company) and a wide range of operational equipment.
1980
Labour^ Sales6 Exports Imports
’ooos £ m £ m £ m
Total
of which:
general chemicals
pharmaceuticals
plastics materials, synthetic
resins and synthetic rubber
toilet preparations
soap and detergents
coal and petroleum products
462 27,056 7,698 5,398
136
73
52
24
i?
35
6,676
2,213
2,037
668
9i5
12,640
2,609
699
883
187
174
2,033
1,768
256
830
75
46
C792
“Employees in employment at June 1980.
6Manufacturers’ sales.
The chemicals industry is one of the most successful industries in Britain as
well as being its fourth largest industrial sector, accounting for about to per
cent of manufacturing net output. The industry is also the second largest in
Europe and its exports of £5,665 million in 1980 (accounting for 16 per cent
of British manufacturing exports) placed Britain among the top four
chemical exporting nations. The industry is undertaking a considerable
investment programme, despite continuing uncertainties over the price
and availability of raw materials. The largest British chemicals group,
Imperial Chemical Industries, is the fourth largest chemicals company in
the world, accounting for some 20 per cent of production in Britain. The
industry is represented by the Chemical Industries Association. Western
Europe is the major export market.
About a quarter of the sales of general chemicals consists of a limited
number of relatively simple inorganic chemicals, such as sulphuric acid and
metallic and non-metallic oxides, serving as basic materials for industry.
Substantial quantities of inorganic chemicals are used in the manufacture
of fertilisers, detergents, paint, glass and metals.
Organic chemicals include the heavy organics produced in bulk and the
speciality intermediate products. Oil and natural gas are the source of some
90 per cent of world organic chemicals production. The most important
products (by weight) are ethylene, propylene and benzene. The main uses
of organic chemicals are in solvents, plastics and synthetic resins, synthetic
rubber, man-made fibres and detergents, and as intermediate chemicals in
the manufacture of other chemicals, pharmaceuticals, dyestuffs, paints,
adhesives, plastics and textiles.
226
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Pharmaceuticals
Plastics Materials,
Synthetic Resins
and Synthetic
Rubber
Fertilisers and
Crop Protection
Paint
Toilet Prepara¬
tions, Soap and
Detergents
Outside the inorganic and organic sectors is a wide range of general
chemicals formulated for specific uses. Radioisotopes are produced by
Amersham International (formerly The Radiochemical Centre), the
world’s largest manufacturers and exporters of radioactive products; over
80 per cent of production is for export.
Britain, whose scientists have discovered and developed many essential
drugs and medicinal products, produces a wide range of pharmaceutical
preparations. These include antibiotics and other drugs for the treatment
of infective (including tropical) diseases, drugs used for the treatment of
respiratory, circulatory, rheumatic and psychiatric conditions, antihista¬
mines, anaesthetics, synthetic steroid and other hormones, vaccines, sera
and drugs obtained from natural sources. Manufacturers in Britain are
among the world’s leading producers and exporters of preparations for the
treatment of human and animal diseases.
Many of the basic discoveries in plastics, including polyethylene, were
made in Britain. Over 40 per cent of production is exported. Expansion in
recent years has mainly been in thermoplastic materials, of which the most
important are polyethylene (used on coverings and packaging—notably for
foodstuffs), polyvinyl chloride (known as PVC and used for a wide range of
industrial purposes and consumer goods), polystyrene (a material used for
toys, light mouldings and many consumer goods) and polypropylene
(which can be fabricated as mouldings, films and fibres). A new group of
plastics materials reinforced with carbon fibres is also in commercial
production in Britain; they have up to three times the strength but are
only 20 per cent of the weight of steel, and are being increasingly used in,
for example, vehicle manufacture. Styrene-butadiene and polybutadiene
rubbers used for tyres, high styrene rubbers for shoe soles and flooring, and
nitrile rubbers for use where oil resistance is required, are also in large-scale
production, together with neoprene rubber.
The development of chemical fertilisers owes much to the pioneer work of
British scientists. Production is dominated by a few large firms, with a
number of firms marketing compound fertilisers from the principal con¬
stituents—nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium—and is almost entirely for
the domestic market. The use of ammonium nitrate, ammonium phosphate
and urea is resulting in highly concentrated fertilisers as different needs
arise. Notable recent British discoveries and developments in crop pro¬
tection include pyrethroid insecticides, Id’s diquat and paraquat herbi¬
cides (both of which kill only green plant tissue at low concentrations) and
sytemic fungicides and aphicides (which kill through being taken up by
growing plants and spreading within them). Herbicides are the largest
category of sales of pesticides and allied products.
Britain is a major producer of paints, varnishes and allied products. In
recent years many improved techniques have been introduced into the
paint and varnish industry, including new ranges of synthetic resins and
pigments, powder coatings, non-drip, quick-drying paints and paints
needing only one application.
These industries include soap, detergents, toilet preparations, cosmetics
and perfumes. Some of the large companies in the tciletries industry are
owned or financed by United States companies but there are a number of
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
227
Other Chemical
Products
Coal and
Petroleum
Products
FOOD, DRINK AND
TOBACCO
Bakery
Products
long-established British cosmetics, toiletries and soap manufacturers. Both
sectors are significant exporters.
There is a varied group of other chemical products including formulated
adhesives, printing ink, colours and dyestuff's, photographic chemical
materials, and floor and furniture polishes.
Refined mineral oil (see also p 250) is the largest product in this sector,
together with medicinal paraffin, paraffin wax, petroleum jelly and other
manufactures. Production of coke, other manufactured solid fuels, lubri¬
cating oils and greases is also included.
1980
Labour0 Sales* Exports Imports
’0005 £ m £ m £ m
Total
of which:
bread, bakery products,
biscuits, flour confectionery
chocolate and sugar
confectionery i
bacon curing i-
meat products )
fish products
milk and milk products
fruit and vegetable products
drinks
tobacco
622 27,885 2,483 4,065
133
68
103
54
52
126
30
2,491
t,472
3,020
3,631
1,501
4,962
3,921
96
219
157
295
112
862
301
28
185
1,040
504
415
396
56
“Employees in employment at June 1980.
'’Manufacturers’ sales.
Britain has one of the world’s largest and most sophisticated food pro¬
cessing industries and processed foods have accounted for a growing
proportion of total domestic demand for food in recent decades, though the
rate of growth has slowed since the early 1970s. Convenience foods,
particularly certain frozen foods, yoghurts and instant snacks, have formed
the fastest growing sector. There is a high rate of innovation in processed
foods, largely owing to the need to increase sales in a food market which is
not growing in size, given nearly static population growth. While Britain is
a net importer of foodstuff's, the level of imports has declined in recent
years. In 1980 the food industry supplied the domestic market with 75 per
cent of foods capable of home production compared with less than 60 per
cent in 1970. The greatest success has been with dairy, meat and fish, fruit
and vegetable products, and oils and fats. Exports, mainly to other mem¬
bers of the European Community, have grown steadily.
About 60 per cent of the bread in Britain is manufactured in large
mechanised bakeries, most of which use a process (the ‘Chorleywood’
process) developed by the industry’s principal research organisation, the
Flour Milling and Baking Research Association, and now widely used in
other countries. Two groups are predominant: Associated British Foods
and Ranks Hovis McDougal. There is a growing consumer interest,
228
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Dairy Products
Confectionery
Bacon Curing,
Meat and Fish
Products
Fruit,
Vegetable and
Other Products
Beverages
however, in locally baked varieties, production of which is usually allied to
the production of cakes and other flour confectionery. Biscuits and related
products are a major sector of the industry and have gained a world-wide
reputation. Another sector is grain milling and the production of various
specialised flours and meal.
Production of milk was some 15,240 million litres in 1981, of which just
under half was for sale as liquid milk. Nine out of ten households in Britain
receive pasteurised milk in bottles through a unique daily door-step
delivery system employing about 44,000 roundsmen (not included in the
employment figure in the table) driving electric vehicles. There are about
200 dairy companies and co-operatives buying, processing and distributing
milk and some 6,000 small distributors. Milk consumption per head (130
litres in 1980) is among the highest in the world.
The main milk products are butter (171,000 tonnes in 1981), cheese
(241,000 tonnes), cream (73,000 tonnes), full-cream condensed milk
(182,000 tonnes), full-cream milk powder (29,000 tonnes) and skim milk
powder (251,000 tonnes). The dairy industry accounted for 58 per cent of
new butter supplies to the British market in 1980, 72 per cent of new cheese
supplies, and nearly all of other milk products. Production and exports of
butter and cheese have increased significantly in recent years: butter
exports in 1980 were 80,000 tonnes and cheese exports 18,000 tonnes,
compared with 16,000 tonnes and 10,000 tonnes respectively in 1976. The
other main exports are skim milk powder (147,000 tonnes in 1980) and
condensed milk (38,000 tonnes). The industry’s interests are represented
by the Dairy Trade Federation.
The cocoa, chocolate and sugar confectionery industry is composed of a
small number of very large manufacturers and many medium-sized and
small companies. The three main manufacturers are Rowntree Mackintosh,
Cadbury Schweppes and Mars. Britain has a large share of world trade in
chocolate and sugar confectionery.
The industry comprises the curing of bacon and ham, the canning and
preserving of meat and fish, the manufacture of sausages and pies and the
preparation of extracts and pastes. In addition to the output of quick-frozen
fish, small quantities are also canned.
Fruit and vegetable products include canned, frozen and dried fruit and
vegetables, jam, marmalade, pickles and sauces. Other products of the food
processing industry include sugar, sugar preparations and honey, eggs, oils
and fats, coffee, cocoa, tea and spices, and cereal preparations.
Of prime importance among the alcoholic beverages produced in Britain,
and in the food and drink industry as a whole, is whisky. Scotch whisky
accounts for almost all whisky production in Britain. There are about 130
distilleries in Scotland and the well-known brands of blended Scotch
whisky are made from the products of a number of different distilleries.
The Distillers Company accounts for about a half of Scotch whisky output.
About 80 per cent of all Scotch whisky produced is exported. The principal
overseas markets are the United States (which takes nearly a third of whisky
exports from Britain), the rest of the European Community and Japan.
Production of gin in Britain has risen steadily since the early 1950s and
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
229
Tobacco
TEXTILES AND
RELATED
INDUSTRIES
some of the larger manufacturers also own distilleries overseas. Production
of vodka in Britain has increased sharply over the last decade.
In the brewing and malting industry there are seven major brewery
groups whose products are sold nationally, and about 80 smaller enter¬
prises who mainly supply locally, or regionally, many of them because of a
demand for traditionally brewed beers. Firms have introduced new pro¬
duction methods, including continuous brewing processes, and automated
batch production plants are well established. The main raw materials used
are malt, hops and some sugar. British malt, which is made almost entirely
from home-grown barley, is used by brewers throughout the world. In
recent years lager has increased in popularity.
Cider, perry and wine producers form the smallest sector of the drinks
industry and are located mostly in southern and western England. Made
wine is produced from imported grapes and juices.
The soft drinks industry has expanded markedly in the last decade.
There are some very large companies among about 20 producing brands
which are marketed on a national scale, while other companies supply
regional markets. There is some specialisation among firms in the produc¬
tion of various types, such as carbonated drinks, cola-based drinks,
squashes and cordials, ‘mixers’, fruit juices and health drinks.
The British tobacco industry manufactures almost all the cigarettes and
tobacco goods sold in Britain. Over 90 per cent of production is provided by
four major manufacturers (the Imperial Group, Gallaher, Carreras
Rothmans and British American Tobacco). The industry specialises in the
production of high-quality cigarettes made from flue-cured tobacco and
achieves significant exports, mainly of cigarettes. Countries in Europe, the
Middle East and Africa are important markets for British cigarettes. Britain
imports raw tobacco in large amounts from Brazil, India and the United
States.
1980
Labour12 Salesfc Exports Imports
’000s £ m £ m £ m
Total
of which:
man-made fibres
cotton )
linen f
wool
carpets
hosiery and knitwear
clothing
leather and leather goods
footwear
770 10,821 2,800
25
69
65
26
102
270
3i
67
723
1,069
IT53
581
L33i
2,982
456
881
373
425
39i
142
298
55i
141
135
3,492
233
776
179
159
360
879
202
359
“Employees in employment at June 1980.
'’Manufacturers’ sales.
The historical branches of the industry, based on the natural fibres of
cotton and wool, linen and jute, have retained their separate identities but
the boundaries between them are becoming blurred with the increasing use
of man-made fibres. The growth of man-made fibres has stimulated the
230
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Man-made
Fibres
Cotton
Linen
development of new processes and new types of yarn and cloth and has
strongly influenced the structure of the industry. A small number of large
multifibre, multiprocess groups have emerged, although in many sectors a
preponderance of small companies engages in just one or two operations.
British textile companies manufacture a wide variety of goods, including
lace, narrow fabrics and household textiles, such as blankets, sheets, towels,
and tablecloths. Rope, twine, nets and netting are manufactured by the
cordage industry, and there is an important sector specialising in textiles for
industrial applications such as machine belting. A recent development is
the production of non-woven fabric by the melded process, which dis¬
penses with the conventional weaving and knitting stages.
The textile and clothing industries in Britain, as in other northern
European countries, have been affected by low-cost imports from develop¬
ing countries. Trade in textiles and clothing is regulated by the Multi-Fibre
Arrangement (MFA) of the General Agreement on Tariff's and Trade. The
MFA allows a measure of restraint on imports of textiles and clothing from
low-cost countries into industrialised countries.
Much of the early development of man-made fibres took place in Britain
and continuing extensive research has produced a wide variety of types
with their own special characteristics. The two main types are still those
first developed—the cellulosic fibres, such as rayon, and the synthetic
fibres, such as nylon and polyester (a British invention), made wholly by
chemical processes. Acrylic fibres, including Courtelle, Acrilan and Orion,
are important products, as are the elastomeric or spandex fibres which have
inherent properties of stretch and recovery, anti-static synthetic yarns
embedded with carbon and various fire-resistant yarns. More recently
there has been a greater use of the polyolefins (polypropylene and poly¬
ethylene) in the carpet, carpet backing and packaging fields and still more
recently in household textiles and clothing. Output in the man-made fibre
producing industry is concentrated in the hands of a few large companies.
Recent innovations in man-made fibres include a number with industrial
applications. Examples are carbon fibres, used in aerospace; melded fabrics
(bonded together without knitting or weaving) with heavy duty uses in civil
engineering; high-tenacity filament yarns for cables and stays; high-
temperature refractory fibres for furnaces; and charcoal cloth with highly
effective air-filtering properties.
During the nineteenth century cotton was Britain’s chief consumer goods
industry and cotton piece goods its largest export. Low-cost competition
has cut progressively into British markets and made necessary extensive
reorganisation, modernisation and the introduction of new techniques.
Production includes single and double cotton yarn, spun man-made fibre
and mixture cloth.
The linen industry is centred in Northern Ireland, where the lighter types
of fabrics for apparel, furnishings and household textiles are produced. The
heavyweight canvas for sailcloth, tents, awnings and tarpaulins is mainly
produced in Scotland.
Export sales of tops, yarns and fabrics of the wool textile industry in Britain
have reached more than three times the value of imports. The industry is
one of the largest in the world and includes the world’s biggest wool textile
Wool
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
231
Carpets
Jute
Hosiery and
Knitwear
Clothing
Footwear and
Leather
company, Illingworth, Morris. There are two main branches, woollen and
worsted. An increasing amount of man-made fibre is now blended with
wool. West Yorkshire is the main producing area but Scotland and the west
of England are also famous as specialised producers of high quality yarn and
cloth. Large quantities of raw wool are scoured and cleaned in Britain to
prepare it for spinning. The largest markets for woollen and worsted fabrics
are the rest of the European Community, the United States and Japan.
Nearly 60 per cent of the output of the carpet and rug industry (in value
terms) is made up of tufted carpets, in the production of which the pile,
usually with a high man-made fibre content, is inserted into a pre-woven
backing. Woven carpets, such as Axminster and Wilton, account for most
of the remainder of sales. There is a higher wool content in woven types,
although they too are making more use of man-made fibres. The high
quality and variety of design make Britain one of the world’s leading
producers of woven carpets. The volume of carpet sales has contracted
since 1976.
Jute products are manufactured in the Dundee area. Jute yarn and the man¬
made polypropylene yarn are used in the manufacturing of carpets, cordage
and ropes and woven into fabrics for a wide range of applications in the
packaging, upholstery, building and motor car industries. New uses for
jute, for example, as a plastics reinforcement and for decorative wall
coverings, have also been developed.
The hosiery and knitwear industry comprises more than 1,000 companies
situated mainly in the East Midlands and Scotland, of which most are small
to medium in size. The industry produces fabrics, outerwear, underwear,
tights, socks, stockings, gloves and accessories.
The British clothing industry is one of the largest in Europe; it is highly
labour intensive with about 7,000 companies (predominantly small ones),
accounting for 4 per cent of Britain’s total employment in manufacturing.
The existence of the Multi-Fibre Arrangement has encouraged investment
within the industry and exports have risen somewhat since 19773 although
import penetration has continued to increase.
The British footwear manufacturing industry is made up predominantly of
small companies although there has been some rationalisation in recent
years. Though largely labour intensive, the industry has made use of
technological advances and supplies half the shoes sold in Britain. Import
penetration, however, has continued to increase. Leather tanning and the
manufacture of leather goods are also long-established industries; all types
of leather (particularly for footwear, clothing and gloves) and leather goods
are produced.
Bricks, Fireclay
and Refractory
Goods
Firms in the industry manufacture such items as bricks, roofing tiles,
chimney pots, fireclay ware and heat-resisting products, including furnace
and kiln linings. Brickmaking is one of Britain’s oldest industries, but most
manufacture is now based on highly mechanised systems. London Brick
PLC supplies about 40 per cent of total brick deliveries. Refrac¬
tory goods include firebricks, silica bricks, magnesite bricks, chrome-
magnesite bricks and alumina bricks.
232
Cement
OTHER
MANUFACTURING
Pottery
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The cement industry is chiefly concerned with the manufacture of Portland
cement for the home market. Invented by Joseph Aspdin and patented in
1824, this material and the methods of its production have been the subject
of continuous technical improvement and intensive research.
Glass-reinforced cement composites, a new variation, were invented in
Britain in the mid-1970s and are manufactured under licence in some 45
other countries. The capacity of the industry as a whole has substantially
expanded in recent years.
1980
Labour2 Sales6 Exports Imports
’ooos £m £ m £ m
Total
of which:
bricks, fireclay, refractory
goods and cement
pottery and glass
paper and board
paper and board converted
products
printing and publishing
rubber and rubber goods
furniture and timber
plastics products not elsewhere
specified and floor coverings,
etc.
toys, games and sports
equipment
1,322 22,809
53
116
61
128
340
93
166
131
33
1,191
T585
L5I9
3T5i
4,081
1,801
2,964
2,615
480
3.097
136
425
315
198
423
520
226
303
183
4.674
22
288
i.54i
143
266
307
1,178
326
244
“Employees in employment at June 1980.
'’Manufacturers’ sales.
The pottery industry, centred largely in Staffordshire, supplies almost all
home needs for domestic and industrial pottery. It uses largely indigenous
clay from Cornwall and Devon. There has been considerable re-equipment
in the industry; kilns fired by gas or electricity have replaced all the coal-
fired kilns, and new decorating techniques and automatic and semi-auto¬
matic machinery, such as automatic glazing machines, have been intro¬
duced. Domestic pottery, including china, earthenware and stoneware,
accounts for 55 per cent of the industry’s output; the other main divisions
are glazed tiles, sanitary ware and electrical ware, and such specialised
industrial products as acid-proof stoneware, porous ceramics and labora¬
tory porcelain. Production of tableware is concentrated in two major
groups. Britain is the world’s principal manufacturer of fine bone china,
much of which is exported; famous makes include Wedgwood, Spode, Royal
Worcester, Royal Doulton, Minton, Aynsley, Coalport and Royal Crown
Derby.
Britain’s glass industry is one of the biggest in the world. Glass containers
form the largest part of the industry; another major section is devoted to the
manufacture of flat glass in its various forms, chiefly ‘float’ glass, a process
developed in Britain by Pilkington Brothers and licensed to glassmakers
Glass
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
233
Paper and
Board
Manufacture
and Conversion
Printing and
Publishing
Rubber
throughout the world. The use of glass for internal decoration and as a
finish for internal and external walls has greatly increased in recent years.
Large quantities of safety glass are produced for the motor and other
industries. Other products include tubular glass, mirrors, lamp and bulb
glass, scientific and medical glassware, glass fibres, and all types of glass
containers (mostly made automatically). A traditional product is hand¬
made lead crystal glassware of very high quality.
There were about 130 paper and board mills in 1981, the largest eight
accounting for one-third of total British production, which was 3 4 million
tonnes. The largest British groups are Wiggins Teape, the Dickinson
Robinson Group, Reed International and the Bowater Corporation. They
hold considerable interests abroad, including pulp and paper producing
mills in the United States, Canada, other parts of the Commonwealth and
Europe. Overseas paper and board groups with manufacturing invest¬
ments in Britain include Georgia Pacific, Kimberley Clark, and Consoli¬
dated Bathurst. The main types of paper and board produced are printing
and writing papers and board, corrugated case materials, packaging paper
and board, and tissue. There has been a significant trend towards waste-
based packaging grades, in order to reduce the industry’s reliance on
imported woodpulp supplies. The use of recycled waste paper is increasing
and research is helping to extend it. Waste paper provides over half of the
industry’s fibre needs. Domestically produced wood pulp represents only a
small percentage of raw material supplies.
The packaging and converting industries manufacture a variety of pro¬
ducts, including cardboard boxes, cartons, fibreboard packaging and
business stationery products.
The printing and publishing industries produce a wide range of products,
including national and provincial newspapers, periodicals, books, business
stationery and greeting cards. Mergers have led to the formation of large
groups in the newspaper, magazine and book publishing sectors, but
general printing, engraving, bookbinding and a large part of publishing
remain essentially industries of small firms. The book publishing industry
is a major exporter. Production processes include high-speed printing,
electronic engraving, advanced processes of photographic reproduction
and computer typesetting. Security printers (of, for example, banknotes
and postage stamps) have a high reputation and are important exporters,
the two major companies being De La Rue and Bradbury Wilkinson. The
most important overseas markets for printed matter are the United States,
the Irish Republic and Australia.
Tyres and tubes represent around 45 per cent of sales of rubber manu¬
factures, the most important other goods being vehicle components and
accessories, conveyor belting, cables, industrial, hydraulic and marine
hoses, latex foam products and rubber footwear, gloves and clothing.
Rubber is also used for inflatable life-rafts, containers for fuel and other
industrial liquids and seals for storage tanks and other products where
there are problems of air exclusion and vapour suppression. The Dunlop
Company is Britain’s leading tyre and rubber goods manufacturer. Tyre
manufacturers include several subsidiaries of United States and other
overseas companies. The industry’s consumption of rubber includes
natural, synthetic and recycled rubber.
234
Furniture,
Brushes and
Timber
Plastics
Products
Toys, Games
and Sports
Equipment
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The furniture industry comprises about 1,700 companies mostly small- to
medium-sized with only a few of any significant size. A wide range of
products are manufactured, the greater part of production being accounted
for by domestic furniture and the remainder by office, contract, school and
other furniture. The industry makes wooden, metal and plastic furniture,
upholstery, bedding and soft furnishings. Exports have increased in recent
years, rising from £69 million in 1975 to £157 million in 1981. The major
markets are the United States, the Irish Republic and the Federal Republic
of Germany.
The brush industry is located throughout Britain and includes highly
mechanised establishments as well as small craft units.
Domestic production of softwood timber has been steadily increasing
but the timber-using industries are mainly dependent on imported sup¬
plies. A large proportion of timber sales is dependent on the construction
industry.
In addition to the plastics components and accessories supplied to many
different industries, the plastics products industry manufactures a wide
range of building materials, such as pipes, sheeting for roofs, sanitary ware,
tanks and other products. It also supplies flexible foams, used in the vehicle,
furniture and other industries; rigid foams; packaging products, including
bottles, containers and bags; domestic and industrial hollow-ware; many
kinds of household goods; vinyl and other floorcoverings; and artificial
leathercloth.
There are about 500 manufacturers of a wide range of toys and games, only
a few of significant size. About a third of total production is exported, the
major markets being France, the Federal Republic of Germany and the
United States. British diecast toys, model construction kits and soft toys
are well established in overseas markets. The greatest expansion in the
industry in recent years has been in electronic toys and games.
There are about 300 manufacturers of sports equipment, many of which
are small companies with a high reputation for craftsmanship. British
fishing tackle and golf and tennis equipment have a world-wide reputation.
The main export markets are the United States and the rest of the European
Community.
CONSTRUCTION
The construction industry accounts for about 6 per cent of gross domestic
product. In 1981 some 60 per cent of output by value was new work and 40
per cent was in repairs and maintenance. About 37 per cent of the work was
in housing and 63 per cent in other work. The volume of output (which was
valued at £21,251 million) declined owing to the industrial recession.
About i-2 million people are employed in the industry, accounting for
nearly 6 per cent of total employment. There are also about 314,000 self-
employed. Government sponsorship of the construction industry is the
responsibility of the Department of the Environment.
The industry includes firms engaged on the design, construction, altera¬
tion, repair and maintenance of buildings, highways, airfields, drainage and
sewerage systems, docks, harbours and canals, sea defence works, offshore
structures, electrical wiring, heating and other installation work, and
structural work connected with power stations and telecommunications.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
235
Structure
Output
Housing
Civil
Engineering
Projects
Research and
Advisory
Services
Overseas
Construction
Construction work is carried out both by private contractors and by public
authorities which employ their own labour. In 1981 about 88 per cent of the
work was done by private firms. Although there were about 77,000 firms
employing two or more people, 92 per cent of them employed fewer than
25. Some large firms are vertically integrated, owning quarries and work¬
shops, mechanised plant and standard builders’ equipment; some under¬
take responsibility for projects from initial design to finished building. All
but the smallest projects are generally carried out under professional
direction, either by architects or, in the case of the more complicated civil
engineering projects, by consulting engineers. The latter, acting on behalf
of a client, may advise on the feasibility of projects, draw up plans and
supervise the construction work.
The Property Services Agency (PSA), which is an integral part of the
Department of the Environment, is responsible for the construction pro¬
grammes undertaken directly by the Government, including work for the
armed forces both in Britain and overseas.
A large proportion of public authority employees are engaged on repair
and maintenance work for local authorities. The total labour force includes
about 70,000 trainees, whose normal apprenticeship period is three years.
Of the total value of work done in Britain in 1981, £21,221 million, £3,783
million represented new housing and £8,900 million other new work;
repair and maintenance accounted for the remaining £8,538 million.
During 1981 a total of 153,200 dwellings were started in Great Britain.
Starts in the public sector were 36,600 and those for private owners
116,500. In the course of the same year 198,800 dwellings were completed,
of which 83,300 were in the public sector and 113,500 in the private sector.
Industrialised building methods employing prefabricated components are
used in some of the work in both sectors.
Among important construction projects in hand or completed in Britain in
1981 were five nuclear power stations, a coal-fired power station, the
Dinorwic pumped-storage electricity station, the Thames Barrier, which
will form part of London’s flood defences, the Humber Bridge, the Kielder
dam and reservoir, the Sullom Voe oil terminal, a new air terminal at
Heathrow (London), and roads, tunnels, bridges, hospitals and large-scale
housing developments.
Within the Department of the Environment, the Building Research
Establishment is concerned with all aspects of construction research and
also provides an advisory service. The Agrement Board, sponsored by the
Department, tests and certifies building products and methods.
In addition to research carried out within the major construction and
building materials firms, work is also undertaken by research associations,
universities and colleges of technology. The Hydraulics Research Station
at Wallingford (Oxfordshire) carries out research in water supply, drain¬
age, flood control, sea protection and offshore engineering.
The Association of Building Centres represents 12 building centres
throughout Britain, most of which provide exhibition and information
services on materials, products, techniques and building services.
Total overseas earnings of all sectors of the construction industry in
1980-81 were estimated at about £3,180 million. British contractors earned
236
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
£250 million from overseas customers and a further £60 million from
overseas branches and subsidiaries. The related professions (consulting
engineers, architects and surveyors) had earnings of £500 million while
process plant engineering contractors contributed some £300 million and
exports of building materials, plant and machinery accounted for some
£2,130 million.
In 1980-81 British construction firms carried out work overseas valued
at £1,287 million. New contracts worth £1,360 million were won overseas.
Recent major projects have included the Dubai Dry Dock, the largest one
in the world, and the Hong Kong Metro. Among new orders are a power
station project in Hong Kong, a sewerage reconstruction programme in
Cairo, Egypt, and a university complex in Oman.
SERVICE INDUSTRIES
There has been a steady rise in the proportion of total output contributed
by the service industries in Britain, and in the proportion of employees
working in the service sector. In 1981 services contributed about 60 per
cent of gross domestic product compared with some 55 per cent in 1970 and
50 per cent in i960; and in mid-1981 they accounted for 61 per cent of
employees in employment compared with 50 per cent in 1970 and 47 per
cent in i960. There has also been an increase in service activities carried out
within the productive sector; the proportion of administrative, technical
and clerical workers employed in manufacturing, for example, rose from 21
per cent in i960 to 27 per cent in 1970 and 30 per cent in 1982. It is probable
that this represents a growing contribution of management, design, re¬
search and development, computing, marketing and distribution skills.
The increase in service activity has been accompanied by a rise in the
proportion of women in the working population, women tending to find
employment more readily in service activities than in production. In June
1981 the number of women in employment was 700,000 higher than ten
years earlier, while the number of males was 1,160,000 lower. In mid-1981,
76 per cent of employed women were in service industries compared with
48 per cent of males in employment.
The contribution of the various service sectors to gross domestic product
can be seen in Table 9, p 191. The main growth sector since 1970 has been
financial and business services, followed by public health and education
services, miscellaneous services, public administration and communi¬
cations. The contribution of the distributive trades to gross domestic
product has changed little and that of transport has declined. The rising
contribution of the publicly provided health and education services results
in part from the recognition that investment in human resources is of
increasing importance to an industrialised society in an era of technological
advance. Within miscellaneous services, growth (measured by employ¬
ment) has occurred chiefly in hotels and catering, services associated with
leisure activities and motor car servicing and distribution.
One detectable trend in recent decades is that consumers have exchanged
certain services (such as public transport, laundries and cinemas) for rented
or purchased goods (such as motor cars, washing-machines and television
sets) with which they can provide services for themselves. In turn demand
for the distribution, maintenance and repair of such goods has generated
fresh service activities. Increased consumer expenditure on the running
costs of motor vehicles has contributed significantly to the rise in consumer
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
237
expenditure on services from 30 per cent of total consumer expenditure in
i960 to 40 per cent in 1981.
In general, technological innovation, particularly in electronics, is com¬
bining with increased consumer spending to make possible the provision of
new and improved services, ranging from electronic accounting, stock¬
taking and ‘check-out’ operations in retail distribution outlets to the
provision of credit through cards, the expansion of information systems
such as viewdata, and the renting of electronic entertainment goods such as
video cassette recorders.
Distribution and certain business and other services are described below.
Services described elsewhere are education (Chapter 7), health (Chapter 6),
national and local government (Chapter 2), defence (Chapter 4), transport
and communications (Chapter 15) and services provided by financial
institutions (Chapter 18).
DISTRIBUTION There were about 3 3 million people engaged in the distributive trades in
mid-1981, together with a large number of owners of businesses. The
distributive trades accounted for about 9 per cent of national income in
1981, retailing contributing about three-fifths of this and wholesaling and
dealing the remainder.
RETAIL TRADES Turnover of the retail trades has been growing slowly in real terms in recent
years. In 1981 retail sales were 43 per cent higher than in 1978, represent¬
ing, however, only a 6 per cent increase in volume. In 1980 there were an
estimated 228,000 businesses in the retail trade in Great Britain with a
turnover of more than £13,000 (see Table 14); they had 349,000 outlets, of
which about 57 per cent were accounted for by single-outlet retailers. Their
turnover was about £59,000 million in 1980 when they invested £1,503
million. Some 2 4 million people (including a large number of part-time
staff) were engaged in retailing in 1980. As the large multiple retailers (those
with 10 or more outlets) have grown in size and diversified their product
ranges, there has been a decline in the number of retail businesses and
outlets. The decline has been particularly evident among small indepen¬
dent businesses and retail co-operative societies. Shops selling durable
household goods have experienced the fastest growth turnover in recent
years, while those selling food have recorded the slowest growth.
The largest multiple retailers in the packaged grocery market are the
retail co-operatives, followed by Tesco, Sainsbury, Asda, Fine Fare, Allied
Suppliers and International Stores. Retail co-operative societies are volun¬
tary organisations controlled by their members, membership being open to
anyone paying a small deposit on a minimum share; at the end of 1981 the
160 retail societies had 9 6 million members and 7,250 retail outlets.
Turnover in 1980 amounted to £3,900 million, 7 per cent of total retail
trade. Retail co-operatives and the Co-operative Wholesale Society (see
p 240) are members of the Co-operative Union as are a number of other co¬
operative bodies such as the Co-operative Bank. In 1981—82 Tesco had
about 544 stores and sales were valued at £2,102 million. Sainsbury had
some 265 outlets and the company’s sales amounted to £1,951 million.
The leading mixed retail businesses are Marks and Spencer (with sales of
£2,199 million in 1981-82), Boots, F W Woolworth, the John Lewis
Partnership, House of Fraser, W H Smith & Son, Debenhams and British
Home Stores.
There are a number of discount stores operating on the principle of
238
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
selling most or all of their goods at a reduced price. Electrical goods,
furniture, carpets and do-it-yourself supplies are some of the main items
sold by discount stores.
About 18 million people regularly shop by post. In 1980 sales by general
mail order firms totalled some £2,370 million, representing 4 per cent of
retail sales and 6-5 per cent of retail sales excluding food shops. The volume
of mail order sales has increased by about 40 per cent since 1971. The
leading items sold by mail order are clothing, footwear, furniture, house¬
hold textiles and radio, television and electrical goods. The two main mail
order firms are Great Universal Stores and Littlewoods.
Trends
Table 14: Retail Trade in Great Britain 1980*
Number of Number of
businesses outlets
Number of
people
engaged
(thousand)
Turnover*
(£ million)
Single-outlet retailers
Small multiple retailers
Large multiple retailers
(ten or more retail
outlets)
of which,
co-operative societies
Food retailers
Drink, confectionery
and tobacco
retailers
Clothing, footwear and
leather goods
retailers
Household goods
retailers
Other non-food
retailers
Mixed retail businesses
Hire and repair
businesses
202,363 202,363
29,486 78,409
I>253
191
81,846
39,408
29,884
38,864
32,228
3,346
2,502
73,358
8,556
118,083
54,878
57,069
58,267
44,745
9,520
6,038
880
385
1,127
139
861
241
291
280
221
420
47
18,469
8,572
32,042
3,869
22,586
5,973
5,281
7,987
4,640
11,083
936
Total retail trade
228,077 348,601
2,368
58,484
Source: British business.
“Figures cover businesses above the threshold of value added tax (£18,000 at that time).
6Includes value added tax.
The difference between totals and the sums of their component parts is due to rounding.
One of the most significant trends in retailing in recent years has been the
increase in the proportion of turnover accounted for by large multiple
retailers; they have 54 per cent of retail turnover. Other important trends
have been the increase in very large self-service stores selling a wide variety
of products, diversification by food multiples into selling a wider range of
goods, the development of specially designed shopping precincts and an
increasing emphasis on price competition.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
239
Supermarkets,
Superstores and
Hypermarkets
Shopping Centres
Diversification
Promotions
Use of
Technology
There are supermarkets in most towns and cities in Britain. The main
multiple grocery companies have been steadily increasing the size of their
supermarkets and closing the smaller and less efficient ones. The trend to
greater size has led to a growing number of superstores and hypermarkets,
single-level, self-service stores offering a wider range of food and non-food
merchandise and which have at least 2,500 square metres (26,900 square
feet) and 5,000 square metres (53,800 square feet) respectively of selling
space. They are designed primarily for shoppers with cars and substantial
free car-parking space is usually provided. In Britain the first such store
was opened in the mid-1960s and by December 1981 there were some 189
superstores and 41 hypermarkets open, while planning permission for
a further 52 superstores and 5 hypermarkets had been granted. It is
government policy that these stores should be located within urban areas,
preferably within shopping centres, where they are accessible to all
shoppers including those without cars.
Britain has a variety of new purpose-built shopping centres. The largest are
the Manchester Arndale and the centre in Milton Keynes, which, both
covering more than 93,000 square metres (1 million square feet), are among
the largest in Europe. Other large centres are at Brent Cross in London, the
Luton Arndale and the Eldon Square Development in Newcastle upon
Tyne.
Many of the large multiple groups have diversified over the last few years
to offer a much bigger range of goods than previously. This has been
especially noticeable for the large food retailers, which often sell non-food
products, such as beer, wines and spirits, clothing and household appli¬
ances, as well as packaged groceries. Another trend is that many superstores
and large supermarkets offer fresh as well as packaged food, often with
special counters or areas for fresh meat, fish, vegetables and bread baked on
the premises.
Retailers are placing greater emphasis on price competition as a means of
promoting sales, while trading stamps, which were an important method of
sales promotion in the late 1960s and early 1970s, have become much less
significant. With the growth of payments by credit card, certain of the large
retailers have issued their own credit cards for regular customers in an
attempt to increase sales, particularly of high-value goods.
Laser-scanning electronic check-outs are expected to have a major impact
on retailing in the next few years. Under this system, the package of each
item is marked with a special bar-code which is read by a low-power laser
beam at the point of sale and the price is automatically retrieved from a
central computer. The customer is given a receipt showing the price and
identity of each item purchased, while the store’s stock records are altered
automatically. Substantial savings are expected from improved stock con¬
trol and a reduction of individual price marking in stores. Key Markets
introduced the first operational laser-scanning electronic check-out in
Britain at Spalding (Lincolnshire) in 1979. At a local library in Gateshead,
Tyne-and-Wear, a computerised shopping service enables elderly and
disabled people to order goods from a supermarket by passing a light-pen
over items on a list of goods. Some large multiple retailers are experiment¬
ing with sales information on Prestel (see p 301); others are trying out
240
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
WHOLESALE
TRADES
BUSINESS
SERVICES
Advertising
Market
Research
electronic order and invoice systems in dealings with their suppliers,
following a legal change permitting tax invoices in forms other than paper.
High-speed labelling techniques, including the use of electronic printers
which can overprint labels, the use of pressure-sensitive glues and printing
in foil instead of ink, are being adopted in order to save time and labour
costs.
In 1980 there were some 80,000 businesses engaged in wholesaling and
dealing, employing around 1 million people. In 1980 the turnover of
wholesaling (including sales to other wholesalers and dealers) amounted to
some £107,300 million. The main areas in which wholesalers are dominant
are groceries and provisions, petroleum products, and ores and metals. A
number of the large retailers carry out the functions of the wholesaler by
having their own warehouses, and buying and distributive organisations.
Two large groups, Booker McConnell and Linfood, predominate in the
wholesale food trade. London’s wholesale markets play a significant part in
the distribution of foodstuffs. New Covent Garden is the main market for
fruit and vegetables, Smithfield for meat and Billingsgate for fish.
The co-operative movement in Britain has its own wholesale organisation,
the Co-operative Wholesale Society (CWS), to serve the needs of retail
societies; its turnover was £1,900 million in 1981. Retail societies are
encouraged to buy from the CWS, which supplies about two-thirds of their
requirements.
‘Cash and carry’ wholesaling is becoming increasingly important. By
bulk purchasing and limiting their expenditure on premises and credit and
delivery facilities, these wholesalers can offer large discounts to their
customers. There were estimated to be about 600 ‘cash and carry’ depots in
Britain in 1980.
In the grocery trade there are a number of voluntary groups which have
been formed by wholesalers with small retailers, whereby the retailers are
encouraged by discounts and other incentives to buy as much as possible
from the wholesaler. This has helped to preserve the existence of retail
outlets for the wholesaler, and also the traditional ‘corner shops’ and village
stores, of value to local communities, and has given small retailers the
advantages of bulk buying and co-ordinated distribution.
Business services include advertising, market research, management con¬
sultancy, exhibition and conference facilities, computer services and
auction houses. Most of these sectors have grown rapidly in recent years.
Advertising expenditure rose by 13 per cent in 1981 to £2,880 million,
according to the Advertising Association, though this represented a fall on
the previous year in real terms, owing to the recession. Advertising in the
press accounted for 65 per cent of the total, television for 29 per cent,
posters for 4 per cent and commercial radio for 2 per cent. Advertising
campaigns are planned mainly by advertising agencies, of which there are
several hundred in Britain; in some cases they also provide marketing,
consumer research and other services. There were some 37,000 people
employed in advertising and market research in mid-1980.
The 24 members of the Association of Market Survey Organisations
(AMSO) accounted for about three-quarters of total turnover by market
research companies in 1981. Excluding the largest company (the AGB
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
241
Management
Consultancy
Exhibition and
Conference
Centres
Computer
Services
Auction Houses
Other Business
Services
group, which had an estimated turnover of £14 million) the turnover of
AMSO members increased to £57 million in 1981 from £49 million in
1980. Research on behalf of food companies accounted for 22 per cent.
There are thought to be some 5,000 management consultants in Britain, of
whom 2,150 are practising members of the Institute of Management
Consultants. Among the largest management consultancy companies are
the 25 members of the Management Consultants Association, whose turn¬
over amounted to £64 million in 1981. Revenue earned within Britain
comprised £45 million, an increase of 14 per cent on the previous year,
while overseas revenue amounted to £ 19 million. The Association reports a
growing demand for services supporting the application of computer
technology, particularly microprocessing, to all aspects of business.
With the steady increase in new and renovated facilities, some 55 to 60
towns and cities are well equipped to hold conferences and exhibitions.
Among the most modern are the National Exhibition Centre at Birmingham,
the Wembley Conference Centre and the Barbican Centre in London, the
Brighton Centre in Sussex, and the Harrogate Centre in North Yorkshire.
Other large facilities are the Earls Court, Olympia and Wembley Arena
sites in London. The Union of International Associations, based in
Brussels, estimated that about 12 per cent (some 545) of the world’s main
international conferences were held in Britain in 1981, more than in any
other country. British firms are very active overseas in the market for
exhibition organising services.
Britain is acknowledged as a world leader in the provision of software and
computer services, and software developed in Britain has contributed to
developments in the applications of computers in numerous countries. The
industry comprises software houses, which provide professional services
such as consultancy and the writing of programs to meet the computing
needs of their clients, and computer bureaux, where the main emphasis is
on processing customers’ data. The revenue of the industry was £612
million in 1981, about £76 million more than in the previous year. The
industry has recorded an annual average growth at constant (1975) prices
of 13 per cent since 1971. Some 26,600 people were employed full-time
in computing services in 1981. About 200 computer service companies
are members of the Computing Services Association, the leading trade
association. Apart from subsidiaries of ICL many of the companies are
subsidiaries of firms engaged in activities such as banking, insurance,
manufacturing and distribution.
Britain’s chief auction houses are active in the international auction
markets for works of art, trading on the acknowledged expertise of British
valuers and dealers. The two largest houses, Sotheby’s and Christie’s, are
established world-wide and had turnover of £267 million and £173 million
in 1981-82 respectively.
Other business services include land and estate companies, estate agents,
and typewriting, duplicating, document copying, translating and employ¬
ment agencies.
242
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
MISCEL¬
LANEOUS
SERVICES
Some 106,000 people were employed in film, theatre, musical, broad¬
casting and related services in June 1980, and 205,000 in services connected
with sport, recreation, gambling and betting.
Film and
Television
Hotels and
Catering
Among major changes in the film and television industry in recent years,
two main trends have been the growth of the specialised film and television
services sector on the one hand, and the decline of the cinema sector, partly
as a result of the growth of public television services, on the other (see also
PP 37° and 386). Technical developments, such as the use of magnetic
videotape instead of film, and the exploitation of computer-generated
graphics, have been responsible for changes both in the production and
exhibition of film and television material. They have also played a part in
the growth of the specialised sector, in which relatively small studios,
mostly based in London, provide a wide range of film and television
services, including the making of advertising films, ‘special effects’
sequences for feature and other films, documentary and educational pro¬
grammes, and cartoon films. In addition, new audio-visual technology is
being adopted in industrial, commercial, medical and scientific contexts for
information, observation and training purposes.
The Department of Trade conducts an annual inquiry into the value of
overseas transactions relating to the production and exhibition of cinema
and television material. For many years the inquiry has shown a surplus of
receipts over expenditure. In 1981 receipts by film and television com¬
panies were £ 145 million, while expenditure was £104 million, a surplus of
£41 million. Film companies’ receipts totalled £9$ million and television
companies receipts £47 million, the North American market accounting
for 45 per cent of revenue in both cases. Some 237 film companies, the
15 Independent Broadcasting Authority programme contractors and the
British Broadcasting Corporation were covered in the 1981 inquiry.
The hotel and catering trades employed 921,000 people in 1980, 274,000 in
hotels and other residential establishments; 183,000 in restaurants, cafes
and snack bars; 271,000 in public houses; 118,000 in clubs; and 71,000 by
catering contractors. A large number of self-employed people are also
engaged in hotels and catering. There were about 14,000 licensed hotels
in Great Britain in 1980 with a total turnover of £2,480 million. Many
licensed hotels as well as most of the numerous guest houses are small, with
fewer than 20 rooms, although there are also several large groups of hotels.
The biggest is Trusthouse Forte Ltd, the world’s largest hotel, catering and
leisure company, which runs over 800 hotels including some 218 in Britain.
The total turnover of holiday camps and camping and caravan sites was
about £200 million in 1977. Among the largest firms running holiday
centres (including holiday camps with full board, self-catering centres and
caravan parks) are Butlins, Pontins, Ladbroke Holidays, Warners and
Haven Leisure. There were over 11,500 licensed restaurants (with a total
turnover of about £1,430 million) in Great Britain in 1980 and a further
22,700 unlicensed establishments (with a total turnover of more than
£1,100 million) including snack bars, cafes, fish and chip shops and other
establishments selling ‘take-away’ food. Britain has a very wide range of
restaurants of which a substantial number specialise in the dishes of other
countries such as Chinese, Italian, Indian and Greek foods. ‘Fast food’
catering, in which establishments sell hot food such as hamburgers or
chicken to be eaten either on the premises or elsewhere, is becoming
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
243
Other Services
TRAVEL AND
TOURISM
increasingly significant. Take-away meals now account for more than one-
third of all meals bought in restaurants and other catering establishments.
There are about 41,000 ‘pubs’ (public houses, which mainly sell beer, wines
and spirits for consumption on the premises) in Great Britain, with a total
turnover of over £4,860 million in 1980.
In June 1980 some 488,000 people were employed in garages, petrol
stations and by motor repairers and distributors in Britain. In spite of the
continuing increase in the number of road vehicles, the number of petrol
stations is declining and at the end of 1981 there were some 24,760 (3 per
cent fewer than in 1980), of which 32 per cent were owned by oil companies.
There were about 8,130 outlets selling diesel fuel. Self-service stations are
becoming increasingly important and in 1981 they accounted for 27 per
cent of petrol stations. There were some 20,000 retail outlets wholly or
mainly engaged in motor vehicle distribution in 1980.
Other services provided include hairdressing and manicure (92,000
employees in June 1980), laundries (45,000), launderettes, dry cleaning,
window cleaning, shoe repair, antique dealing, and funeral services.
The travel business is another growth sector and some 2,140 travel agencies
with about 4,900 offices (about 90 per cent of the total) belong to the
Association of British Travel Agents (ABTA). Many travel agents are small
businesses but nearly half of ABTA members have more than one office.
There are a few large firms (of which the biggest is Thomas Cook) with
about 185 branches. There are also some 460 tour operator members of
ABTA, of whom half are also travel agencies. The leading tour operators
are British Airways (through its subsidiaries, Sovereign and Enterprise),
Cosmos, Horizon, Intasun and Thomson. Nearly three-quarters of the
package holiday market is accounted for by the 26 largest air travel
organisers. ABTA operates financial protection schemes to safeguard its
members’ customers, maintains codes of conduct drawn up with the Office
of Fair Trading, and offers a free conciliation service to help to resolve
complaints against members and an independent arbitration scheme for
tour operators’ customers.
Overseas earnings from foreign 1 ravel increased by more than five times
(at current prices) in the 1970s. It is estimated that in 1981 some 11-5
million overseas visitors to Britain (some 935,000 fewer than in the pre¬
vious year) spent £2,960 million, about the same as in 1980. British
residents made 19 million trips abroad and spent £3,285 million, giving a
deficit on the travel account for the first time since 1967. About half
of overseas visitors to Britain came from other European Community
countries, 18 per cent from North America and about 12 per cent from
elsewhere in Western Europe. There was an increase of 1-5 million visits
abroad by British residents in 1981; the main destinations were the Euro¬
pean Community (just over half of all visits) and elsewhere in Western
Europe (just under one-third). Official support for the promotion of tour¬
ism within Britain is provided by the British Tourist Authority and the
tourist boards for England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland (see
p 206). Registration schemes exist for tourist accommodation throughout
Britain and facilities offered by registered establishments are listed in
the boards’ accommodation guides. Information on tourist facilities and
accommodation is available from official information centres throughout
Britain and on the Prestel information service.
i3 Energy 
and Natural
Resources
Britain has the largest energy resources of any country in the European
Community. Minerals as a whole make an important contribution to the
economy. The approximate value of minerals produced in 1980 was
£14,231 million, of which crude oil accounted for 53 per cent, coal 31 per
cent and natural gas 5 per cent. The value of mineral production was 46 per
cent higher at constant prices than in 1970, virtually all of the increase being
accounted for by oil and gas.
All minerals in Great Britain are privately owned, with the exception of
gold, silver, oil and natural gas (which are owned by the Crown), and coal
and some minerals associated with coal. On the United Kingdom Conti¬
nental Shelf the right to exploit all minerals except coal is vested in the
Crown. The exclusive right to extract coal, or license others to do so, both
on land and under the sea, is vested in the National Coal Board. Normally,
ownership of minerals runs with the ownership of the land surface but in
some areas, particularly where mining has taken place, these rights have
become separated. Mining and quarrying, apart from coal, are usually
carried out by privately owned companies.
Water resources are normally sufficient for domestic and industrial
requirements; supplies are obtained from surface sources such as mountain
lakes and from underground sources by such means as wells and boreholes.
ENERGY
Four main primary sources of energy—petroleum, coal, natural gas and
nuclear power—are used in Britain, together with some water power;
secondary sources produced from these are electricity, coke and very small
quantities of town gas. During 1980 Britain became self-sufficient in energy
in net terms as a result of the continued growth in offshore oil production,
and this position should be maintained for a number of years. Coal and
nuclear power are nevertheless likely to have an increasingly important role
in Britain’s primary energy supply particularly in the long term. Estimated
operating reserves of coal, Britain’s richest natural resource, are 7,000
million tonnes, equivalent to output at present rates of extraction for nearly
60 years; total coal resources are many times higher. A major capital
investment programme in the coal industry is in progress. Nuclear power
provided about 13 per cent of electricity available through the public
supply system in 1981 and the proportion will grow as further nuclear
power stations now under construction, or planned, are brought into
service.
Privately owned companies predominate in offshore oil and gas pro¬
duction and oil refining, while publicly owned bodies are responsible for
most coal production, gas distribution, and electricity generation and
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
245
Energy Policy
ENERGY
CONSUMPTION
distribution. The publicly owned fuel and power industries in Britain
employ in total some 500,000 people, just over 2 per cent of the working
population; their annual turnover is about £25,000 million and capital
investment £3,000 million. In Great Britain the Secretary of State for
Energy is responsible for these industries, except for electricity in Scotland
which is the responsibility of the Secretary of State for Scotland.
The Government’s energy strategy involves ensuring the security and
availability of energy supplies, using oil and gas reserves at an optimum
rate, developing competitive coal production, expanding the role of nuclear
power, supporting research into renewable sources of energy and en¬
couraging measures which result in lower energy consumption. Pricing
that reflects the true long-term costs of energy supplies is also central to the
Government’s approach, both to discourage the wasteful use of energy and
to stimulate new methods of utilising and saving it.
Britain is actively engaged in international collaboration on energy
questions, notably through its membership of the European Community
(following a British initiative, agreement was reached in 1981 on energy
pricing principles) and of the International Energy Agency (IEA, a body
with 21 member countries attached to the Organisation for Economic Co¬
operation and Development). Since its establishment in 1974, the IE A has
agreed a wide range of co-operative measures to reduce member nations’
dependence on imported oil. The rapid increase of North Sea oil pro¬
duction, together with the Government’s policies on coal, nuclear power
and energy conservation, has meant that, from being a net oil importer of
41 million tonnes of oil in 1978, Britain has been able to accept, as a
contribution to the European Community’s response to the world economic
summit in Tokyo in 1979, a target for 1985 of net exports of 5 million tonnes
of oil. The Government also attaches considerable importance to a com¬
mon understanding between energy producers and energy consumers.
Inland primary energy consumption fell by 3 5 per cent in 1981 to 317-3
million tonnes (see Table 15), the second successive annual fall in con¬
sumption since 1975, reflecting energy conservation and the economic
recession. The changing pattern of consumption is illustrated in the
diagram on p 246, the most noticeable feature being the growing contri¬
bution of natural gas. Energy consumption by final users in 1981 amounted
Table 15: Inland Energy Consumption (in terms of primary sources)
million tonnes coal equivalent
Total
1970
1975
1979
1980 1981
Oil 1500 136-5 1390 121-4 no-8
Coal 156-9 1200 129-6 120-8 118-4
Natural gas 17-9 55-4 711 711 72-1
Nuclear energy 9-5 10-9 13-8 13-4 13-7
Hydro-electric power 2-3 2 0 2-2 2 0 2-3
336-7 324-8 355-7 328-7 317-3
Source: Department of Energy
Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
246
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
ENERGY
CONSERVATION
Conservation
Measures
to 54,998 million therms1 on a ‘heat supplied’ basis, of which industrial
users consumed about 33 per cent, domestic users 29 per cent, transport 25
per cent and public services 6 per cent.
Energy conservation has a central place in the Government’s energy
strategy. It is based on the rational pricing of energy and supported by a
campaign of information and advice to consumers including the encourage¬
ment of good energy conservation practice throughout industry. The
Secretary of State for Energy is advised by an independent Advisory
Council on Energy Conservation, while studies on energy conservation and
alternative sources of energy are undertaken by a number of organisations,
notably the Energy Technology Support Unit of the Department of
Energy.
Primary Energy Consumption
1971
Coal 42.1%
a
Oil 45.7
Natural gas 8.7%
Nuclear energy 3.0 %
Hydro-electric power 0.5%
1981
Nuclear energy 4.3 %
Hydro-electric power 0.7 %
Several schemes to help industry and commerce to conserve energy are in
operation, including assistance towards the cost of consultants’ surveys,
energy audits in selected industries and financial assistance for research,
development and demonstration projects. Firms are encouraged to appoint
energy managers (of whom there are over 5,000) to draw up and be
responsible for energy conservation measures in factories and offices. Many
11 therm = 105,506 kilojoules.
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
247
OFFSHORE
OIL AND GAS
Offshore
Supplies
OIL
North Sea
Fields
firms have achieved significant economies through measures such as better
use of heating and lighting, improved operational and maintenance
techniques, and the installation of draught-proofing and additional
insulation. Following discussions with the Government, the motor
manufacturers are working towards a voluntary target of a 10 per cent
improvement between 1978 and 1985 in the average mileage per gallon
achieved by new cars sold in Britain. The Government believes that in
certain circumstances it is appropriate to give consumers a direct financial
inducement to adopt conservation measures and, for example, under the
Homes Insulation Act 1978, grants are available to householders for loft
and water-tank insulation. In some areas the Government sets compulsory
standards such as the maximum temperature in non-domestic buildings
and the minimum insulation standard of all new buildings. Under the
Energy Conservation Act 1981 the Government has powers to enable
standards to be set for the efficiency of new space and water heating
appliances and of gas appliances, for industrial and domestic uses. These
powers will enable the Government to implement a number of European
Community directives on heat generators and gas appliances.
Britain’s energy position has been transformed by the discovery of sub¬
stantial oil and gas reserves (estimated to be worth over £400,000 million)
offshore in the United Kingdom Continental Shelf (UKCS). Seismic
prospecting began in the early 1960s and full-scale exploration activities in
1964. The total area covered by production licences is some 84,000 square
kilometres (32,500 square miles) out of a total designated area of about
643,000 square kilometres (248,250 square miles), over which Britain has
exercised its rights to explore and exploit the seabed and subsoil. Expendi¬
ture on offshore and onshore exploration and development amounts to over
£31,000 million (at 1981 prices) so far. Expenditure in 1981 was estimated
at about £3,300 million.
The Department of Energy’s Offshore Supplies Office seeks to ensure that
British industry can compete effectively for orders for offshore equipment
by helping firms to identify the needs of offshore operators, assisting
operators to identify British suppliers of offshore equipment and services,
and promoting new ventures to increase British involvement in the in¬
dustry. British companies increased their share of the United Kingdom
offshore market, worth £2,900 million in 1981, from between 25 and 30 per
cent in 1973 to 67 per cent in 1981 and are increasingly involved in
supplying other offshore markets.
During most of the twentieth century Britain has been almost who ly
dependent for its oil supplies on imports, the only indigenous supplies
coming from a small number of land-based oilfields. However, the first
discovery of oil in the UKCS was made in 1969 and the first oil was brought
ashore in 1975. Output of crude oil from the UKCS in mid-1982 was over
2 million barrels (270,000 tonnes) a day making Britain the world’s fifth
largest producer. (For estimates of the additional benefits of North Sea oil
and gas to the British economy, see p 189.)
Some 20 fields in the UKCS are producing oil: Brent and Forties, two of
the largest offshore oilfields in the world; Argyll; Auk; Beatrice; Beryl A;
Buchan; Claymore; Dunlin; Fulmar; Heather; Montrose; Murchison;
Oil
50
100 miles
 l
Norway
T"
50
—r-
100
150 kilometres
Offshore oilfields in production
or under development
Other named offshore oil finds
Onshore oil finds
Magnus-
Eider-
Cormorant N-n^-
Tern aS
Cormorant S'
Oil refineries (over 1 million
tonnes annual capacity)
Clair,
Sullom Voe^k
Crude oil pipelines
Shetland]/0
Islands
Heather
-Thistle
■ Murchison
Statfjord
Dunlin
Brent
Hutton
Ninian
N Alwyn
Orkney
Islands ^Flotta
Beryl B ^
Beryl1
ACrawford
Brae »
Tiffany
^Toni/Thelma
Balmoral
a %Maureen
Andrew
Forties
>
Montrose
Clyde
Ekofisk
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
249
Structure of the
Oil Industry
Ninian; North Cormorant; Piper; South Cormorant; Statfjord; Tartan;
and Thistle. A further six fields are under development while another 20
significant finds may prove to have commercial potential after further
appraisal. Production from most large fields is controlled from production
platforms of either steel or concrete which have been built to withstand
severe weather including gusts of wind of up to 260 km/h (160 mph) and
waves of 30 metres (too feet).
Britain’s primary oil production, including condensates and petroleum
gases, amounted to nearly 90 million tonnes in 1981 (see Table 16), 11 per
cent more than in 1980.
Production is expected to continue to rise, reaching between 90 million
and 105 million tonnes in 1982, and between 95 million and 125 million
tonnes in 1984. Output should be at its highest levels in the mid-1980s, but
is expected to begin to decline in the 1990s, although Britain should be a
significant producer on a smaller scale until well into the twenty-first
century. The Government’s view is that its oil policy should encourage
exploration and development with the objective of maximising economic
oil production for the foreseeable future. Remaining proven reserves of
oil in the UKCS amount to about 1,050 million tonnes while the total
remaining reserves of the UKCS could be as high as 4,000 million tonnes.
Table 16: Oil Statistics
million tonnes
1970 1975 1979 1980 1981
Oil production^
land
offshore
Refinery output
Deliveries of petroleum products
for inland consumption
Exports (including re-exports):
crude petroleum
refined petroleum products
and process oils
Imports:
crude petroleum
refined petroleum products
and process oils
o-i
o-i
i‘5
O-I 0-2
77-7 80-2
947 86-6 906 792
912 828 84-6 71-2
11 o-8 388 385
173 143 144 i6'i
ioo-8 87-2 57-9 44-8
231 160 160 141
0-2
892
72-0
66-3
51-4
131
331
131
Sources: Department of Energy, HAt Customs and Excise, and United Kingdom Petroleum Industry
Association
“Crude oil plus condensates and petroleum gases derived at onshore treatment plants.
The two leading British oil companies are British Petroleum (BP) and Shell
Transport and Trading, which are the two largest industrial companies in
Britain in terms of turnover. Sales by BP (in which the Government has a 39
per cent stake) averaged 3 • 1 million barrels a day of crude oil and petroleum
products in 1981, and its gross income was million. It has about
153,000 employees, of whom 41,000 are employed in Britain.
The British National Oil Corporation (BNOC) is a public corporation
set up under the Petroleum and Submarine Pipelines Act 1975 and a major
oil trader. On 1 August 1982, under the Oil and Gas (Enterprise) Act 1982,
250
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Land-based
Fields
Refineries
Consumption
International
Trade
Oil Pipelines
BNOC’s oil-producing business (covering substantial exploration, develop¬
ment and production activities on the UKCS) was transferred to a new
company, Britoil, which will become an independent private sector com¬
pany by a public sale of shares. BNOC will continue in existence, wholly
within the public sector, as an oil trader. By virtue of its rights through
agreements with other oil companies to purchase up to 51 per cent of oil
currently produced, and as agent for the Government in marketing oil
received as royalty for payments in kind, BNOC will remain the largest
single trader in oil from the UKCS.
There are several other large oil companies operating in Britain or
engaged in work on the UKCS. In addition, there are about 30 independent
oil exploration companies with interests in North Sea developments.
Onshore production of crude oil in Britain is much less significant than
offshore production. In 1981 it amounted to about 230,000 tonnes, over
140,000 tonnes of which was produced from Britain’s largest onshore field
at Wytch Farm (Dorset), which started production in 1979. Eleven other
onshore fields are in operation, notably Bothamsall and Egmanton in
Nottinghamshire, Gainsborough in Lincolnshire and Kimmeridge in
Dorset.
The crude distillation capacity of Britain’s oil refineries stood at 125-4
million tonnes at the beginning of 1982. All but four of the 18 refineries in
operation in September 1982 had a distillation capacity of over 5 million
tonnes a year and are shown on the map on p 248. Two have a crude
distillation capacity of over 10 million tonnes a year: Stanlow, in Cheshire
(12-2 million tonnes); and Fawley, near Southampton (14 million tonnes).
Existing refineries are being adapted to the changing pattern of demand by
the construction of new upgrading facilities which are leading to a higher
output of motor spirit and naphtha at the expense of fuel oil.
Deliveries of petroleum products for inland consumption (excluding
refinery consumption) in 1981 totalled 66-3 million tonnes including 15-6
million tonnes of fuel oil, 18-7 million tonnes of motor spirit, 17-1 million
tonnes of gas and diesel oil (including derv fuel used in road vehicles), and
6 4 million tonnes of kerosene. Deliveries were 6 9 per cent less than in
1980, consumption of all the main petroleum products, except naphtha,
having declined.
With the growth in offshore oil production, the volume of imports of crude
oil has fallen considerably to about 30 per cent of the level of the peak year of
JPTS- The main sources of imports in 1981 were Saudi Arabia (which
supplied about 52 per cent by volume), Kuwait (12 per cent) and Norway (9
per cent). Exports in 1981 of 51 million tonnes offset imports of 33 million
tonnes for the first time. Virtually all exports went to the markets of
Britain’s partners in the European Community and the International
Energy Agency, the two largest markets being the United States and the
Federal Republic of Germany.
Exports of crude oil accounted for over half of UKCS output in 1981.
Some 13 million tonnes of petroleum products were also exported.
Oil pipelines brought ashore about 86 per cent of offshore oil in 1981. About
950 miles (1,530 kilometres) of submarine pipeline have been built to bring
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
251
Research
GAS
Structure
ashore oil from a number of North Sea oilfields (see map). Major crude oil
onshore pipelines in operation from harbours, land terminals or offshore
moorings to refineries include those connecting Finnart to Grangemouth,
Angle Bay (Milford Haven) to Llandarcy, Tranmere to Stanlow, Amlwch
(Gwynedd) to Stanlow, and Cruden Bay to Grangemouth. Onshore pipe¬
lines also carry refined products to major marketing areas; for example,
a 300-mile (480-kilometre) pipeline runs from Milford Haven to the
Midlands and Manchester.
Research into petroleum technology is carried out mainly by the leading oil
companies, which have extensive research and development programmes
in support of oil exploration and production and on new and improved
fuels. All aspects of production are covered, including the design of pro¬
duction facilities and enhanced oil recovery techniques. Research centres
are situated at Sunbury-on-Thames (BP), Ellesmere Port in Cheshire and
Sittingbourne in Kent (Shell), and Abingdon in Oxfordshire (Esso). The
main government research and development effort in offshore technology is
undertaken by the Department of Energy with the advice of the Offshore
Energy Technology Board. In 1982-83 the Department expects to spend
some £20-5 million in support of offshore technology.
Public supply of manufactured gas in Britain began in the early nineteenth
century in Westminster in central London. For many years gas was
produced from coal but during the 1960s, when growing supplies of oil
were being imported, there was a switch to producing town gas from oil-
based feedstocks. However, a more significant change began in the late
1960s following the first commercial natural gas discovery in the UKCS in
1965 and the start of offshore gas production in 1967. Supplies of offshore
natural gas grew rapidly and natural gas has now replaced town gas as the
source of gas for the public supply system in Great Britain. Originally used
almost exclusively for lighting, gas is now used for domestic cooking and
heating and for industrial and commercial purposes.
The Gas Act 1948 brought the industry in Great Britain under public
ownership and control in 1949. As a result of the change to natural gas
necessitating more centralised control of production and transmission, the
British Gas Corporation was set up in 1973 under the Gas Act 1972 to
replace the Gas Council and area gas boards. The Oil and Gas (Enterprise)
Act 1982 gives power to permit the disposal of assets held by the Cor¬
poration, and curtails the Corporation’s statutory monopoly in the supply
of gas for fuel purposes so as to permit private companies to compete in this
supply.
In 1981-82 the turnover of the Corporation and its subsidiary companies
amounted to £5,235 million, of which sales of gas accounted for £4,624
million. After interest payments and taxation there was a profit of £144
million. Recently the Corporation has been wholly self-financing. It has
repaid all its long-term debt to the Government. The Corporation has a
large investment programme, amounting to £4,300 million (at outturn
prices) in the five years from 1981-82, nearly half of which is accounted for
by investment in the Rough and Morecambe fields (see p 253). Capital
expenditure on projects to increase the availability of gas has been brought
forward to help to meet the growth in demand. The Corporation has about
105,000 employees.
Gas
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
253
Production
Transmission
and Storage
Natural gas is not available in Northern Ireland and the industry there,
which is controlled by nine municipal undertakings and four private sector
companies, uses town gas produced from oil feedstocks. In 1979 the
Government decided that the large-scale expenditure required for a natural
gas pipeline from Great Britain to Northern Ireland could not be justified
and that it could not subsidise the industry’s operations. Accordingly, most
of the gas undertakings have decided that without government support
they would be unable to continue and began a phased run-down of the
industry. However, there is a possibility of obtaining natural gas from the
Irish Republic’s Kinsale field, and the terms of a possible supply are being
discussed with the Government of the Irish Republic to see whether such a
supply could provide the basis of a financially viable industry.
In 1981 home-produced natural gas accounted for about 75 per cent of total
natural gas supplies, the remainder coming from Norway and Algeria.
Output of natural gas from the UKCS amounted to 37,389 million cubic
metres (mcm), of which 1,606 mcm were used for drilling, production and
pumping operations offshore and 170 mcm supplied direct to the petro¬
chemical industry, leaving 35,613 mcm available for the public supply gas
industry. Production comes mainly from six major gasfields: Leman Bank,
Indefatigable, Hewett, Viking, Frigg (UK), and West Sole. In addition, a
growing amount of gas produced in association with oil in oilfields is being
brought ashore, particularly from the Piper field. The British Gas Cor¬
poration is undertaking a major investment programme to develop the
Morecambe field in the Irish Sea, and the first supplies should be brought
ashore in 1984.
Indigenous offshore natural gas supplies are expected to be sufficient to
meet the major part of British requirements into the twenty-first century.
Total proven gas reserves remaining in known discoveries in the UKCS at
the end of 1981 amounted to 664,000 mcm and total possible reserves in
known discoveries amounted to 1 4 million mcm.
The national high-pressure pipeline system of some 3,100 miles (5,000
kilometres) provides for the distribution of natural gas. It is supplied by
feeder mains from four North Sea shore terminals and from the Canvey
Island terminal which can receive tankers carrying liquefied natural gas.
Four new pipelines have been built to carry gas from St Fergus (Grampian)
to central Scot and and northern England. In the northern North Sea two
225-mile (362-kilometre) pipelines have been laid between the Frigg field
and St Fergus, while the longest offshore pipeline in the UKCS has been
laid for 281 miles (452 kilometres) between the Brent field and St Fergus. A
link to the Magnus, Murchison and Thistle fields to enable gas to be
brought ashore from these fields via the Brent pipeline system is expected to
become operational in the summer of 1983. The gas brought ashore is likely
to be separated into natural gas suitable for distribution through the
national pipeline system and other gases such as ethane, propane and
butane which are expected to provide an important new feedstock for the
petrochemical industry. The Corporation has developed the world’s most
advanced computerised inspection vehicle for high-pressure pipelines that
detects flaws as it travels through them.
Various methods of storage of natural gas to meet peak load conditions
are being developed including additional storage facilities for liquefied
natural gas and the use of salt cavities. The British Gas Corporation has
254
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Consumption
Research
COAL
The National
Coal Board
Production and
Productivity
acquired the partially depleted Rough gasfield and intends to use it to store
natural gas. This is the first time an offshore gasfield will be used for this
purpose.
Sales of gas by the public supply industry in Britain totalled 16,622 million
therms in 1981. About half of all gas sold by the British Gas Corporation to
its 15 7 million consumers is for industrial and commercial purposes, most
of the remainder being for household use. Gas is used extensively in
industries requiring the control of temperatures to a fine degree of accuracy
such as the pottery industry and certain processes for making iron and steel
products. In 1981, 5,670 million therms of gas were sold to industry in
Britain, 78 million therms to public supply and transport power stations
and 2,110 million therms to commercial users. The domestic load includes
gas for cookers, space heaters, water heaters and refrigerators, but an
increasingly large part of domestic demand is for gas for central heating. In
1981, 8,764 million therms were sold to domestic users.
The British Gas Corporation conducts research at five research stations
into all aspects of gas supply and use. Its total expenditure on research and
development and on technical service and testing amounted to £64 million
in 1981-82. Work on processes for the manufacture of substitute natural
gas (SNG) from either oil or coal is one of the Corporation’s main research
projects and it has a 20-year programme, expected to cost some £300
million, to enable it to produce commercial quantities of SNG when this
is required to augment supplies of natural gas. A demonstration coal
gasification plant (‘slagging gasifier’) has been built at the Westfield
Development Centre in Fife and a prototype plant to make SNG from oil at
Killingholme (Humberside) began operating in 1982.
Coalmining in Britain can be traced back to the thirteenth century. It
played a crucial part in the industrial revolution of the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries and in its peak year, 1913, the industry produced
287-4 million tonnes of coal, exported 73 4 million tonnes and employed
over a million workers. In 1947 the coal mines passed into public ownership
by means of the Coal Industry Nationalisation Act 1946, which set up the
National Coal Board (NCB) as a statutory corporation to manage the
industry.
The NCB has, with limited exceptions, exclusive rights over the extraction
of coal in Great Britain, but is empowered to license private operators to
work small mines and opencast sites. It also has powers to work other
minerals, where discoveries are made in the course of searching for, or
working, coal; and to engage in certain petrochemical activities beneficial to
the future of the coal industry. Retail sales remain largely in private hands,
although the NCB makes bulk sales to large industrial consumers.
In 1981-82 the NCB’s income was nearly £4,420 million including sales
of coal (and other coalmining products) of some £4,270 million; there was a
trading loss in the year of £84 5 million.
At the end of March 1982 there were 198 NCB collieries in operation
grouped into 12 areas. The main coal-bearing areas are shown on the map
on p 255 and the main trends in the coal industry are shown in Table 17. In
1981-82 output of 126-6 million tonnes comprised 108-9 million tonnes
256
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Capital
Investment
Consumption
from the NCB’s deep mines, 14-8 million tonnes from opencast mines and
2 9 million tonnes from licensed mines and other sources. Britain’s coal
industry remains the largest in Western Europe and is one of the world’s
most technologically advanced. Substantial progress has been made in
techniques for mining coal. Developments are concentrated on the intro¬
duction of computerised automatic monitoring and remote control of
machines, together with the increasing use of heavy-duty equipment, such
as powered roof supports, power loaders and armoured flexible conveyors,
capable of sustained high performance with minimum maintenance. Pro¬
ductivity in terms of output per manshift rose to 2 4 tonnes in 1981—82, the
most productive fields being in north Nottinghamshire and north Derby¬
shire with overall output per manshift of over 3 tonnes.
Table 17: Coal Statistics year ended March
Unit 1971 1976 1980 1981 1982
Output million tonnes 147-5 126-9 125-1 128-4 126-6
of which, opencast million tonnes 8-5 10-7 13-4 15-7 14-8
Output per manshift3:
underground tonnes 2-92 2-91 2-95^ 2-94 3 03
overall tonnes 2-24 2-28 2-31* 2-32 2-40
Inland consumption million tonnes 150-6 122-3 128-4 I2Q-3 117 0
Average labour force3 ’000 287-2 247-1 232-5 229-8 218-5
Collieries in operation3 number 292 241 219 211 198
Sources: Department of Energy and NCB
aNCB mines only.
^Figures for this and the following years are not directly comparable with those for earlier years.
The NCB’s capital expenditure amounted to £886 million in 1981-82. By
far the largest NCB project is the new mining complex at Selby in North
Yorkshire (which will be one of the world’s most advanced deep mines)
where production should build up to the full rate of 10 million tonnes a year
by the late 1980s.
Although many good seams of coal have now been worked out due to the
early development of the industry, total coal resources in Britain are
estimated at 190,000 million tonnes, of which about 45,000 million tonnes
(sufficient for at least 300 years at present rates of consumption) are
considered to be recoverable using established technology.
In 1981-82 internal consumption of coal was 117 million tonnes of which
73 per cent was by power stations, 10 per cent by coke ovens and 7 per cent
by domestic users. With an increasing proportion of coal being used by
power stations for electricity generation, NCB sales of coal to them totalled
82 million tonnes in 1981-82. Sales to industry are expected to grow in the
long term with increased application of new coal-utilising technologies and
in 1981 the Government announced a £50 million grant scheme to en¬
courage industry to switch from oil-fired to coal-fired boilers.
Exports of coal in 1981-82 are estimated at 91 million tonnes, most of
which went to Western European countries, while imports amounted to an
estimated 4-5 million tonnes.
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
257
Research
ELECTRICITY
Structure
Consumption
In 1981-82 the NCB spent £41 million on research. It has two main
research establishments: the Coal Research Establishment (CRE) at Stoke
Orchard (Gloucestershire), concerned with the combustion and utilisation
of coal; and the Mining Research and Development Establishment at
Stanhope Bretby (Staffordshire), for work on mining methods and equip¬
ment, particularly improving the performance and reliability of existing
equipment and developing systems for remote and automatic control. A
new study has begun of the use of radar to measure stock levels in
underground coal bunkers. Two CRE processes for converting coal to
liquid fuels and chemical feedstocks have been developed on a small scale.
Agreements to exchange technical information have been signed by the
NCB with several countries. Britain is responsible through an NCB sub¬
sidiary for'managing a programme of international coal research projects
under the auspices of the International Energy Agency. Five collaborative
coal research projects, including a £60 million project to develop pressurised
fluidised bed combustion (a method of steam-raising for power generation),
are based in Britain.
The first public supply of electricity in the world was in 1881, at Godaiming
(Surrey). In 1948 all municipal and private undertakings in Great Britain
were acquired under the Electricity Act 1947 and vested in the British
Electricity Authority and 14 regional boards, except in the north of Scot¬
land where they became the responsibility of the North of Scotland Hydro-
Electric Board (NSHEB), which had been set up in 1943. Two subsequent
Acts (1954 and 1957) effected a measure of decentralisation and established
the present structure of public corporations. Electricity from the public
supply system is available to all premises in Britain except for very remote
rural households. The public supply industry employed about 170,000
people and invested some £1,500 million in 1981-82. The main trans¬
mission system (national grid) in England and Wales is the largest fully
interconnected power network under unified control in the Western world.
The Electricity Council is the central co-ordinating body of the supply
industry in England and Wales. It has a general responsibility for pro¬
moting the development and maintenance of an efficient, co-ordinated and
economical system of electricity supply. Electricity is generated and trans¬
mitted by the Central Electricity Generating Board (CEGB), which is
responsible for the operation and maintenance of power stations and the
national grid. Twelve area electricity boards are responsible for distri¬
bution and for the retail sale of electricity. In 1981-82 the income of the
electricity supply industry in England and Wales was £8,471 million and its
operating profit was £475 million.
In Scotland two boards, the NSHEB and the South of Scotland
Electricity Board (SSEB), generate, distribute and sell electricity. The
boundary separating their areas runs from Dumbarton on the Firth of
Clyde to Newburgh on the Firth of Tay (see map, p 258). In 1981-82 the
income of the SSEB and the NSHEB was £716 million and £270 million
respectively and their net profits were £17-2 million and £i3'2 million.
In Northern Ireland generation, transmission and distribution are car¬
ried out by the publicly owned Northern Ireland Electricity Service.
Sales of electricity in 1981 amounted to 226,195 gigawatt hours (GWh).
Industry took 37 4 per cent of the total, domestic users 37 3 per cent and
Electricity
20 40 60 80 100 kilometres
Conventional power stations
(1,000 MW and over)
Under construction
Nuclear power stations
Under construction
Power-producing reactors of
the UKAEA or BNFL
Hydro-electric power stations!
(over 45 MW capacity)
Pumped storage schemes
Under construction
Boundary of the SSEB
and NSHEB
Dungeness
A
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
259
Generation
commercial and other users the remainder. About one-fifth of domestic
sales is for space heating, one-quarter for water heating and one-tenth for
cooking. Electricity is used in industry mainly for motive power, melting,
heating and lighting. The electricity industry supplies 23 3 million con¬
sumers of whom 20 6 million are in England and Wales, i -6 million are
supplied by the SSEB, 548,000 by the NSHEB and 529,000 by the
Northern Ireland Electricity Service.
Generation by the public supply electricity industry in Britain amounted to
259j73i GWh in 1981. Conventional steam power stations provided 84 8
per cent of the total, nuclear stations 131 per cent and gas turbine, hydro¬
electric and diesel plant 21 per cent. Public supply power stations in
Britain corisumed no million tonnes of coal equivalent in 1981 of which
coal accounted for 79 per cent and oil 8 per cent. The output capacity of the
199 generating stations of the electricity boards in Britain at the end of 1981
totalled 64,800 megawatts (MW) including 53,623 MW run by the CEGB,
6,316 MW by the SSEB, 2,752 MW by the NSHEB and 2,115 MW by the
Northern Ireland Electricity Service. An analysis of electricity generation
by and output capacity of the public supply system in Britain is given in
Table 18.
Generation of electricity outside the public supply system is relatively
small (18,004 GWh in 1981). The major sources outside the fuel industries
are the chemical, engineering, paper, and iron and steel industries and the
nuclear power plants of the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority
(UKAEA) and British Nuclear Fuels Ltd (BNFL). In 1981 these nuclear
plants supplied 3,373 GWh of electricity to the public supply system.
New large-scale power stations are based on units of 500 MW and 660
MW. Station capacities have increased and there are 11 stations each with a
capacity of 2,000 MW including Kingsnorth (Kent), Europe’s largest
Table 18: Generation by and Capacity of Public Supply Power Stations
Electricity generated
(GWh)
Per cent Output
capacity^
1970
1975 1981 1981 (MW)
Nuclear plant
Other steam plant
Gas turbines and
oil engines
Pumped-storage plant
21,870 26,518 34^043
199,868 219,692 220,259
1,517 699
1,125 LI53
509
1,003
Other hydro-electric plant 3,856 3,201 3,917
131 5,767
848 52,817
0-2 3,856
0'4 1,060
1-5 1,284
Total
228,236 251,263 259,731 100 0 64,784
Electricity supplied (net)fc 210,904 233,236 242,106
Source: Department of Energy
‘'At 31 December 1981.
^Electricity generated less electricity used at power stations (including electricity used for pumping at
pumped-storage stations).
260
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Nuclear Power
Nuclear Power
Programme
mixed-fuel station burning either coal or oil, while Britain’s largest power
station is at Longannet (Fife), a 2,400 MW station. The larger units have a
higher thermal efficiency (the ratio of the net electrical energy output to the
heat energy input) than earlier units and their introduction, coupled with
the closure of less efficient plant, has resulted in a gradual rise in overall
thermal efficiency, leading to substantial savings in fuel consumption.
Average thermal efficiency of conventional steam stations in England and
Wales rose from 20-91 per cent in 1947-48 to 3414 per cent in 1981-82
when the CEGB’s 20 most efficient stations had an average thermal
efficiency of 35-82 per cent.
About 13,000 MW of plant was under construction at the end of March
1982, including a 2,000 MW coal-fired extension to the Drax station (North
Yorkshire) and five nuclear power stations (see below). Work is also in
progress on the commissioning of a pumped-storage station at Dinorwic
(Gwynedd), which will be the largest of its type in Europe when ready for
operation in 1983 and will have an average generated output of 1,680 MW.
(In pumped-storage schemes electricity generated in off-peak periods is
used to pump water to high-level reservoirs from which it descends to drive
turbines, rapidly providing a large supply of electricity at peak periods or to
meet sudden increases in demand.) A programme to study the potential for
combined heat and power (CHP) and district heating in particular locations
in Britain is in progress; approval has been given for two CHP power
stations, in Birmingham and Hereford.
Britain has been developing nuclear power for several decades and in 1956
the world’s first large-scale nuclear power station, at Calder Hall (Cumbria),
began to supply electricity to the national grid. The Government believes
that nuclear power has a vital role in helping to meet Britain’s long-term
energy requirements. There are 11 nuclear power stations in operation
controlled by the electricity authorities, while four other stations also feed
electricity to the national grid: the two original Magnox stations (both with
a net capacity of about 200 MW) operated by BNFL at Calder Hall and
Chapelcross (Dumfries and Galloway); and two experimental or prototype
stations run by the UKAEA, at Winfrith (Dorset) and Dounreay in
Highland (the site of the Prototype Fast Reactor).
Under the first commercial programme, nine Magnox stations with a total
gross capacity of about 4,000 MW were commissioned between 1962 and
1971. They range in size from Bradwell (Essex) with a capacity of 247 MW
to the most recent, Wylfa (Gwynedd), which has a capacity of 840 MW.
The second main programme was based on the Advanced Gas-cooled
Reactor (AGR) and the first two commercial AGRs, 1,320 MW stations at
Hinkley Point B (Somerset) and Hunterston B (Strathclyde), began oper¬
ating in 1976. Three AGRs (Dungeness B, Kent, 1,200 MW; Hartlepool,
Cleveland, 1,320 MW; and Heysham, Lancashire, 1,320 MW) are nearing
completion and the first units were commissioned in 1982. When these
stations are fully operational, nuclear power stations are expected to pro¬
vide nearly 20 per cent of electricity generated in Britain. Construction has
also started on two more AGRs, a second 1,320 MW station at Heysham
and a 1,320 MW station at Torness (Lothian). The CEGB has also applied
for the consent of the Secretary of State for Energy to build a 1,200 MW
pressurised water reactor at Sizewell (Suffolk). This application will be
subject to a full public inquiry (to begin in January 1983) and to the
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
26l
British Nuclear
Fuels Ltd
Research
Nuclear Research
necessary consents and safety clearances being obtained. Government
policy on fast reactor development is under review. Any decision to proceed
with a full-scale commercial demonstration fast reactor would be subject to
a full public inquiry.
BNFL provides nuclear fuel services covering the full fuel cycle: that is,
uranium conversion, uranium enrichment, fuel element fabrication, trans¬
port and reprocessing of spent fuel, and the manufacture of specialised fuel
element components. All of BNFL’s shares are held by the Government.
BNFL is organised into three divisions, covering uranium enrichment,
based at Capenhurst (Cheshire); fuel manufacture at Springfields (Lanca¬
shire); and reprocessing at Sellafield (Cumbria) where valuable unused
uranium and plutonium are recovered from the spent fuel. The company is
engaged on a large-scale investment programme costing some £3,500
million (at 1981 prices) over the next ten years. This includes the re¬
furbishing and construction of facilities for storing and reprocessing spent
fuel from Magnox power stations, the construction of further centrifuge
enrichment plant at Capenhurst, the construction of a new thermal oxide
reprocessing plant (THORP) at Sellafield which will deal with spent fuel
from Britain’s AGRs and will also reprocess spent fuel for a number of
overseas customers, and the construction of a plant for vitrifying highly
radioactive waste.
The Electricity Council draws up a general programme of research, some of
it direct research carried out by the Council and electricity boards and some
of it in co-operation with selected industrial research associations and
through research contracts placed with universities and other organisations.
Much of the work is done in collaboration with the SSEB, the NSHEB and
the Northern Ireland Electricity Service which contribute towards its cost
(£79 million in 1981-82). Collaboration on research between the supply
industry and the plant manufacturers is co-ordinated by the Power
Engineering Research Steering Committee. The research establishments
run by the CEGB comprise the Central Electricity Research Laboratories
at Leatherhead (Surrey), the Berkeley Nuclear Laboratories in Gloucester¬
shire and the Marchwood Engineering Laboratories on Southampton
Water. Research on distribution technology and electricity utilisation is
undertaken at the Electricity Council Research Centre at Capenhurst
(Cheshire) and by the area boards.
Research on nuclear energy in support of the British nuclear power pro¬
gramme and for overseas organisations is carried out by the UKAEA.
Its work is undertaken at the Atomic Energy Research Establishment
at Harwell (Oxfordshire), the Culham Laboratory in Oxfordshire, the
Atomic Energy Establishment at Winfrith (Dorset), the Risley (Cheshire)
and Dounreay Nuclear PowTer Development Establishments, and a number
of other UKAEA establishments. Work connected with the development
of the fast reactor at Dounreay and its fuel cycle (including the on-site
reprocessing of spent fuel) represents the largest single programme of the
UKAEA.
Co-operation in nuclear energy between Britain and other countries
takes place within a framework of intergovernmental agreements and
membership of bodies such as the International Atomic Energy Agency,
262
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
RENEWABLE
SOURCES OF
ENERGY
and through direct links on research between the UKAEA and equivalent
organisations overseas. Britain takes part in the co-operative research
programmes of the European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom) in¬
cluding one on establishing the feasibility of achieving controlled thermo¬
nuclear fusion. A major component of this programme is the Joint Euro¬
pean Torus (JET) project being built at Culham and expected to become
operational in 1983.
Research is in progress on assessing the potential contribution of alter¬
native sources of energy and the ways in which they may be harnessed.
These include seawave, wind, tidal and geothermal (from hot dry rocks)
energy for electricity generation; solar and geothermal (from deep aqui¬
fers) energy for low-grade heat for domestic and industrial uses; and the
conversion of biomass (plant tissue or animal waste) to fuels. Development
in Britain is at an early stage and they are not expected to make a major
contribution to energy supplies in the next few years, although they may
have a greater role in the long term as offshore oil and gas production
declines. In 1981-82 the Department of Energy is estimated to have spent
some £19 million in support of its renewable energy programme.
Wave energy is potentially a large resource for the British Isles, with long
coastlines facing the Atlantic Ocean, but ways of tapping it at reasonable
cost need to be developed. Work is in progress on a number of types of wave
energy device and includes one-tenth scale trials, full-scale component
development, test tank experiments and the study of problems common to
all the devices. Britain has established the world’s most comprehensive
research and development programme to tackle the problems of harnessing
wave energy-.
The Department of Energy and an industrial consortium have established
the technical potential for generating electricity from wind power, and are
carrying out further economic and environmental studies on it. This
involves the construction at Burgar Hill (Orkney) of Britain’s first large-
scale wind generator, a 3 MW machine which is expected to be in operation
by 1983-84. A smaller machine with a capacity of 250 kilowatts has entered
service on the same site and will provide useful data for the larger machine.
The Central Electricity Generating Board is building a pilot 200 kW
vertical axis wind generator on the site of a power station at Carmarthen
Bay, Dyfed. The board is also conducting experiments on wind speed and
conditions at three other sites with a view to erecting a larger generator
which could be the forerunner of a cluster of ten or 12 machines.
The solar heating programme is intended to identify its potential con¬
tribution and to stimulate the development of cost-effective solar heating
technologies, particularly on water and space heating in houses (the areas
of greatest potential return). Work is also in progress on assessing the
potential of biomass as a source of solid, liquid and gaseous fuels. Where
appropriate, demonstration facilities are being developed and there is
considerable collaboration between the Department of Energy and in¬
dustry on promising conversion processes.
Research on geothermal energy involves collection of data in the areas
considered to have the most suitable conditions and assessment of the
markets for the relatively low-grade heat produced. The first borehole
suitable for commercial use was drilled in Southampton in 1981; following
experimental discovery at a large aquifer below the city in 1979. The
Department of Energy is also providing financial support for a project at the
TVMFXMnWFAR The brid§e across the River Tyne, specially constructed for the new
» a ^ ^ LJ W ■CiA.-Tn. light rapid transit Metro system which forms part of the integrated
iVlET^ RO bus/train link between Newcastle upon Tyne and Gateshead.
NAVIGATION
AIDS
Right: This
advanced
navigational buoy
has a wind-driven
generator to power
its self-charging
light system; a
solar-powered
option is available
for tropical regions.
Below: The control
room at Dover
coastguard station.
Using automatic
data processing and
advanced radar
scanners, it keeps
constant watch on
shipping in the
Straits of Dover, one
of the world’s
busiest shipping
lanes.
BIOGAS
Facing page: Biogas,
a mixture of
methane and carbon
dioxide, is an
alternative source of
energy produced by
anaerobic digestion.
Pictures show
digesters of two
types and the
laboratory for
testing the
effectiveness of
digestion.
SCIENCE PARKS
Cambridge Science Park. Britain has an increasing number of science parks, where high technology
companies and research institutes are located near universities of scientific repute. This encourages
a greater interchange of ideas and people and the shared use of equipment and libraries.
Exploration
Production
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES 263
Camborne School of Mines (Cornwall) to improve ways of extracting heat
from crystalline rocks at great depth.
Studies have been made of a project for harnessing the tides in the Severn
Estuary, one of the world’s most suitable sites for tidal power, and the
Government is considering the report of an independent committee (which
found that it would be technically feasible) before deciding whether to
proceed with the project.
NON-FUEL MINERALS
Although much of Britain’s requirements of industrial raw materials is met
by imports, non-fuel minerals produced in Britain make an important
contribution to the economy. Output of non-fuel minerals in 1980 totalled
298 million tonnes, valued at £1,377 million. The total number of
employees in the industry was 41,000 in 1980. The geographical locations
of some of the more important minerals produced in Britain are shown on
the maps on p 264.
Exploring for and exploiting indigenous mineral resources to meet the
needs of industry are being encouraged by the Government to minimise
dependence on imports. The Mineral Exploration and Investment Grants
Act 1972 provides for financial assistance of up to 35 per cent of the cost
of searching for mineral deposits in Great Britain and on the UKCS
and evaluating them for commercial purposes. Minerals included in the
scheme are the ores of non-ferrous metals, fluorspar, barium minerals and
potash. A similar scheme was introduced in Northern Ireland in 1979. The
Institute of Geological Sciences is carrying out a programme for the
Department of Industry aimed at identifying areas with the potential for
economic extraction of minerals. It also has a programme for the Depart¬
ment of the Environment to assess resources of sand and gravel, and
limestone.
The tonnage extracted of some of the main non-fuel minerals produced in
Britain is given in Table 19. In terms of value, production of sand and
gravel was estimated at £373 million in 1980, limestone £331 million,
igneous rock £202 million, clays £ 140 million, sandstone £75 million, non-
ferrous ores £43 million, chalk £25 million, gypsum and anhydrite £19
million, fluorspar £14 million and iron ore £4 million.
Britain is a major world producer of several important industrial
minerals including china clay, ball clay, fuller’s earth and gypsum, and also
produces significant amounts of limestone, dolomite, chalk, fluorspar,
potash, salt, industrial sands, fireclay, common clay and shale, barytes, talc
and celestite, mostly for home consumption. Small amounts of diatomite,
slate, calcspar, chert and flint, anhydrite and china stone are also produced.
In 1980 the production of metal from non-ferrous ores totalled 11,600
tonnes, mainly lead mostly from northern England, and tin mostly from
Cornwall. Small amounts of copper and silver are produced in association
with tin and zinc. Britain’s only tungsten mine, near Penrith (Cumbria),
was reopened in 1977 and its capacity increased in 1978 (though current
production is small) while permission to develop a large tungsten deposit at
Hemerdon (near Plymouth) is being sought.
Production of sand, gravel and crushed rock (from limestone, igneous
rock and sandstone) as aggregates for use in construction constitutes over
z64 BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Some Minerals Produced in Britain
ron ore
Non-ferrous ores
Fireclay
Ball clay,
potters clay
China clay
Fuller's earth
Celestite
Gypsum, anhydrite
Fluorspar
Salt
Limestone
Chalk
A 'o
^4'
tTc
The maps above are based on county or regional boundaries and not those for geological outcrops.
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
265
Table 19: Production of Some of the Main Non-fuel Minerals
million tonnes
1970 1975 1980
116-4 1250 104-5
5'8 61 57
361 420 347
899 95'2 88-8
160 17-9 I4‘0
135 13-4 12-6
2-8 3'3 3'4
9-0 7-6 7'2
321 27-8 19-8°
40 32 40
20 i-6 i-2
120 45 0-9
— 0-03 0-5
0-2 0-2 0-2
Source: United Kingdom Mineral Statistics 1981
“Great Britain only.
Common sand and gravel
Special sands
Igneous rock
Limestone and dolomite
Chalk
Sandstone
Gypsum
Salt including salt in brine
Common clay and shale
China clay, ball clay and potters’ clay
Fireclay
Iron ore
Potash
Fluorspar
half, by value, of Britain’s output of non-fuel minerals. Britain is the
world’s second largest producer of marine-dredged sand and gravel (17
million tonnes in 1980).
WATER
Britain’s water resources are normally sufficient for domestic and indus¬
trial requirements. Supplies are obtained partly from surface sources such
as mountain lakes, streams impounded in upland gathering grounds and
river intakes (one-third comes from rivers), and partly from underground
sources by means of wells, adits and boreholes. Water consumption in
Britain amounted to about 19,000 megalitres a day in 1980 and average
daily consumption per head was about 340 litres. About 99 per cent oi the
population in Great Britain and 9° Per cent in Northern Ireland are
connected to the public water supply system.
In general, householders pay for their domestic water supply, sewerage
and sewage disposal services through charges based on the rateable value of
their property, whereas industrial users are charged for their water supply
according to actual metered consumption. Optional metering for domestic
users was introduced by a number of water authorities in 1981 and since
April 1982 it has been available throughout England and Wales.
England and
Wales
In England and Wales the Secretaries of State for the Environment and for
Wales are jointly responsible for policy in relation to the conservation,
augmentation, distribution and proper use of water resources and provision
of water supplies; the provision of sewerage and sewage disposal services;
the restoration and maintenance of the wholesomeness of rivers and other
inland waters; and the use of inland waters for navigation and recreation.
The Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and the Secretary of State
266
Water Authorities
Statutory Water
Companies
Supplies
Scotland
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
for Wales are responsible for policy relating to land drainage, and the
protection and development of fisheries.
Following reorganisation of the regional water authorities involving a
reduction in their membership (see below) and the establishment of a more
direct relationship between them and the Government, the National Water
Authority (an advisory body for ministers and water authorities) is to be
dissolved.
Nine regional water authorities in England and the Welsh Water Authority
in Wales are responsible for the management of water services; the
development of water resources; water distribution and supply; the pre¬
vention of pollution (see p 178); sewerage and sewage treatment; river
management; land drainage; sea defences; recreation; and freshwater
fisheries. Each water authority in England has a membership consisting of a
chairman and several members appointed by the Secretary of State for the
Environment, a few members appointed by the Minister of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food and a majority of members appointed by the county and
district councils within the area of the authority. A reorganisation of the
Welsh Water Authority involving a reduction in its membership became
effective in 1982 and similarly revised arrangements for the membership of
the water authorities in England and Wales are to be introduced. District
councils usually act as agents of water authorities for the design, construc¬
tion, operation and maintenance of public sewers in their areas.
There are 29 statutory water supply companies, accounting for about one-
quarter of total supplies, operating under the Water Act 1973. Special
arrangements govern the relationship of statutory water companies to the
water authorities.
Some 32,100 megalitres a day were abstracted in England and Wales in
1980, of which public water supplies accounted for 16,200 megalitres a day.
The Central Electricity Generating Board took 10,500 megalitres a day
primarily for cooling in connection with electricity generation, other in¬
dustry 4,800 megalitres a day and the remainder was used in agriculture.
Water authorities’ estimated revenue for 1982-83 is some £2,080 million.
Water authorities have powers to restrict consumption when there are
severe water shortages. Under the Drought Act 1976, passed in the driest
period of weather since records began in 1727, they can limit or prohibit the
use of water and, if necessary, restrict domestic water supplies.
In Scotland responsibility for public water supply, sewerage and sewage
disposal rests with the nine regional and three islands councils. Addition¬
ally the Central Scotland W^ater Development Board, established under the
Water (Scotland) Act 1967, is primarily responsible for developing large
water sources and supplying water in bulk to its five constituent member
authorities, the regional councils in Central Scotland.
Scotland has a relative abundance of unpolluted water from upland
sources. About 826 million cubic metres of water were abstracted in Scot¬
land in 1980 for public water supplies. The Secretary of State for Scotland
is responsible for the promotion of the conservation of water resources and
the provision by water authorities of adequate water supplies, and also has a
duty to promote the cleanliness of rivers and other inland waters and the
tidal waters of Scotland.
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
267
Northern
Ireland
Development
Projects
Research
The Water Service of the Department of the Environment for Northern
Ireland is responsible for water supply and sewerage in Northern Ireland.
The Department is also responsible for the conservation, cleanliness and
planned development of Northern Ireland’s water resources. Northern
Ireland has abundant potential supplies of water for both domestic and
industrial use. An average of 666 megalitres of water a day was supplied in
1981.
Investment is taking place in projects intended to ensure that there is an
adequate water supply to meet the expected rise in demand. Recent pro¬
jects have included the Kielder Reservoir in Northumberland, officially
opened in 1982, one of the largest man-made reservoirs in Europe. In
1981-82 capital expenditure on water supply, sewerage and sewage dis¬
posal amounted to some £700 million in England and Wales, £93 million in
Scotland and £25 million in Northern Ireland.
The central research organisation for the water industry in Britain is the
Water Research Centre. Its membership includes water undertakings,
consulting engineers, manufacturers and overseas organisations. It has
three laboratories: at Stevenage (Hertfordshire), which deals with water
treatment; Medmenham (Buckinghamshire), which is concerned with
environmental protection (including water quality and pollution); and at
Swindon (Wiltshire), which is concerned with instrumentation, water
mains and sewers. Other organisations conducting research include the
Hydraulics Research Station Limited, the Meteorological Office and
the Natural Environment Research Council, which has a number of
laboratories including the Institute of Hydrology and the Institute of
Geological Sciences.
i4 Agriculture,
Fisheries
and Forestry
AGRICULTURE
British agriculture is noted for its high level of efficiency and productivity.
Employing less than 3 per cent of the working population, the industry
produces nearly two-thirds of Britain’s food requirements compared with
just under a half in i960, and about three-quarters of that which can be
grown in a temperate climate compared with nearly two-thirds in i960.
As befits its long tradition of innovation and efficient farming, Britain
has an important programme of modern research which has increased crop
and other yields. It is also a major exporter of agricultural produce and
machinery, fertilisers and food products.
Land Use Nearly four-fifths of the land area is used for agriculture, the rest being
mountain, forest or put to urban and other uses. Although the area for
farming is declining by about 20,000 hectares (50,000 acres) a year to meet
the needs of housing, industry and transport, the land in urban use is less
than a tenth of the agricultural land. There are 12 million hectares (30
million acres) under crops and grass. In hill country, where the area of
cultivated land is often small, large areas are also used for rough grazing.
Soils vary from the thin poor ones of highland Britain to the rich fertile soils
of low-lying areas like the fenlands of eastern England. The cool temperate
climate and the even distribution of rainfall ensure a long growing season;
streams rarely dry up and grassland is green throughout the year.
Farming The average area of a full-time holding (including rough grazing) is some
119 hectares (294 acres). About half of the 242,000 farming units are able to
provide full-time employment for at least one person and account for 90 per
cent of total output. Some 30,000 large farms capable of providing full-time
employment for at least four people account for about half of total output.
In Wales and Northern Ireland the output from small-scale holdings is
more significant than in the rest of Britain.
In England, Scotland and Wales, some two-thirds of holdings are wholly
or mainly owner-occupied. Nearly all farms in Northern Ireland are
owner-occupied.
The agricultural labour force (637,000 in 1981) has continued to decline
and mechanisation has increased, labour productivity rising by over 150
per cent between 1961 and 1981. Investment has increased the level of
capital per person employed which is now almost the same as in manufac¬
turing industry compared with only 60 per cent in i960. Total farming
income in 1980 was £1,059 million.
There are over half a million tractors and some 58,000 combine
harvesters in use. A wide variety of other machines for harvesting and
preservation of grass are also employed. Horticultural crops such as black-
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
269
PRODUCTION
Livestock
Cattle and Sheep
currants and brussels sprouts are frequently harvested by machine and
milking machines are used on the vast majority of dairy farms. Over 90 per
cent of farms have a direct electricity supply, the remainder having their
own generators.
Home production of the principal foods is shown as a percentage by weight
of total supplies (that is, output plus imports minus exports) in Table 20.
Table 20: British Production as a Percentage of Total Supplies
Food product 1970-72 1980°
average
Meat 74 84
Eggs 99 100
Milk for human consumption (as liquid) 100 100
Cheese 51 7°
Butter 17 57
Sugar (as refined) 35 47
Wheat 50 88
Potatoes for human consumption 93 92
Source: Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food
12 See footnote p 343.
Crop production and yields per hectare have risen; between 1961 and
1981 the output of wheat and barley a hectare increased by some 63 per cent
and 34 per cent respectively, due largely to the introduction of new varieties
and the greater use of fertilisers and pesticides. The yield of potatoes a
hectare rose by 45 per cent.
There has been a substantial growth in the number of beef cattle and pigs
and a less marked increase in sheep and poultry.
Three-fifths of full-time farms are devoted mainly to dairying or beef cattle
and sheep. The majority of sheep and cattle are reared in the hill and
moorland areas of Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and northern and
south-western England. Beef fattening occurs partly in better grassland
areas, as does dairying, and partly in yards on arable farms. British livestock
breeders have created many of the cattle, sheep and pig breeds with world¬
wide reputations, for example, the Hereford and Aberdeen Angus beef
breeds, the Jersey, Guernsey and Ayrshire dairy breeds, Large White pigs
and a number of sheep breeds. Because of developments in artificial
insemination and embryo transfers, Britain is able to export semen and
embryos from high quality donor animals.
Table 21 shows the number of livestock and output of livestock products.
Most dairy cattle in England and Wales and a significant proportion in
Scotland and Northern Ireland are bred by artificial insemination. The
average size of dairy herds in Britain increased from about 20 in 1961 to 53
in 1981 while average yields of milk per dairy cow increased from 3,491
litres (768 gallons) to 4,710 litres (1,036 gallons), a rise of 35 per cent.
Average consumption of liquid milk per head in 1981 by domestic
households was about 119 litres (26 gallons).
270
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Pigs and Poultry
Crops
Table 21: Livestock and Livestock Products
Average
1970-72
1979
1980 1981
Cattle and calves (’000 head) 12,992 13,589
Sheep and lambs (’ooo head) 26,384 29,946
Pigs (’ooo head) 8,492 7,864
Poultry (’ooo head) I4L399 135,345
Milk (million litres) 12,786 15,280
Eggs (million dozen) 1,253 LiSi
Beef and veal (’ooo tonnes) 968 1,082
Mutton and lamb (’ooo tonnes) 229 239
Pork (’ooo tonnes) 646 696
Bacon and ham (’ooo tonnes) 271 212
Poultry meat (’ooo tonnes) 613 751
13,426
3L446
75815
1355105
155345
1,100
1,096
287
693
210
754
135137
32,091
7,828
132,286
15,222
1,090
1,031
274
700
204
745
About two-thirds of home-fed beef production derives from the national
dairy herd, in which the Friesian breed is predominant. While pure-bred
Friesians make a substantial contribution to Britain’s beef supplies, many
other dairy cows are crossed with beef bulls for beef production.
Britain has a long tradition of sheep production with more than 40 breeds
and many crosses between them. Research has provided vaccine and serum
protection against nearly all the epidemic diseases. Although lamb
production is the main source of income for sheep farmers, wool is also
important.
Grass supplies 60 to 80 per cent of the feed for cattle and sheep; grass
production has been enhanced by the increased use of fertilisers, irrigation
and methods of grazing control, and improved herbage conservation for
winter feed. Rough grazings are used for extensively grazed sheep and
cattle, producing young animals for fattening elsewhere.
Pig production is carried on in most areas but is particularly important in
eastern and southern England, north-east Scotland and Northern Ireland.
There is an increasing concentration into specialist units and larger herds.
Artificial insemination is available in England, Wales and Scotland.
The poultry meat and egg industries have continued to benefit from
better husbandry and genetic improvements. Since 1971 poultry meat
production has increased by a quarter and reached an estimated 745,000
tonnes in 1981. There is a continued trend towards larger units with just
over a half of broilers in flocks of 100,000 birds or more. In 1981, egg
production was an estimated 1,090 million dozen. About 60 per cent of
laying birds are in flocks of 20,000 or more. Britain remains broadly self-
sufficient in poultry meat and eggs.
The farms devoted primarily to arable crops are found mainly in eastern
and central southern England and eastern Scotland. Large-scale potato and
vegetable production is undertaken in the fens (in south Lincolnshire and
Cambridgeshire), the alluvial areas around the rivers Thames and Humber
and the peaty lands in south Lancashire. Early potatoes are an important
crop in south-west W’ales, Kent and south-west England. High-grade seed
potatoes are grown in Scotland and Northern Ireland.
Table 22 gives figures on the area, harvest and yield of the main crops.
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
271
Cereals
Fodder Crops
Sugar
Horticulture
Table 22: Main Crops
Average 1979
1970-72
1980 1981
(forecast)
Wheat: area (’000 hectares) I3O79 1,372
harvest (’000 tonnes) 4,610 7,168
yield (tonnes per hectare) 4 28 5 23
Barley: area (’ooo hectares)
harvest (’ooo tonnes)
yield (tonnes per hectare)
Oats: area (’ooo hectares)
harvest (’ooo tonnes)
yield (tonnes per hectare)
Potatoes: area (’ooo hectares)
harvest (’ooo tonnes)
yield (tonnes per hectare)
2,277
8,444
3-71
35i
1,276
364
2,347
9,623
410
136
542
399
255 204
7,135 6,485
28-02 31-87
Oilseed rape: area (’ooo hectares) 5 74
harvest (’ooo tonnes) 11 198
yield (tonnes per hectare) 2 0 2-70
Sugar beet: area (’ooo hectares) 190 214
production (’ooo tonnes refined
basis) 959 1,154
1,441
8,472
5-88
2,330
10,326
443
148
601
4-07
205
7,109
3448
92
300
3-30
213
1,106
i,49i
8,710
5-84
2,327
10,230
439
144
620
4-30
191
6,215
32-4
125
325
2-60
210
1,080
About a third of the wheat crop is normally used for flour milling, and two-
fifths for animal feed. Between 15 and 25 per cent of the barley crop is used
for malting and distilling and 50 per cent for animal feed. Exports of wheat
and barley are increasing substantially and account for about a fifth of total
production. There has been a rapid increase in the oilseed rape crop; the
seed is crushed to obtain vegetable oil and the solid matter left is used for
animal feed.
The universal use of combine harvesters has necessitated the installation
of drying and storage facilities, many of which are used on a co-operative
basis.
The area of traditional fodder crops (field beans, maize and kale) has
declined since i960, farmers having provided winter feed more economic¬
ally by increased grass production and improved methods of conservation.
Sugar from home-grown sugar beet provides about 50 per cent of re¬
quirements, most of the remainder being refined from raw sugar imported
from developing countries under the Lome Convention (see p 75).
In 1981 the land utilised for horticulture was 282,000 hectares (696,800
acres). Fruit (including dessert apples, pears, cherries, plums, straw¬
berries, blackcurrants, raspberries and gooseberries) accounted for 62,000
hectares (153,200 acres), vegetables grown in the open, excluding potatoes,
for 206,000 hectares (509,000 acres), flowers, bulbs and nursery stock for
272
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
EXPORTS
MARKETING
AND
CO-OPERATION
10,000 hectares (24,700 acres) and protected crops (those grown under
glass or plastic) for 4,000 hectares (9,900 acres).
Field vegetables account for some 45 per cent of the value of horticultural
output and are widely grown throughout the country. Most horticultural
enterprises are increasing output per unit area with the help of improved
planting material, new techniques and the widespread use of machinery.
Most glasshouses (used for growing tomatoes, cucumbers and lettuce)
have been re-equipped since the mid-1960s. Widespread use is made of
automatic control of heating and ventilation, and semi-automatic control of
watering. Experiments are being made to promote energy efficient glass¬
houses through the use of thermal screens and other methods. Low-cost
plastic tunnels extend the season for certain crops previously grown only
out of doors.
Under the European Community’s Common Agricultural Policy (see
P 273), a wide range of horticultural produce is subject to common quality
standards.
The Government is seeking to encourage the growth of exports related
to agriculture, which amounted to £3,890 million in 1980. The British
Agricultural Export Council, which represents the agricultural and horti¬
cultural supply industries, provides British pavilions at the world’s major
agricultural exhibitions, identifies suppliers for customers, and organises
programmes of visits and meetings for overseas customers. Products and
services offered by the Council’s members include all types of machinery,
seeds, fertilisers, chemicals, feedingstuffs, livestock and semen, veterinary
preparations and equipment, and consultancy. There is also a British Food
Export Council which provides a similar service for the fresh and processed
food industries with particular emphasis on opportunities in Western
European markets.
One of the world’s largest agricultural events, the annual Royal Inter¬
national Agricultural Show held at Stoneleigh in Warwickshire, provides
an opportunity for overseas visitors to see what British agriculture has
to offer. Virtually every British agricultural machinery manufacturer is
represented at the show which is also the most important pedigree livestock
event in the country. The show’s specialised sections cover livestock
improvement, farm mechanisation including working demonstrations of
agricultural equipment, electronics, arable cropping, horticulture, forestry,
research and farming in tropical areas; there is also a food hall. A second
major display of agricultural interest is the Royal Smithfield Show, held
each December in London, which exhibits agricultural machinery, live¬
stock and carcases.
Agricultural products are marketed by private traders, producers’ co¬
operatives and marketing boards, the latter being producers’ organisations
(each including a minority of independent members appointed by agri¬
culture ministers) with certain statutory powers to regulate the marketing
of milk, wool and potatoes. Most boards buy from producers or control
contracts between first buyers; the Potato Marketing Board, however,
maintains only a broad control over marketing conditions leaving pro¬
ducers free to deal individually with buyers. For home-grown cereals, meat
and livestock, apples and pears, and eggs, there are marketing organisations
representing producer, distributor and independent interests.
Further attention is being given to the marketing of British agricultural
produce in order to ensure that it reaches customers in the best possible
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
2?3
ROLE OF THE
GOVERNMENT
Common
Agricultural
Policy
condition. A special panel has been appointed to advise the Minister of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food on marketing and there is a stronger
emphasis on the role of co-operatives. Recent initiatives include efforts by
growers to improve the marketing of onions, carrots, dessert apples and
lamb.
Agricultural co-operatives may be concerned with production, storage,
marketing, services, and the supply of farmers’ requirements. There are,
in addition, machinery syndicates. The Government provides grants for
co-operative production and marketing of agricultural and horticultural
produce on the recommendation of the Central Council for Agricultural
and Horticultural Co-operation, a statutory body. Plans have been
announced to transform the Council into a new marketing organisation
called Food from Britain. The co-operative development function would
continue within the new body which would have wide powers to co¬
ordinate and promote marketing initiatives throughout Britain and in other
countries.
Four government departments are responsible for agricultural policy—the
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, the Department of Agricul¬
ture and Fisheries for Scotland, the Welsh Office Agriculture Department
and the Northern Ireland Department of Agriculture.
Market arrangements under the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) of the
European Community are administered by the Intervention Board for
Agricultural Produce, which is responsible to the agriculture ministers.
Under the CAP, producers’ returns for most of the main commodities
are supported by a combination of intervention buying when necessary and
charges on imports into the Community. In addition, export refunds
enable Community exporters to sell on world markets when world prices
are below Community price levels. There is also provision for certain direct
payments to producers, including beef and sheepmeat premiums. The
support price levels, as well as rates of levy and subsidy, are set in European
Currency Units (see p 76) and are converted into the currencies of the
member states at fixed rates of exchange (commonly called ‘green rates’)
which do not vary automatically in line with changes in real exchange rates.
The green rates can thus be out of line with the market rate of exchange
between each currency and the European Currency Unit, giving rise to
different real support price levels in the different member states. Monetary
compensatory amounts, based on the percentage difference between the
green and market rates of each currency, are applied to prevent distortions
in trade. They operate as import subsidies and export levies for countries
whose currencies’ market rates are below the green rates, and as import
levies and export subsidies in the opposite case.
Britain is seeking significant improvements in the operation of the
Common Agricultural Policy. In particular, it would like to see better
control of the growth of surpluses achieved through action on price or
additional measuresappropriate to each sector.
The Community’s agricultural expenditure is channelled through the
European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund. The Fund’s
guarantee section finances market support arrangements, while the guid¬
ance section provides funds for structural reform (for example, contribu¬
tions to capital and production grants—see p 274). The CAP absorbs over
67 per cent of the Community’s budget; nearly half of this expendi¬
ture is attributable to the cost of export refunds.
274
Price Guarantees,
Grants and
Subsidies
Smallholdings
and Crofts
Tenancy
Legislation
Safety at Work
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Expenditure in Britain in 1981-82 on price guarantees, grants and sub¬
sidies and on Common Agricultural Policy market regulation was an esti¬
mated £374 million and £665 million respectively. About £770 million was
reimbursed from the Community budget.
Potatoes and wool are not covered by the Common Agricultural Policy;
British price guarantees for potatoes are operated through the Potato
Marketing Board and the Department of Agriculture for Northern Ireland
and a price stabilisation fund for wool is administered by the British Wool
Marketing Board.
Producers also receive support through certain capital and production
grants, some based on Community decisions. Grants are available to assist
farmers and horticulturists with their development plans and capital in¬
vestment, and there is special financial help for hill farmers in the form
of headage payments on cattle and sheep (known as compensatory allow¬
ances). Community assistance may also be made to help improve facilities
for the marketing and processing of agricultural products and to provide a
premium payment to specialised beef producers.
Local authorities provide nearly 7,400 smallholdings in England and nearly
1,000 in Wales. In England the Government has some 530 lettable hold¬
ings. Both may make loans of up to 75 per cent of required working capital
to their tenants. Land settlement in Scotland has always been carried out
by the Government, which owns and maintains about 148,000 hectares
(366,000 acres) of land settlement estates, comprising some 2,500 crofts
and holdings.
Within the crofting areas of Scotland (in Strathclyde, Highland,
Western Isles, Orkney Islands and Shetland Islands) much of the land is
held by crofters, tenants whose holdings are generally either rented at a
cost of not more than £100 a year or have an area not exceeding 30 hectares
(75 acres). Crofting is administered by the Crofters Commission, and
benefits from government grants for land improvements and some other
agricultural work.
A code of landlord-tenant relationships protects the interests and rights of
landlords and tenants. Rent is a matter for negotiation between landlord
and tenant and may be varied by agreement or, failing agreement, by
arbitration. Most agricultural tenants have the right to contest a notice to
quit, which then lapses unless the landlord obtains consent to its operation
from an independent body (in England and Wales the Agricultural Land
Tribunal and in Scotland the Scottish Land Court). On termination of
tenancy, the tenant is entitled to compensation in accordance with a special
code. There are provisions for succession of a close relative on the death of a
tenant.
Practically all farms in Northern Ireland are owner-occupied, but, under
a system known as ‘conacre’, farmers not wishing to farm all their land let it
annually to others. About one-fifth of agricultural land is so let, and is used
for grazing and potato growing.
The Agricultural Inspectorate of the Health and Safety Executive is
responsible for enforcing regulations relating to the health and safety of
workers in agriculture. These cover such matters as the guarding of field
and stationary machinery, workplaces, the fitting of safety cabs to tractors,
and the use of chemicals.
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
275
Advisory
Services
Animal Welfare
CONTROL OF
DISEASES AND
PESTS
Animals
Free and impartial professional, scientific and technical advice is given to
farmers, growers and landowners in England and Wales by the Govern¬
ment’s Agricultural Development and Advisory Service, in Scotland by
three agricultural colleges and in Northern Ireland by the advisory service,
agricultural colleges, research centres and the specialist divisions of the
Department of Agriculture. The purpose of the advisory services is to
exploit and develop new technology, to identify problems requiring in¬
vestigation and research, and to contribute to possible solutions.
It is an offence to cause unnecessary pain or distress to livestock on
commercial farms. Regulations control such operations as castration and
tail docking, and require owners of intensive units to arrange for the daily
inspection of their stock and the equipment on which it depends. Com¬
pliance is monitored by veterinary officers of the Agricultural Develop¬
ment and Advisory Service. Other regulations protect the welfare of farm
animals in transit and at markets.
The Farm Animal Welfare Council, an independent body set up by the
Government, keeps under review the welfare of farm animals on agricul¬
tural land, at markets, in transit and at the place of slaughter.
England, Scotland and Wales are free from many serious animal diseases.
Foot-and-mouth disease and swine vesicular disease are combated by a
slaughter policy applied to all infected animals and those exposed to
infection, and by control over animal movements during outbreaks.
Rigorous measures are taken to eradicate sheep scab. The incidence of
bovine tuberculosis is very low; cattle (except for certain categories) are
tested at regular intervals, and reactors to the test are slaughtered, com¬
pensation being paid to the owners. Because of compulsory measures to
eradicate brucellosis, begun on an area basis in 1972, England and Wales
were declared free of the disease for all practical purposes in 1981, following
a similar declaration for Scotland in 1980. Newcastle disease has been
eradicated by means of vaccination, mainly with live vaccines; their use is
now prohibited and a slaughter policy will operate in the event of future
outbreaks.
Strict controls are exercised on the import of animals, meat and meat
products, live poultry and other captive birds, and poultry meat, so as to
prevent the introduction of animal or poultry diseases. Special measures
apply to non-farm animals, which are subject to import licence and six
months’ quarantine as a precaution against the introduction of rabies, and
there are severe penalties for anyone breaking the law. There has been no
case of rabies in Britain since 1970.
Northern Ireland has been kept free from the major animal diseases,
including rabies, foot-and-mouth disease, and swine vesicular disease, and
in 1971 was declared brucellosis-free.
Professional advice and action on the control of animal disease and the
welfare of farm livestock is the responsibility of the State Veterinary
Service which in England and Wales is part of the Agricultural Develop¬
ment and Advisory Service and has extensive laboratory facilities and
investigation centres performing specialist work and advising private prac¬
titioners. In Scotland the Service has laboratory facilities and three agri¬
cultural colleges also provide services and advice. In Northern Ireland the
Department of Agriculture has its own veterinary service, supplemented
by a central veterinary laboratory.
276
Plants
Pesticides
Veterinary
Medicinal
Products
EDUCATION
AND
TRAINING
AGRICULTURAL
RESEARCH
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The agricultural departments are responsible for limiting the spread of
plant pests and diseases and for preventing the introduction of new ones.
They also issue the health certificates required by other countries to
accompany plant material imported from Britain. Certification schemes are
operated to encourage the development of healthy, vigorous and true-to-
type planting stocks.
Control of pesticides is exercised primarily through the Pesticides Safety
Precautions Scheme. Under this the Government, advised by the indepen¬
dent and expert Advisory Committee on Pesticides, gives safety clearance
for marketing only if it is satisfied that, as long as recommended precautions
are followed, the product can be used without risk to people, livestock and
domestic animals and with minimal risk to wildlife.
The manufacture, sale and supply of veterinary medicinal products is
prohibited except under licence. Licences are issued by the agriculture
ministers, who are advised on safety, quality and efficacy by the Veterinary
Products Committee comprising independent experts.
University and other degree and postgraduate courses provide training in
the scientific and technological aspects of agriculture and horticulture, the
emphasis being on science and economics. There are also degree and post¬
graduate courses in veterinary medicine. Science-based sandwich courses,
leading to a Higher National Diploma and available at agricultural colleges,
are designed for students wishing to enter farming or horticulture with a
good knowledge of the managerial and technological aspects of the in¬
dustry. The three-year Ordinary National Diploma, also organised on a
sandwich basis, is a general course in agriculture with some colleges
offering special subjects such as arable farming, livestock production, dairy
farming and farm mechanisation. Both diploma courses normally require
12 months’ previous practical experience. In addition, there are one-year
full-time National Certificate courses providing a basic education in agri¬
culture or horticulture, and a one- or two-year part-time practical course in
the basic principles of agriculture, horticulture or forestry followed by
more specialised study. In Scotland new and restructured courses have
replaced the Higher and Ordinary National Diplomas.
In Great Britain the Agricultural Training Board runs an apprenticeship
and craft training scheme for young people entering agriculture and horti¬
culture, which includes release to attend part-time courses. Shorter courses
in craft skills training are available for others working in agriculture and
horticulture. In Northern Ireland agricultural training courses are the
responsibility of the Department of Agriculture.
Hundreds of research projects are being carried out by the agricultural
research service, many being of international importance.
The Agricultural Research Council, the Government and private in¬
dustry are responsible for the research effort. An autonomous body, the
Council conducts its own research and supports projects in universities and
elsewhere. It has eight institutes dealing with research in animal breeding,
food, weeds, animal physiology, animal diseases, meat and poultry, and has
four units associated with universities. In addition, the Council is respon¬
sible for 14 independent state-aided research institutes concerned with
such topics as plant breeding, glasshouse crops, grassland, animal viruses,
fruit and vegetable growing, dairying, poultry, soils and agricultural en¬
gineering. In Scotland the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries is
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
2?7
Fish Caught
responsible for seven grant-aided institutions; four of these are concerned
primarily with nimal-related research, one with plant breeding and crop
research, one with soil research, and the other with agricultural engineer¬
ing. Research in Northern Ireland is carried out by the Department of
Agriculture in association with the Queen’s University of Belfast. Three
teaching agricultural colleges also cover applied research in agricultural
science and food technology.
Among recent research achievements of international importance are the
high yielding wheats developed at the Plant Breeding Institute and in wide
use in Europe, and the foot-and-mouth disease vaccines developed by the
Animal Virus Research Institute and used throughout the world. The
National Vegetable Research Station, in association with Oxfam, has
opened a gene bank designed to preserve seed varieties which will allow
plants with better growth and disease resistant characteristics to be kept to
meet agricultural needs in different areas of the world. The National
Institute of Agricultural Engineering has developed machinery more suit¬
able for use in countries with labour intensive agriculture.
The Ministry of Agriculture’s Chief Scientist (fisheries and food) and
the Food Science Division provide advice on the scientific and technical
aspects of food, particular attention being paid to safety, quality and
nutritional value.
Applied and basic research is carried out by the Agricultural Develop¬
ment and Advisory Service. At its Central Veterinary Laboratory investi¬
gations are undertaken into most diseases affecting farm livestock and into
the making and supply of certain biological products. A central laboratory
is concerned with plant health, the detection of pesticide residues in treated
crops and crop products, and the formulation of pesticides. Other central
laboratories do research work on insects, mites and fungi affecting food
storage and on harmful mammals and birds; they are also concerned with
the safe use of pesticides.
FISHERIES
Britain is one of Europe’s most important fishing nations. The fishing
industry provides about 70 per cent of British fish supplies, and is an
important source of employment and income in a number of ports. In 1981
there were 16,609 fishermen in regular employment and about 7,320
occasionally employed. It is estimated that for every fisherman there are
between three and five jobs in associated trades. The maintenance of fish¬
ing opportunities through conservation of stocks and the preservation of
British fishermen’s access to traditional grounds are prime government
concerns.
Demersal fish caught on or near the bottom of the sea account for about 55
per cent by weight of the total British catch, pelagic fish caught near the
surface for 35 per cent and shellfish for 10 per cent. In 1981 landings of all
types of fish (excluding salmon and trout) by British fishing vessels totalled
745,400 tonnes. Cod accounted for 32 per cent of the total value of demersal
and pelagic fish landed while haddock (20 per cent), mackerel (10 per cent)
and plaice (7 per cent) were the other most important sources of earnings to
the industry. Home production of fish meal in 1981 was about 59,700
tonnes and fish oil production about 12,000 tonnes.
The British fish farming industry is a substantial and expanding business
278
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Fishing
Fleet
Administration
Fishery Limits
Common
Fisheries Policy
mainly concerned with the production of salmon and trout although
shellfish and eel farming are growing. Estimated production in 1981 was
6,500 tonnes of trout and 1,000 tonnes of salmon.
Imports of fresh, frozen, cured and canned fish and shellfish in 1981
totalled 344,600 tonnes, those of fish meal 74,600 tonnes and those of fish
oils 218,900 tonnes. Exports and re-exports of fish and fish products
amounted to 329,600 tonnes. Following a British initiative, member states
of the European Community banned from January 1982 the import of
primary whale products in order to help to conserve whale populations.
Some 73 per cent of the British catch is taken by the 7,100 vessels of the
inshore fleet employing a variety of catching methods. The deep-sea fleet,
comprising 245 larger vessels, has been reduced in number as fishing
opportunities and the profitability of operations in distant waters have
declined. Recently the mackerel and herring stock off the west coast have
provided alternative fisheries for the larger vessels. The European Com¬
munity provides funds for the construction and modernisation of fishing
vessels.
The agriculture departments are responsible for the administration of
legislation concerning the fishing industry and for fisheries research. The
safety and welfare of crews of fishing vessels and other matters common to
shipping generally are provided for under legislation administered by the
Department of Trade.
The Sea Fish Industry Authority provides financial aid for the purchase
of new fishing vessels, vessel improvements, the provision and improve¬
ment of processing plants, cold stores and ice plants and towards the
formation of fishermen’s co-operatives. Other functions include research
and development, training, dissemination of information, publicity and
promotion and the provision of consultancy services, including those to
developing countries.
Since 1977 Britain’s fishery limits, like those of other Community member
states outside the Mediterranean, have extended to 200 miles (or, where the
distance between two countries’ coasts is less than 400 miles, up to the
median line or agreed boundary between the two countries).
Community countries, and non-Community countries having tempor¬
ary agreements with the Community, have the right to fish up to Britain’s
12-mile limit. Designated Community countries may also fish in certain
areas of Britain’s 6- to 12-mile zone. The only non-Community country
which ma> fish in this zone is Norway, which has very restricted rights in
some areas off the Scottish coast. No foreign vessels may fish within
Britain’s 6-mile limit.
Fishery relations between the European Community and other countries
are governed by long-term framework agreements which have been con¬
cluded with eight countries. In 1982 reciprocal agreements were in force
with Norway, the Faroe Islands and Spain, and arrangements were agreed
with Sweden. Non-reciprocal agreements were in force with Canada, the
United States, Senegal and Guinea-Bissau. Quotas were also established in
international waters in the north-west Atlantic.
With the extension of fishery limits to 200 miles, new arrangements
became necessary to control Community fishing in the greatly extended
area. Britain has a particularly strong interest in such control, since a
sizeable proportion of the total catch within the 200-mile limits of member
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
279
Marketing Policy
Fisheries
Research
Freshwater
Fisheries
states is taken in British waters, while the loss of fishing opportunities in
distant waters (such as Iceland) has reduced the British industry’s total
catch more than that of other Community states. As a result, Britain is
looking for adequate access arrangements and a fair share of the quotas
proposed for the fish stocks around its coasts and in other countries’ waters.
There is also a need for effective and enforceable conservation measures
within the waters of member states. The Government is continuing to work
towards a common fisheries policy which meets these needs. Pending the
adoption of new Community measures on fish conservation, the Govern¬
ment has introduced a series of national measures corresponding as far as
possible to measures contained in a Community conservation regulation
which expired in October 1981.
The Community’s fishing industry is also subject to a common organisation
of the market which aims at assisting in the adaptation of supplies to
marketing requirements, while ensuring, as far as possible, a reasonable
return to producers, by means of the establishment of a grading and price
system and rules on competition. Provision is also made for the protection
of the Community market against disruption by imports from non-member
countries. Market organisation is largely in the hands of the industry itself
through producers’ organisations. Intra-Community fish trade is tariff-
free and there is a common external tariff.
The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has a research directorate
comprising laboratories dealing with marine and freshwater fisheries,
shellfish, marine pollution, fish farming, and diseases. Work on the utilisa¬
tion of fish is undertaken by a research station at Torry, Aberdeen. There
are also four seagoing research vessels. In Scotland the Department of
Agriculture and Fisheries maintains laboratories on marine and freshwater
fisheries research as well as four seagoing vessels. The two research pro¬
grammes are co-ordinated. Department of Agriculture laboratories in
Northern Ireland monitor marine and freshwater fisheries.
The most valuable freshwater fish are salmon and sea-trout. Sea fishing for
salmon is prohibited in waters outside a limit of six miles from the coasts of
the British Isles. Within six miles, drift netting and certain other methods
are prohibited off the coast of Scotland but are permitted under licence off
England, Wales and Northern Ireland. In Scotland, salmon fishing is a
private right. In England and Wales, water authority licences are required
for coastal and estuary netting.
FORESTRY
Woodland covers an estimated 2-1 million hectares (5 2 million acres),
about 9 per cent of the total land area in Great Britain; about 40 per cent
is in England, 49 per cent in Scotland, and 11 per cent in Wales. The
Government supports the continued expansion of forestry in order to
reduce dependence on imports.
The area of productive forest in Great Britain is 1,769,000 hectares
(4,371,000 acres), about half of which is managed by the Forestry
Commission (see p 280) and the rest by private owners.The annual rate of
expansion is currently 11,600 hectares (28,700 acres) by the Commission,
mainly in Scotland, and some 8,700 hectares (21,498 acres) by private
woodland owners. The Commission’s programme includes considerable
280
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Forestry
Commission and
Forestry Policy
Private
Forestry
Forestry
Education and
Research
Forestry in
Northern Ireland
planting in upland areas, and consists mainly of conifers because of the
difficult site conditions encountered.
Total employment in state and private forests in Great Britain was
estimated at about 18,500 in 1981.
Except during the two world wars, when felling was abnormally heavy,
home woodlands have until recent years made only a limited contribution
to the nation’s consumption of wood and wood products, as less than half
of the Commission’s woodlands are yet in production. Britain imports over
90 per cent of its needs.
The Forestry Commission is the national forestry authority in Great
Britain. The Commissioners comply with directions given by the Minister
of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and the Secretaries of State for Scotland
and Wales. In pursuing timber production, forestry policy also takes into
account amenity, environmental and employment criteria, and the Com¬
mission’s activities include wildlife conservation, the landscaping of
plantations, and the provision of facilities for recreation. The Commission
has also encouraged the setting up of some 20 major new timber-using
industries.
The Government has given the Commission greater commercial freedom
to sell some of its land and plantations thereby reducing its call on public
funds. However, the Commission is in control of the disposals programme,
the scale and location of which is at its discretion. The Commission is
financed partly by the Government and partly by receipts from sales of
produce, rentals and other sources. Income from timber is expected to
increase as production doubles in the next 20 years, probably leading to a
reduction in grant-in-aid.
A substantial number of private woods are in ownerships of under 100
hectares (250 acres) in extent. Effective management is encouraged by grants
administered by the Forestry Commission, in return for which owners
accept an obligation to manage their woodlands in accordance with sound
forestry practice.
Degree courses in forestry and associated studies are provided at three
universities and there are supervisory, craft and managerial level courses.
The Forestry Training Council, set up by the Forestry Commission, assists
the development of systematic training and the co-ordination of training in
the state and private sectors. The Furniture and Timber Industry Training
Board is concerned with training for private-sector employees in the home
timber trade.
Forestry research, including that on ‘Dutch’ elm disease, is carried out by
the Commission at two research stations. Aid is also given for research work
in universities and other institutions, including the Commonwealth Forestry
Institute in Oxford. A laboratory at Princes Risborough in Buckinghamshire
conducts research into the quality and uses of home-grown timber.
The Department of Agriculture may acquire land for afforestation and give
financial and technical assistance for private planting. Financial provision is
made annually by Parliament.
The state forest area has grown steadily since 1945. By 1982, 59,000
hectares (145,800 acres) of plantable land had been acquired, of which 54,000
hectares (133,400 acres) were planted. There were about 13,000 hectares
(32,100 acres) of privately owned forest. Some 700 people work in state
forests.
k Transportand
Communications
The application of technological developments to Britain’s transport and
communications network is continually increasing the speed and con¬
venience of its operations. Major improvements in the movement of pas¬
sengers and freight have resulted from the construction of a network of
motorways, the extension of fast inter-city rail services (such as those
operated by high speed trains), the modernisation of many ports, the
increased use of containers and other modern methods in shipping, the use
by airlines of larger or speedier aircraft (including the Concorde supersonic
aircraft) and expansion schemes at many airports. Communications are
benefiting from developments in microelectronics, computer and satellite
technology, and advances in materials, for example, the invention of optical
fibres used in telecommunications.
While major sectors of transport and communications operations are still
publicly owned, the Government is arranging for the introduction of
private capital into a number of them as part of its policy of reducing state
involvement as much as possible.
INLAND TRANSPORT
Passenger and freight traffic is carried mainly by road. At the end of 1981
there were 19-3 million vehicles licensed for use on the roads of Great
Britain, of which 15 3 million were motor cars, 1-7 million road goods
vehicles, 1 4 million motorcycles, scooters and mopeds, and 110,000 public
road passenger vehicles (including taxis). Private ownership of cars has
been growing rapidly for many years and the car is the most popular form
of travel. Buses and coaches account for about 10 per cent of passenger
mileage within Great Britain, rail for 7 per cent and air 0 5 per cent. Road
haulage has a dominant position in the movement of inland freight,
accounting for about 82 per cent of tonnage carried and for some three-
quarters of tonne-kilometres. Railways and, to a lesser extent, pipelines
and inland waterways are important in carrying certain types of freight,
particularly bulk goods. The railways and much of the bus industry are
publicly owned, but road haulage is in the hands of private enterprise.
Transport policy rests on the fundamental aims of promoting economic
growth and higher national prosperity, and ensuring a reasonable level
of personal mobility, while improving safety, particularly on the roads,
minimising damage to the environment and using energy economically.
Britain is taking an active part in the development of a common transport
policy by the European Community.
ROADS Motor vehicle traffic in Great Britain amounted in 1981 to over 277,700
million vehicle-kilometres, of which cars and taxis accounted for 81 per
cent. Improvements are continually being made in the network of trunk
roads (which form a basic network linking major centres of population,
industrial areas and ports) to accommodate the growth in traffic. A number
282
Administration
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
of motorways (roads specially designed for high speed traffic) have been
built, while other improvements, such as the construction of by-passes,
have helped to make travelling easier and faster, particularly over long
distances and between cities. Congestion on inter-urban roads has been
reduced or eliminated and many towns and villages have been relieved of
heavy through traffic. Although motorways account for less than 1 per cent
of road mileage, they carry 10 per cent of traffic including over one-fifth of
heavy goods vehicle traffic. In 1981 the road network totalled over 227,150
miles (365,560 kilometres), of which some 1,830 miles (2,950 kilometres)
were motorways. Motorways and other major roads are shown on the map
at the end of the book.
Table 23: Road Mileage
Public
roadsa
Trunk
roadsa
(including
motorways)
Trunk motorways*
in usec under
construction
England
Scotland
Wales
Northern Ireland
161,649
31,049
19,803
14,652
6,360
i,97i
1,086
409
1,472
153
74
70
7i
Britain
227,153
9,826
1,769
7i
Sources: Department of Transport, Northern Ireland Department of the Environment, Scottish Development
Department and Welsh Office
“As at April 1981.
'’As at April 1982.
cIn addition, there were 48 miles (77 kilometres) of local authority motorway in use in England and 21 miles
(33 kilometres) in Scotland.
The main aims of the Government’s programme to improve trunk roads
are to meet the needs of industry and to keep heavy lorry traffic away from
towns and villages. In England the main priorities are the M25 London
orbital route and certain routes to serve industry and the major ports. In
Wales the priorities are to reconstruct the coast road in north Wales and
improve roads which are important for industrial redevelopment. Most of
the remaining links in the motorway/dual carriageway network in central
Scotland have been completed. Accordingly, the programme is being
directed mainly to the improvement of other strategic routes, particularly
those to the north and north-east which are important for North Sea oil-
related activities and some of the west-coast routes, and also to the con¬
struction of more by-passes. In Northern Ireland the emphasis is on
building new links to the motorway network, constructing more by-passes,
and improving roads in the Belfast area and other urban areas. Priority for
new roads in urban areas of Great Britain is being given to those designed to
meet the needs of industry and commerce, serve new industrial or housing
estates, provide links to the national trunk road network or to complement
traffic management schemes.
Responsibility for trunk motorways and other trunk roads in Great Britain
rests in England with the Secretary of State for Transport, in Scotland with
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
283
Road Safety
the Secretary of State for Scotland and in Wales with the Secretary of State
for Wales. The costs of construction, improvement and maintenance are
paid for by central Government. The highway authority for non-trunk
roads in England and Wales is, in general, the county council in whose area
the roads lie, and in Scotland the regional or islands council. In Northern
Ireland the Northern Ireland Department of the Environment is respon¬
sible for public roads and their maintenance and construction.
Research into all aspects of road construction, traffic engineering and
safety, and into problems associated with transport is carried out by the
Transport and Road Research Laboratory, jointly responsible to the
Department of Transport and the Department of the Environment.
Great Britain’s accident record is considerably better than that of most
other countries even though it has one of the highest densities of road traffic
in the world. In 1981, 5,800 people were killed on the roads, about 78,300
seriously injured and 240,700 slightly injured. A comprehensive frame¬
work of legislation embodied in recent Road Traffic and Transport Acts
and summarised in the Highway Code (which sets out the standard of
conduct for road users) has contributed to the decline in casualty rates.
Other factors have been better road design and construction, segregating
vehicles from pedestrians, and campaigns conducted nationally by govern¬
ment departments and the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents
and locally by local authorities to persuade people to take greater care on the
roads. In recent years major publicity campaigns have been undertaken to
increase the wearing of seat belts, to reduce casualties to child pedestrians
and to riders of motorcycles and bicycles, and to reduce the incidence of
drinking and driving.
Comprehensive regulations govern the design of vehicles, their use on
the roads, and the maintenance and testing of their mechanical condition.
Under a national ‘type approval’ scheme, all new cars must be of a type that
has been certified as meeting the required standards. In Great Britain
private cars and light vans which are three or more years old must be tested
annually at private garages authorised as test stations. (In Northern Ireland
private cars seven or more years old are tested at official vehicle inspection
centres.) A compulsory type approval scheme for goods vehicles is being
implemented and will apply to virtually all goods vehicles manufactured
from 1 October 1982 and first used on or after 1 April 1983. Heavy goods
vehicles are subject to annual tests carried out at special testing stations.
Minimum ages are laid down for driving: 16 for driving invalid carriages
and mopeds; 17 for cars and other passenger vehicles with nine or fewer
seats (including that of the driver), motorcycles and goods vehicles not over
3-5 tonnes gross laden weight; 18 for goods vehicles over 3 5 but not over
7 5 tonnes; and 21 for passenger vehicles with over nine seats and goods
vehicles over 7 5 tonnes. All drivers of motor vehicles are required to pass
the driving test before being granted a full licence to drive. Until they pass
the test they must hold a ‘provisional’ licence, display ‘L’ (learner) plates
on their vehicle and be accompanied while driving (with certain exceptions)
by a qualified driver. There are national speed limits of 70 mph (113 km/h)
on motorways and other dual carriageway roads, and 60 mph (97 km/h) on
single carriageway roads, while in built-up areas a general limit of 30 mph
(48 km/h) applies. To meet local needs the urban limit can be raised and the
other limits lowered on specific stretches of road.
A wide range of other measures directed primarily towards road safety
284
Traffic in
Towns
ROAD
HAULAGE
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
include legislation and publicity to discourage drinking and driving, com¬
puter-controlled warning signals on most busy motorways to inform
motorists of advisory speed limits in adverse conditions and of lane
closures, and regulations governing the carriage of dangerous goods by
road. The T ransport Act 1981 contains a number of provisions designed to
improve road safety which are expected to be brought into force in 1982-83.
Measures to increase the effectiveness of the law on drinking and driving
include the virtual replacement of blood testing by breath testing; the
statutory limit of breath alcohol concentration for drivers will be 35
microgrammes of alcohol in 100 millilitres of breath. Provisions to improve
the safety of motorcyclists include the restriction of learner drivers to the
less powerful machines, a new two-part motorcycle driving test and a limit
on the duration of the motorcycle provisional licence. The introduction of
compulsory seat belt wearing is provided for in the Act and children will
also be prohibited from riding without an appropriate restraint in the front
passenger seat of many vehicles. The totting-up procedure of licence en¬
dorsements for driving offences will be replaced by a more discriminating
system whereby drivers are given penalty points, varying in number
according to the severity of the offence, and are liable to disqualification
from driving for a period if they incur a set number of points within three
years.
Traffic management schemes are being operated in many city and town
centres to minimise congestion and its environmental effects, and to im¬
prove road safety. They may include one-way systems, streets reserved for
pedestrians, bus priority measures, parking controls and limited road
construction. In most town centres parking is restricted and waiting limits
apply. Major city centres often have controlled parking zones, where
payment is required for on-street parking. Many towns have shopping
precincts, some of them enclosed, which are specially designed for
pedestrians and from which motor vehicles are excluded.
Urban traffic control systems, which link traffic signals and some traffic
signs to a central computer, represent an important addition to local
authorities’ ability to control traffic. A new method for large towns and
cities of continuously adapting traffic signal response to the flow of traffic is
being used in Glasgow and Coventry. It will also be used in replacing a
number of signals in London’s urban traffic control system which, with
some 1,200 sets of traffic signals, is the largest traffic management scheme
in Britain and one of the largest in the world. A compact form of urban
traffic control, sponsored by the Department of Transport, is operating in
Torbay, Hull and a number of other towns.
Road haulage traffic amounted to about 94,400 million tonne-kilometres in
1981. There has been a move towards larger and more efficient vehicles
carrying heavier loads—about 67 per cent of the traffic, in terms of tonne-
kilometres, is carried in vehicles of over 28 tonnes gross laden weight.
Much of the traffic is moved over short distances, with more than three-
fifths of the tonnage being carried on hauls of 50 kilometres (31 miles) or
less. Public haulage (private road hauliers carrying other firms’ goods)
accounts for 61 per cent of freight carried in Great Britain in terms of tonne-
kilometres. The growth in road haulage has been concentrated on long¬
distance traffic, particularly international road haulage.
The environmental problems caused by lorries have become a matter of
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
285
Structure of the
Industry
Licensing and
Other Controls
PASSENGER
SERVICES
Buses and
Coaches
public concern. Following an independent inquiry, the Government has
proposed a number of measures to bring economic benefits and increased
protection to the environment and the public. If maximum lorry weights
were increased, the higher load capacity should enable industry to meet
demands for freight services with fewer vehicles than would otherwise be
needed. Safeguards on the design of lorries (including their dimensions and
axle arrangements) would mean that the effect of heavier vehicles on roads
and bridges would be marginal and, in some respects, slightly favourable.
Other measures include more by-passes to keep lorries away from places
where people live, and a programme of research and development, in¬
volving vehicle and engine manufacturers, to reduce the noise from heavy
lorries to less than half the 1981 level and produce a quiet heavy vehicle for
the 1990s.
Road haulage is predominantly an industry of small, privately owned
businesses. Many of the 127,700 holders of an operator’s licence in 1981
had only one vehicle and the average size of a vehicle fleet is only about four.
The biggest operator in Great Britain is the National Freight Consortium
set up by a consortium of managers and employees to acquire the National
Freight Company from the Government. The acquisition, completed in
February 1982, was the largest staff/management ‘buy-out’ ever under¬
taken in Britain and the first for a nationalised industry.
Those operating goods vehicles over 3 5 tonnes gross weight (with certain
special exemptions) require an operator’s licence, obtained on showing
good repute and ability to maintain vehicles properly and control loading
and drivers’ hours. Licences are divided into restricted licences for firms
carrying their own goods and standard licences, sub-divided into ‘national
only’ and ‘international’, for hauliers operating for hire or reward. (In
Northern Ireland operators carrying their own goods do not require a
licence.) Proof of professional competence is required to obtain a standard
licence. Regulations lay down limits on the hours worked by drivers of
goods vehicles, and there are also minimum rest periods. Under a European
Community regulation a tachograph (a device which automatically records
a vehicle’s speed and distance covered, driving time and stopping periods)
must be fitted and used in most goods vehicles over 3 5 tonnes gross weight
in Great Britain. International road haulage is governed mainly by bilateral
agreements which are in force with 26 other countries.
Bus and urban railway services in Britain are provided mainly by publicly
owned operators, coach services partly by publicly owned bodies, and taxis
and hire cars almost entirely by privately owned businesses.
The largest single public sector bus and coach operator in Britain is the
National Bus Company, which operates in England and Wales through
35 locally based subsidiaries and has a network of long-distance coach
services; it has a fleet of some 14,700 vehicles. Legislation is being enacted
to enable the Government to sell shares in any of the Company’s subsidiaries
and it intends to invite private sector participation in the coach operations
side of the business.
Vehicles run by other public sector operators include 3,400 run by the
Scottish Transport Group (which operates the main bus services in Scot¬
land outside the major cities and also runs ferries to the islands off the west
286
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Services
Taxis
Urban
Railways
coast of Scotland), 10,400 by the seven passenger transport executives
(responsible for the day-to-day management and operations of local trans¬
port in Strathclyde and the metropolitan counties of Greater Manchester,
Merseyside, West Midlands, Tyne and Wear, South Yorkshire and West
Yorkshire), 6,400 by the London Transport Executive and 5,700 by other
local authority undertakings. There are some 5,500 privately owned under¬
takings (of which the majority have fewer than five vehicles) comprising
about 27,400 vehicles; only a small proportion of these operators are
concerned with scheduled bus services. Double-deck buses are an impor¬
tant feature of urban passenger transport in Britain and there are some
25,600 in operation. In addition, there are 43,500 single-deck buses and
coaches, and some 75 trams (at Blackpool and Llandudno which have
Britain’s only remaining tramway systems).
In Northern Ireland almost all road passenger services are provided by
subsidiaries of the Northern Ireland Transport Holding Company. City-
bus Ltd operates services in the city of Belfast and Ulsterbus Ltd operates
most of the services in the rest of Northern Ireland. These companies have
370 and 1,040 vehicles respectively.
There has been a long-term decline in the use of bus and coach services
(except in the area of contract and private hire), mainly because of the
growth in ownership of private cars, and in 1981 some 6,300 million
journeys were made by bus or coach in Great Britain, 27 per cent fewer than
in 1971. Bus operators have taken action to contain costs and to improve
productivity by introducing larger buses, increasing the proportion of bus
services operated by one man and reducing or rationalising services. Many
uneconomic bus services have been withdrawn, particularly in the rural
areas. However, in some rural areas new ‘postbus’ services (Post Office
minibuses carrying mail and passengers), community-run minibus ser¬
vices or social car-sharing schemes have been introduced.
One of the aims of the Transport Act 1980, which contained the biggest
series of reforms in road passenger transport for 50 years, was the en¬
couragement of competition and new types of service. It removed restric¬
tions on operating long-distance express coach services and excursions and
tours, allowing free competition between operators. The result has been
reductions in long-distance coach fares and a sharp rise in the number of
services and of passengers carried.
Great Britain is divided into 11 traffic areas, each with a body of traffic
commissioners responsible for licensing operators of buses and coaches to
ensure their suitability for carrying the public safely. In addition, local bus
services cannot be provided except under road service licences. The com¬
missioners are required to grant applications for licences unless satisfied
that to do so would be against the public interest.
There are about 35,000 licensed taxis and 70,000 licensed taxi drivers in
Great Britain, mainly in urban areas; London has some 13,000 and 18,000
respectively. In London and a number of other cities taxis must be
purpose-built to conform to very strict requirements and drivers must have
passed a test of their knowledge of the area. Hire cars with drivers may be
booked only through the operator and not hired on the street; in some areas
hire cars are licensed.
There are underground railway services in three British cities: London,
Glasgow and Liverpool. London Transport has 4,300 railway cars and
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
287
RAILWAYS
Operations
serves 277 stations, while its trains operate over 260 miles (418 kilometres)
of railway, of which about too miles (161 kilometres) are underground. A
light rapid transit system under construction on Tyneside involves the
electrification of two suburban railway lines, linked by new tunnels under
Newcastle upon Tyne and Gateshead, and a new bridge over the Tyne. The
first section was opened in 1980 and the whole of the system, which will
eventually be 34 miles (55 kilometres) long with over 40 stations, should be
in operation by 1983. The project is the largest provincial urban transport
scheme in Britain in the twentieth century.
Railways were pioneered in Britain, and the Stockton and Darlington
Railway, opened in 1825, was the first passenger public railway in the world
to be worked by steam power. Under the Transport Act 1947 the four large
railway companies in Great Britain were brought under public ownership
and in 1963 the British Railways Board was set up to manage railway affairs
and subsidiary activities. In Northern Ireland the Northern Ireland
Railways Company Ltd, a subsidiary of the Northern Ireland Transport
Holding Company, operates the railway service on some 200 miles (322
kilometres) of track.
British Rail’s operating statistics are shown in Table 24. In 1981 the
Board’s turnover, including financial support and income from other
activities but excluding internal transactions, was £2,899 million and there
was a net deficit of £37 2 million. Financial support for British Rail
includes compensation for the financial burden of operating the rail pas¬
senger system as a public service and grants for level crossings. In 1981
the British Railways Board received £810 million from the Government
and the passenger transport executives in respect of the public service
obligation. At the end of 1981 the British Railways Board employed
227,300 people.
Table 24: Railway Statistics
1976
1979
1980 1981
Passenger journeys (mz//zon) 707 748 760 718
Passenger-miles (miY/iow) I7>700 19,900 19,700 19,100
Freight train traffic {million
tonnes) 176 169 153 154
Freight train traffic {million net
tonne-miles) 12,794 12,361 10,961 10,877
Assets (at end of year):
Locomotives 3,689 3,571 3,379 3,131
HST power cars and passenger
carriages 193 669 772 845
APT power cars and passenger
carriages - 20 36 36
Other coaching vehicles 22,222 20,963 20,408 18,268
Freight vehicles 187,000 137,589 119,507 87,955
Stations 2,865 2,821 2,787 2,739
Route open for traffic (miVe^) H3I89 11,020 10,964 10,831
Source: British Railways Board
288
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Passenger
Services
Freight
Other
Activities
The passenger network (see map, p 289) comprises a fast inter-city net¬
work, linking the main centres of Great Britain; local stopping services;
and commuter services in and around the large conurbations, especially
London and south-east England. The introduction of faster trains, to¬
gether with the raising of standards of track and signalling, has brought
significant reductions in journey time on many routes. Inter-city rail
services in Great Britain are among the best in the world in speed, fre¬
quency and comfort. Two major projects, the High Speed Train (HST)
and the Advanced Passenger Train (APT), have been designed to raise
speeds using existing track. British Rail introduced the world’s fastest
diesel rail service, known as Inter-City 125 and operated by HSTs travel¬
ling at maximum sustained speeds of 125 mph (201 km/h), in 1976 on the
route from London to Bristol and south Wales. Similar services have also
been introduced on the London-Edinburgh-Aberdeen route, the London-
Plymouth-Penzance route, the London-Sheffield route and the route
linking Edinburgh, Newcastle upon Tyne, Birmingham and south-west
England or south Wales. British Rail is continuing to develop the APT,
also capable of speeds of 125 mph (201 km/h) but with the ability to take
curves up to 40 per cent faster than conventional trains, and is concentrating
its resources on the design of the first production APTs. Three pre-
production APTs are being used for testing purposes.
Electrification is continuing, with a £30 million scheme to extend elec¬
trified services to Ipswich, Norwich and Harwich. The Government has
invited British Rail to draw up a ten-year programme of schemes for
electrifying potentially profitable main line routes, following a review by
the Department of Transport and British Rail. Government approval of
particular electrification projects will depend on the profitability of the
investment and on the achievement of improvements in productivity.
British Rail is looking at ways of reducing costs on its local passenger
services by the installation of automatic level crossings and radio signalling,
track rationalisation, and replacing existing diesel multiple-unit trains by
lightweight vehicles which are cheaper to build and maintain.
The most important freight commodities handled in 1981 were coal and
coke (95 2 million tonnes), iron and steel (18-2 million tonnes), earth and
stones (12-5 million tonnes) and petroleum products (12-3 million tonnes).
British Rail is concentrating on traffic particularly suitable for carriage by
rail, especially long-distance and bulk trainload traffic.
Increased efficiency is being obtained as new types of wagon are intro¬
duced with larger capacities and which are capable of higher speeds. A
network of some 80 scheduled ‘Speedlink’ high-speed freight services
using these new wagons has been established between the major industrial
centres. A computer-based total operations processing system, which
monitors all consignments and freight train and wagon movements in
Great Britain, has reduced costs by allowing the more intensive use of
rolling stock and the withdrawal of many obsolete wagons.
To encourage the use of railways for the carriage of freight, grants of up
to 50 per cent are available towards the cost of construction or modernisa¬
tion of privately owned rail freight facilities where there are significant
environmental benefits by the removal of heavy goods vehicle traffic from
the roads.
British Rail has a group of other companies, of which British Rail
Engineering Ltd (BREL) has the largest number of employees, about
290
Channel Tunnel
Private
Railways
INLAND
WATERWAYS
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
34,600 at 12 engineering plants. BREL mainly constructs locomotives,
coaches, wagons and containers for British Rail, and undertakes heavy
maintenance, overhauls and work for export. The Railway Technical
Centre at Derby is the largest in the world; its most important achievement
has been the development of the APT. Transmark provides consultancy
services overseas on railway and associated operations. Travellers-Fare,
which is responsible for catering facilities at stations and on trains, provides
meals and snacks on a greater number of trains than any other railway
company in Europe.
Ownership of the main non-railway businesses (Sealink UK Ltd, see
p 294, hovercraft, see p 294, and British Transport Hotels Ltd) and of
a portfolio of property not needed for the railway business has been
transferred to British Rail Investments Ltd, a holding company set up by
British Rail to implement the policy agreed with the Government of
introducing private capital into the major non-railway operations. Under
the Transport Act 1981 the British Railways Board has powers to dispose of
a proportion of its interest in the businesses. The Board may decide to keep
a minority interest in some cases, but the intention is that the businesses
should be transferred to the private sector, with their future investment
financed by private capital.
Some eight proposals for a fixed link across the English Channel between
Britain and France, varying from bridges to bored tunnels, including one
for a single-track rail-only tunnel submitted by the British Railways Board
and Societe Nationale des Chemins de Fer Fran^ais (SNCF), are being
considered by the British and French Governments.
There are a number of small privately owned passenger-carrying railways
in Great Britain, mostly operated on a voluntary basis and providing
limited services for tourists and railway enthusiasts. The principal aim of
many of these railways, such as the Bluebell Railway at Sheffield Park, East
Sussex, is the preservation of steam traction.
The inland waterways of Britain are experiencing a considerable revival of
interest in their use for recreation, freight-carrying and for their contri¬
bution to the environment. They play an important part in land drainage
and water supply. Of the 2,000 miles (3,219 kilometres) of canal and river
navigations controlled by the publicly owned British Waterways Board,
some 340 miles (547 kilometres) are maintained as commercial waterways
for use by freight-carrying vessels. Freight traffic carried on the Board’s
waterways amounted to 71-8 million tonne-kilometres in 1981 and the
tonnage carried was 4-6 million tonnes. In addition, some freight is carried
on about 600 miles (966 kilometres) of inland waterways owned by other
bodies. The Board also operates docks, warehouses and inland freight
terminals, and has two barge fleets, although most of the traffic on its
waterways is conveyed by independent carriers. In 1981 the Board’s
turnover amounted to £15-8 million, and it received government grants of
£27-3 million to maintain its waterways to statutory standards. Completion
of the Board’s £16 million scheme to improve the Sheffield and South
Yorkshire Navigation between Doncaster and Rotherham is expected in
1983. When completed, the improvements will raise the barge capacity
above Doncaster from 90 tonnes with the result that 700-tonne barges will
be able to navigate as far as the Rotherham area.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
291
Port Traffic
PORTS
There are some 200 port authorities or public wharf operators in Britain,
and about 800 other undertakings engaged in operations such as steve¬
doring, towage, warehousing and lighterage. Port authorities are of four
main types: nationalised bodies, public trusts, local authorities and
statutory companies.
The Transport Act 1981 provides for the introduction of private capital
into Britain’s main nationalised port undertaking, the British Transport
Docks Board, which controls about a fifth of total port capacity includ¬
ing Southampton, Hull, Grimsby/Immingham, Newport, Cardiff and
Swansea. It creates a new holding company which will control a re¬
constituted Board, to be known as Associated British Ports, as if it were a
wholly owned subsidiary. Initially 49 per cent of the shares in the company
will be offered for sale, but the Government will not use its shareholding to
control the holding company. In 1981 total cargo handled at the Board’s
docks was 75-2 million tonnes. The British Railways Board’s subsidiary
Sealink UK Ltd (see p 294) also controls certain ports (Fishguard, Folke¬
stone, Holyhead, Newhaven, Parkeston Quay at Harwich, and Stranraer)
which are largely used for its shipping services. The British Waterways
Board owns Sharpness (Gloucester) and Weston Point in Runcorn. Major
ports controlled by public trusts include London, Milford Haven, Tees
and Hartlepool, Medway, Forth, Clyde and Belfast. Local authorities
own about one-third of Britain’s ports, including Bristol, Portsmouth and
the new oil ports in Orkney and Shetland. Port undertakings owned by
statutory companies include Felixstowe, Manchester and Liverpool. Many
private ports deal with the traffic of individual industrial firms in commodi¬
ties such as china clay and petroleum.
Port authorities, in the main, operate with statutory powers and respon¬
sibilities set out in private Acts of Parliament. Most are members of the
British Ports Association which aims to further the common interests of
port authorities in their relations with the Government, shipowners and
traders.
In 1981 traffic through the ports of Great Britain amounted to 405 million
tonnes comprising 124 million tonnes of imports, 126 million tonnes of
exports and 155 million tonnes of domestic traffic (including ‘one-port’
traffic which comprised offshore traffic, landings of sea-dredged aggregates
and material shipped for dumping at sea). About 64 per cent of the traffic
was in fuels, mainly petroleum and petroleum products. Some 82 per cent
of the 13 -1 million tonnes of traffic (9 8 million tonnes of imports and 3 3
million tonnes of exports) which entered or left Northern Ireland by sea in
1981 represented traffic with the rest of Britain.
Britain’s main ports, in terms of total tonnage handled, are given in T able
25. Offshore oil developments have had a substantial effect on port traffic by
greatly increasing the flow through certain North Sea ports, such as Tees
and Hartlepool and the Forth ports, creating new oil ports at Flotta in
Orkney and Sullom Voe in Shetland, and reducing oil traffic at traditional
oil importing terminals such as Milford Haven and the Clyde. There has
also been a decline in the volume of conventional cargo handled by
traditional ports, such as London, Liverpool and Manchester, and a
growth in traffic through other ports including Dover, Felixstowe and
Harwich, due to containerisation and the use of roll-on/roll-oflf facilities,
and to the increasing proportion of Britain’s trade with the rest of Europe.
292
Development
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
While non-fuel traffic has been growing only slowly, container and roll¬
on traffic has more than doubled since 1971 to 43 million tonnes in 1981
and now accounts for over one-third of non-fuel traffic. The leading ports
for this type of traffic are Dover, Felixstowe, Southampton, Liverpool,
London and Hull.
Table 25: Traffic through the Principal Ports of Great Britain
million tonnes
1971
1976
1979
1980 1981
Shetland
London
Tees and Hartlepool
Milford Haven
Forth
Grimsby and
Immingham
Southampton
Orkney
Medway
Liverpool
Manchester
na
532
22-2
432
93
17-8
28-0
na
22'7
31-8
16-2
na
442
30-5
432
13-7
234
26-6
na
20-7
222
I49
20'4
40-2
37-1
389
28-8
24'7
22-6
17-8
186
131
H'9
290
394
37- 7
38- 7
28-5
211
21-8
17-6
16-9
130
no
396
353
340
3i-7
263
250
20-1
15-6
15-4
H'9
99
Source: Department of Transport
na = not available
Notes: Foreign and coastal traffic only; excludes one-port traffic.
Belfast and Larne are the main ports in Northern Ireland and handled 5 5 million tonnes and 4 9 million
tonnes respectively in 1981.
Modernisation of Britain’s ports has been carried out primarily to
accommodate the increase in the proportion of goods carried in container
ships and roll-on vessels, and the changing nature and direction of Britain’s
trade. Most current developments are concerned with specific energy or
industrial needs or to accommodate specialised container or roll-on ser¬
vices rather than with general purpose port facilities. Recent major schemes
have included a £32 million scheme to provide two deep-water container
berths at Felixstowe, which became operational in 1981, and a £12 million
scheme for two roll-on berths, with multi-level access, at Dover, completed
in 1980. At Portsmouth a £15 million scheme is in progress to add two new
ferry berths by 1983, doubling the port’s cross-Channel capacity.
The first purpose-built terminal for oil from the British sector of the
North Sea was completed at Hound Point on the Forth in 1975 and other
terminals have been built on the Tees, at Flotta and Sullom Voe. Sullom
Voe is expected to become the largest oil exporting port in Europe by the
mid-1980s. Three of the four jetties are able to handle oil tankers of up to
350,000 deadweight tons. The fourth jetty handles the export of liquefied
petroleum gases and can accommodate vessels with a capacity of up to
75,000 cubic metres. A natural gas liquids terminal is being built in the
Firth of Forth. Other developments related to offshore oil and gas have
included the construction of supply bases for offshore vessels at a number of
ports mostly on the east coast, including Great Yarmouth, Leith, Dundee,
Montrose, Aberdeen, Peterhead, and Lerwick in Shetland.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
293
THE
MERCHANT
FLEET
Ownership
SERVICES
Cargo Services
SHIPPING
The British merchant fleet in mid-1981 at 25 4 million gross tons1 (41-3
million deadweight tons) was the fifth largest after those of Liberia, Greece,
Japan and Panama. The oil tanker fleet (12-2 million gross tons) was the
fourth largest and the fleet of fully cellular container ships (1-5 million gross
tons) was the third largest. The fleet reached its peak of 33 2 million gross
tons in 1975, but has declined since then, mainly owing to the world
recession in shipping and increasing international competition. A large
tonnage of ships, particularly of tankers, has been scrapped or sold.
Nevertheless, the British fleet still, modern and technically advanced,
contains a substantial number of ships.
In July 1981, 33-8 million deadweight tons of trading vessels of too gross
tons and over were both owned and registered in Britain: 21 - 6 million tons
usually employed as tankers, 8 7 million tons as tramps and 3 6 million tons
as cargo or passenger liners or cellular container ships. The merchant fleet
figure of 41 3 million deadweight tons also includes non-trading vessels,
such as fishing vessels, tugs and dredgers, and shipping registered in
Britain but owned in other Commonwealth countries.
Virtually all of the British merchant fleet is privately owned. Nearly two-
thirds of the tanker fleet belongs to the oil companies, although there are a
few independent tanker operators. British liner tonnage is dominated by a
relatively small number of large groups, the largest liner company being the
Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company (P & O). Some
shipowners have delegated the management of their fleets to specialist ship
management companies. Several companies are participating in consortia,
particularly where heavy investment is required, as with container vessels.
Chartering of ships of all nationalities takes place on the Baltic Exchange,
the largest market of its type in the world. The representative body for
shipowners (excluding owners of fishing vessels) is the General Council of
British Shipping.
About 95 per cent of Britain’s overseas trade by weight, about three-
quarters by value, is carried by sea, while the proportion of passengers
travelling to or from Britain by sea is over one-third, compared with about
one-half in the early 1960s.
In 1980 British seaborne trade amounted to 232 million tonnes (valued at
over £75,150 million) or 755,950 million tonne-miles (i-2 million million
tonne-kilometres). Ships registered in Britain carried 34 per cent by
weight, 28 per cent in terms of tonne-miles and 40 per cent by value. T anker
cargoes accounted for nearly half this trade by weight, but only about 16 per
cent by value, and foodstuffs and manufactured goods accounted for over
three-quarters by value.
Container and roll-on/roll-off vessels are responsible for a growing
proportion of general cargo trade. Many of the deep-sea liner services from
Britain are operated by container ships. Roll-on services, accommodating
passengers and their cars and, in some cases, commercial vehicles, are
increasing in number, particularly between Britain and the continent of
'One gross ton = 100 cubic feet (2 83 cubic metres). One deadweight ton = 1 tonne (1,000 kilogrammes or
2,205 lb). Gross tonnage indicates the total capacity of the enclosed space on a ship. Deadweight tonnage
denotes the maximum load which a vessel can carry before submerging the load-line.
294
Passenger
Services
ROLE OF THE
GOVERNMENT
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Europe. Several freight-only roll-on services operate to the Irish Republic,
the continent of Europe, and to more distant countries.
British shipping companies operating liner services have associated with
each other and with the companies of other countries operating on the same
routes in a series of ‘conferences’ designed to secure standardisation and
stability of rates, and to maintain frequency and regularity of services. The
essential principle of a conference is a common tariff of freight rates and
other conditions of service to be applied by each member line. There are
about 100 conferences dealing with trade to and from Britain.
Almost all of the 25 2 million passengers who arrived at or departed from
British ports in 1981 travelled to or from the continent of Europe or the
Irish Republic, services on other routes having been withdrawn as a result
of the growth of air services. Remaining long-distance passenger ships are
used for cruising and in 1981 some 81,000 passengers embarked on pleasure
cruises from British ports. Services from British ports are shown on the
map at the end of the book.
Cross-Channel traffic accounts for a substantial proportion of traffic to
the continent of Europe. Sealink UK Ltd, a subsidiary of the British
Railways Board, is the largest short-sea ferry operator in Europe. The
company and its continental partners (SNCF of France, Regie des Trans¬
ports Maritimes Beiges and Stoomvaart Maatschappij Zeeland of the
Netherlands) operate about 60 ships on short-sea routes. Sealink UK Ltd
and the other major British operators, including Townsend Thoresen and
P & O Ferries, have invested heavily in new ships in recent years, resulting
in a substantial increase in cross-Channel ferry capacity. Competition
between the operators has led to reductions in fares on many routes.
Cross-Channel hovercraft services are provided by Hoverspeed (formed
in 1981 by the merger of British Rail Hovercraft Ltd and Hoverlloyd Ltd)
with routes between Dover and Boulogne, and Dover and Calais, and a
summer-only route between Ramsgate and Calais. A hovercraft crossing
takes about one-third of the time taken by ships, and hovercraft carry over
one-quarter of the traffic on the short-sea crossings to the continent of
Europe. Hoverspeed operates six hovercraft including two British Hover¬
craft Corporation SR.N Super 4s which have been structurally enlarged so
that each accommodates 424 passengers and 55 cars, making them the
largest hovercraft in the world.
Passenger and freight ferry services are also operated to many of the
offshore islands, such as the Isle of Wight, Orkney, Shetland and a number
of other Scottish islands.
The Department of Trade is the government department responsible for
most matters connected with merchant shipping, including general policy
towards the industry and Britain’s relations with other governments and
international organisations on shipping matters. The general policy is one
of minimum intervention by the Government and the encouragement of
free and fair competition. Under the Merchant Shipping Acts the Depart¬
ment does, however, administer many regulations for marine safety and
welfare, and for preventing and cleaning up pollution from ships. For
instance, it certifies the load-line (or Plimsoll line) that shows that a ship is I
not overloaded; ensures that standards of safety are observed in ship
construction; ensures the provision of adequate life-saving, fire-fighting
and radio equipment; and deals with the discipline, professional standards,
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
295
SAFETY AT
SEA
health and accommodation of seamen. The Acts also contain certain
reserve powers for protecting shipping and trading interests from measures
adopted or proposed by overseas governments.
Outside London the Department’s responsibilities for the enforcement
of marine safety are carried out from marine offices located at various ports.
In the offices of the Registrar General of Shipping and Seamen, at Cardiff, a
record is kept of all ships registered in Britain and its dependencies.
Britain’s merchant fleet is one of the safest in the world with a lower record
of ship losses than the world average.
The Coastguard Service, administered by the Department of Trade, is
responsible for initiating and co-ordinating civil marine search and rescue
action in the United Kingdom Search and Rescue Region (SRR). This is
divided into six coastguard SRRs, each controlled by a maritime rescue
co-ordination centre (MRCC) supported by sub-centres, all of which
maintain continuous telecommunications watch on marine distress fre¬
quencies. In addition, at times of casualty risk a watch is kept at some 250
other stations around the coast. The Coastguard Service is able to call upon
the lifeboats of the Royal National Lifeboat Institution (a voluntary body
which operates 259 lifeboats), Ministry of Defence aircraft (including
helicopters from 11 airfields around the coast), a long-range civilian heli¬
copter based at Sumburgh (Shetland), and any other ships or aircraft
available to assist in search or rescue action. In 1981 the Coastguard Service
took action in 3,965 incidents (including cliff rescues) in which over 7,750
people were assisted.
The lighthouse authorities (for England and Wales the Corporation of
Trinity House, for Scotland the Northern Lighthouse Board and for
Ireland the Commissioners of Irish Lights) control about 350 lighthouses,
many minor lights and buoys, and a number of lightships, some of which
are being replaced by unattended sea marks or by light towers. In Britain
there are 47 pilotage authorities for the 87 pilotage districts and about 1,300
licensed pilots. Trinity House is the largest pilotage authority, licensing
some 600 pilots in 40 districts in England and Wales. In some cases the
harbour authority or local council is the pilotage authority.
Compliance with traffic separation schemes around the shores of Britain
is mandatory for all vessels of countries party to the 1972 International
Collision Regulations. The most important scheme affecting British waters
is in the Dover Strait, the world’s busiest seaway. It consists of traffic lanes
for shipping passing through the strait and inshore traffic zones for use by
local shipping. The number of collisions in the strait has fallen consider¬
ably since the scheme was introduced. Britain and France operate radar
surveillance of the strait to keep watch on ships not conforming to the
scheme and, through the Channel Navigation Information Service, broad¬
cast navigational information to ships in the Dover Strait. The MRCC at
Dover, which monitors ships passing through the strait, has a data pro¬
cessing system for detecting and tracking vessels automatically, making it
probably the most advanced centre of its kind in the world.
CIVIL AVIATION
Britain’s substantial civil air transport industry is continuing to develop to
meet the generally increasing demand for air travel, particularly inter¬
national travel. Airline services are operated by British Airways and by a
296
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Role of the
Government
Civil Aviation
Authority
Air Traffic
number of independent airlines. Their fleets contain some of the most
modern types of equipment including wide-bodied aircraft and the
Concorde supersonic aircraft with which British Airways inaugurated in
i976, jointly with Air France, the world’s first scheduled supersonic
passenger services. Many airports are being substantially modernised and
extended.
The Secretary of State for Trade is responsible for international matters
(including negotiation of air service agreements with more than 100 other
countries, the licensing and control of public transport operations into
Britain by overseas operators and British participation in the activities of
international aviation bodies), airports policy, amenity matters (such as
aircraft noise), aviation security policy and investigation of accidents.
The Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) is an independent statutory body,
responsible for the economic, technical and operational regulation of the
industry. It is also responsible for the aerodrome navigation services at
certain British airports and, jointly with the Ministry of Defence, for the
provision by the National Air Traffic Services of air navigation services.
The CAA also operates eight aerodromes in Scotland. Members of the
CAA are appointed by the Secretary of State for Trade.
Under the Civil Aviation Act 1980 the Authority’s primary objectives are
to ensure that British airlines provide air services to satisfy all major
categories of public demand at the lowest charges consistent with a high
standard of safety and an economic return for efficient operators, and to
further the reasonable interests of air transport users. Other duties are to
ensure that British airlines compete effectively on international routes, to
secure the most efficient use of airports in Britain and to have regard to the
need to minimise the adverse effects of civil aviation on the environment. In
1981-82 the Government paid a grant of £9-8 million to the CAA to cover
its loss-making operations: the operation of its Scottish aerodromes, which
received a subsidy of £3 8 million from the Scottish Office; and the
provision of air navigation services in British airspace, for which a grant of
over £5 9 million was paid (and for which grants will continue to be paid
until the arrangements for providing the services can be altered by inter¬
national agreement).
In 1981 a total of some 43 7 million passengers travelled by air (inter¬
national terminal passengers) to or from Britain, 21 per cent more than in
1980. Total capacity offered on all services by British airlines amounted to
13,087 million capacity-tonne-kilometres in 1981: 9,936 million tonne-
kilometres on scheduled services and 3,151 million tonne-kilometres on
non-scheduled services. British Airways accounts for some 80 per cent of
scheduled services flown by British airlines, whereas the charter market is
dominated by independent companies.
In 1980 the value of Britain’s overseas trade carried by air was some
£18,200 million and the proportions carried by air amounted to approxi¬
mately 18 per cent of the value of exports and of imports. Air freight is
important for the carriage of goods with a high value-to-weight ratio,
especially where speed of movement is essential. Precious stones, live
animals, medicinal and pharmaceutical products, clothing, leather and
skins, and scientific instruments are major categories where a relatively
high proportion of exports is sent by air.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
297
British Airways
Airline Operations
Independent
Airlines
British Airways is one of the world’s leading airlines, and in terms of
international passengers carried and of international passenger-kilometres
flown it is the largest in the world. During 1980-81 British Airways’
turnover was £2,061 million (including £1,750 million from airline oper¬
ations) and it recorded a net loss of £145 million. The Civil Aviation Act
1980 makes legislative provision for the Government’s intention to change
British Airways from a nationalised industry to a private sector company.
At the appropriate time the Government will effect this change and it
intends to sell a controlling shareholding in the new company to private
investors.
British Airways’ route network, covering some 578,000 kilometres (359,200
miles) of unduplicated route, is among the largest in the world. The airline
serves 140 destinations in 70 countries and in 1981-82 carried some 15 3
million passengers on scheduled services. International scheduled ser¬
vices are operated to the rest of Europe, the Middle East, the Far East,
Australasia, East and South Africa, and North America. Within Britain it
runs 1,200 services a week to 14 towns and cities. Scheduled Concorde
services are operated from London (Heathrow) to New York and to
Washington, covering these routes in about half the time taken by subsonic
aircraft.
Other activities carried out include helicopter services, engine overhaul
work, airport technical services and investments in a number of hotel
companies and air companies in other countries.
British Airways operated 154 aircraft and 39 helicopters in June 1982
(see diagram, p 298). A large investment programme is under way to replace
the older aircraft, and major orders for new aircraft include 19 Boeing 757s.
The independent airlines carry 6 million passengers a year on scheduled
services and 12 million on charter flights. The main independent scheduled
airline is British Caledonian Airways, which operates a fleet of 25 aircraft
and carried 1-9 million scheduled service passengers in 1981. Its scheduled
services are primarily to the continent of Europe; North, West and Central
Africa; South America; the United States; and the Middle East and Hong
Kong. Other operators of scheduled passenger services include British
Midland Airways, Air UK and Dan-Air Services. Britannia Airways, Dan-
Air Services, Monarch Airlines and Air Europe are the leading indepen¬
dent airlines operating charter passenger services.
Helicopters are engaged on a variety of work, but are mainly employed on
the large-scale operations connected with the development of Britain’s
offshore oil and gas resources. Bristow Helicopters, which operates a fleet of
more than 50 helicopters in Britain, is the world’s largest helicopter
contracting business. There are a small number of scheduled helicopter
passenger services in Britain, including a link between Heathrow and
Gatwick airports, and routes between Penzance and the Isles of Scilly, and
Glasgow and Fort William. Light aircraft and helicopters are also involved
in other activities, such as charter operations, search and rescue services,
crop-spraying, and aerial survey and photography.
The CAA is responsible for air safety, both airworthiness and operational
safety. Its Operations Division deals with the preparation and application
of safety requirements concerning airline and private aviation operations,
flight crew licensing and training, aerodromes, and fire and rescue services.
Safety
298
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Aircraft and Helicopters Operated by British Airways
in June 1982
Air Traffic
Control and
Navigation
Services
7 Concordes
■>)-
4 Trident Ones
mmsmMSmm
8 Trident Twos
26 BAG One-Elevens
©-
25 Boeing 747s
25 Trident Threes
23 TriStars
24 Sikorsky 61 Ns
Other aircraft Other helicopters
2 Boeing 707s 4 Sikorsky S76s
6 HS 748s 6 Boeing Vertols
1 Jet Ranger
2 Bell 212s
2 Westland 30s
The Airworthiness Division is responsible for the airworthiness standards
of aircraft registered in Britain, the licensing of aircraft maintenance
engineers and the approval of work schedules to which British transport
aircraft are maintained. The CAA is advised in its airworthiness duties by
the Airworthiness Requirements Board.
Every company operating aircraft used for public transport must possess
an Air Operator’s Certificate which is granted by the CAA when it is
satisfied that the operator is competent to secure the safe operation of its
aircraft. The CAA’s flight operations inspectors (who are experienced
airline pilots) check that satisfactory operating standards are maintained.
Each member of the flight crew of a British registered aircraft must hold
the appropriate official licence issued by the CAA. Except for pilots with
acceptable military or other qualifying experience, all applicants for a first
professional pilot’s licence must have undertaken a full-time course of
ground and flying instruction at a training body approved by the CAA.
Responsibility for civil and military air traffic control over Britain and the
surrounding seas rests with the National Air Traffic Services (NATS). The
Controller of the NATS reports to both the CAA and the Ministry of
Defence. The function of the NATS is to secure the safe, orderly and
expeditious flow of air traffic within British airspace. It also provides air
traffic services for aircraft flying over the north-eastern quarter of the North
Atlantic. At some 20 civil aerodromes, including most of the major British
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
299
Airports
Ownership and
Control
Development
airports, the NATS provides the navigation services necessary for the
operation of aircraft taking off and landing, and integrates them into the
flow of trafiic within British airspace. To provide its services, the NATS
uses radar, some 100 navigational beacons, landing aids, air/ground
communications and an extensive telecommunications network.
Of the 127 licensed civil aerodromes in Britain, about one-quarter each
handles more than 100,000 passengers a year. In 1981 Britain’s civil
airports handled a total of 59 million passengers (57-8 million terminal
passengers and 12 million in transit), and 725,500 tonnes of freight.
London’s Heathrow airport is the world’s busiest airport for international
travel, and is Britain’s most important airport for passengers and air
freight, handling 26 4 million passengers and 447,000 tonnes of freight in
1981. Gatwick, the second major airport in the London area, and the
world’s fourth busiest international airport, handled 10 7 million pas¬
sengers in 1981. Other leading airports were Manchester, Glasgow, Luton,
Birmingham, Belfast, Aberdeen and Edinburgh.
The British Airports Authority (BAA), a statutory body, owns and
manages seven airports—Heathrow, Gatwick and Stansted in south-east
England, and Glasgow, Edinburgh, Prestwick and Aberdeen in Scotland—
which handle about 75 per cent of air passengers and 85 per cent of air cargo
traffic in Britain. In 1981-82 the BAA’s income was £278 million and it
recorded a pre-tax profit of £38-6 million.
Sumburgh airport and seven small aerodromes in the Highlands and
Islands of Scotland are controlled by the CAA and Belfast’s airport
(Aldergrove) is managed by Northern Ireland Airports Ltd, a subsidiary of
the Northern Ireland Transport Holding Company. Most of the other
public airports are controlled by local authorities. Except for those con¬
trolled by the CAA, all airports used for public transport and training
flights must be licensed by the CAA. Stringent requirements, such as the
provision of adequate fire-fighting, medical and rescue services, suitable
physical characteristics and visual aids, must be satisfied before a licence is
granted. Strict aviation security measures are in force at airports.
The Government’s policy is that the growing demand for air transport
facilities in south-east England should be met by the provision of additional
capacity at existing airports, especially Heathrow, Gatwick and Stansted.
It is also encouraging the maximum use of other main regional airports.
A fourth major terminal to be built at Heathrow will raise the airport’s
capacity from 30 million to 38 million passengers a year and should be open
by 1986. At Gatwick a £100 million redevelopment programme has been
completed, increasing the airport’s annual capacity to some 16 million
passengers. A second passenger terminal, which will ultimately increase
Gatwick’s capacity to about 25 million passengers a year, is proposed and
should be in operation by 1987 if planning permission is given. The BAA is
proposing to build a new terminal and associated facilities at Stansted
which would increase the airport’s capacity to 15 million passengers a year.
Its planning application is being examined at a public inquiry.
Work is in progress to develop facilities at several of Britain’s other
airports. A new terminal complex, which will be able to handle up to 3
million passengers a year, is to be built at Birmingham airport at a cost of
some £50 million. It is expected to be open in 1984. Major expansion of
300
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
BRITISH
TELECOM
Telephone
Services
existing terminals is being implemented at Luton, Newcastle upon Tyne
and Belfast airports, while the runways at Manchester and Leeds-Bradford
airports are being substantially extended. Offshore oil and gas activities
have also stimulated expansion schemes at airports in north-east Britain,
such as at Aberdeen where a new terminal was opened in 1977.
COMMUNICATIONS
A new framework for the structure of communications services has been
established under the British Telecommunications Act 1981. This pro¬
vided for the separation of the Post Office into two corporations, one for
postal and banking services and the other for telecommunications, both of
which are responsible to the Secretary of State for Industry.
Britain has the world’s fourth largest public telecommunications business.
There are some 29 million telephones, 19 million exchange connections,
92,000 telex connections and 93,000 data transmission terminals (more
than in any country except the United States). British Telecommuni¬
cations (known as British Telecom), established under the British Telecom¬
munications Act 1981 to operate telecommunications and data processing
services, employs 245,900 people, has assets of £15,300 million, and runs
eight factories and a fleet of 54,000 telecommunications vehicles.
The Government intends to introduce legislation to change British
Telecom from a nationalised industry to a company operating under the
Companies Acts and plans to offer up to 51 per cent of the shares on the
market. It has begun to relax the statutory monopoly in telecommuni¬
cations in the interests of encouraging competition, and is to allow private
sector firms to supply, install and maintain equipment attached to the
telecommunications network with the exception of a customer’s first
telephone and the maintenance of certain private branch exchanges.
Private sector organisations are also able, under licence, to provide a wide
range of added value services offered via the public network such as
computer and word processing bureaux, message handling systems and
information retrieval systems. In February 1982 the Government issued a
licence to enable the Mercury Consortium, a joint venture between Cable
and Wireless, British Petroleum and Barclays Merchant Bank, to run an
independent telecommunications system for business, and the Consortium
hopes to connect its first customers in London early in 1983.
In 1981-82 some 21,093 million telephone calls were made in Britain
comprising 17,360 million local calls, 3,446 million trunk calls and 287
million international calls. Customers dial virtually all local and trunk
telephone calls, and about 97 per cent of international calls. Britain’s
telephone customers can dial direct to 121 countries.
Several specialised services are available by telephone, including the
‘999’ emergency dialling service enabling customers to be connected
rapidly and free of charge to the police, ambulance or fire services. British
Telecom provides a number of ‘Guidelines’ services, the most popular
being Timeline (the Speaking Clock) which received 362 million calls in
1981-82. Other services include Discline, weather forecasts, cricket scores,
racing results and a service for visitors and tourists. A radiopaging service,
providing direct dialling access over the public telephone network to small
lightweight portable receivers, has been extended to the whole of Britain to
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
301
Exchanges
Overseas Services
Prestel
form one of the largest networks of its kind in the world. An international
facsimile service, known as ‘Bureaufax’, provides high-speed facsimile
links from a number of cities to 60 other countries.
Over 1,500 electronic exchanges are in use and some 630 more have been
ordered. They are more reliable than conventional electro-mechanical
exchanges as they have very few moving parts and so require less main¬
tenance. Most electronic exchanges are of the TXE2 type, with a capacity of
up to 7,000 lines. Larger TXE4 exchanges, with a capacity of up to 40,000
lines, have been brought into service since 1976, and the first of an
improved version, the TXE4A, was brought into service in 1981. A series of
new switching and associated systems for telephone exchanges, known as
System X, using microelectronics technology, integrated digital trans¬
mission and switching, stored program (software) control and common
channel signalling, has been developed. Four System X exchanges are in
operation and four more are due to enter service in 1983.
The demand for international calls is doubling every four or five years and
British Telecom has increased the amount of equipment in its international
exchanges substantially. By the end of 1982 there will be some 26,000 cable
and satellite circuits linking Britain with other countries compared with
nearly 3,000 in 1970. A substantial proportion of the intercontinental
telephone traffic to or from Britain is carried by satellite. Britain has the
second largest interest in the International Telecommunications Satellite
Organisation (INTELSAT) and is the third largest user of facilities pro¬
vided by the International Maritime Satellite Organisation (INMARSAT).
Satellite earth stations at Goonhilly in Cornwall and Madley near Hereford
provide access to the geostationary satellites which form the basis for both
systems. Between them the earth stations operate about 7,000 circuits via
five satellite paths to over 80 countries. Britain also participates in
EUTELSAT, a European telecommunications satellite body which has
developed from an initial organisation set up by the telecommunications
administrations of over 20 European countries.
There are 29 submarine cables from Britain to the continent of Europe,
the Irish Republic and the Faroe Islands, and three cables from Britain to
North America.
British Telecom’s ‘Prestel’, the world’s first public viewdata service, was
inaugurated in 1979. It enables information and messages to be transmitted
through the telephone network from a computer for display on a suitably
equipped television set in words, figures and simple graphics. About
210,000 ‘pages’ of information are being provided from over 800 sources.
Information is available on a wide range of subjects but with special
emphasis on the needs of selected business sectors such as travel agents,
investment managers, farmers and lawyers. Prestel has more than 17,000
sets attached to its network and is the largest information service of its kind
in the world. Prestel’s ‘Gateway’ facility, which connects private computer
databases to the Prestel database and allows a wide range of services (such as
booking holidays, travel tickets or placing an immediate order with a mail
order company), came into operation in March 1982.
Prestel software has been sold to telecommunications authorities in a
number of countries. In 1981 British Telecom opened Prestel to overseas
access as the first international public viewdata service. Direct access is
302
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Data
Communications
Telex
Telegrams
Developments
available from anywhere in the world and the service is being used in 24
countries. Local support and marketing are available in Australia, the
Federal Republic of Germany, Hong Kong, the Netherlands, Sweden,
Switzerland and the United States. (‘Teletext’ information services trans¬
mitted by broadcasting instead of the telephone network are operated by
the British Broadcasting Corporation and the Independent Broadcasting
Authority, see p 391).
British Telecom’s Datel services provide for transmission of information
for computers and other automatic processors at speeds from 200 up to
9,600 bits a second over the public telephone network and up to 48,000 bits
a second on private networks. Datel services are available internationally at
speeds up to 2,400 bits a second. The services consist of a suitable telegraph
or telephone line and, when necessary, a modem (which converts digital
signals into voice frequencies for transmission). In 1980 British Telecom
started a commercial packet switching service for computer data, and in
1981 this was extended to all the main centres in Britain. A packet switching
service is also available for computer communications with a number of
other countries including Canada, the Federal Republic of Germany,
Japan and the United States, and was extended to several more countries
during 1982.
The telex service is fully automatic. Customers can dial direct to more than
170 countries and over 99 per cent of all international calls are dialled direct.
Britain’s first computer-controlled telex exchange handling international
automatic calls was installed in London in 1978 and a second was brought
into operation in June 1982. Teletex, a very fast form of telex capable of
transmitting messages at up to 3,500 words a minute (as against 80 for
telex), will be inaugurated later in 1982.
International telegrams are transmitted through a computer-controlled
Telegram Retransmission Centre in London. It is one of the largest in the
world, and has direct access via satellite, cable and radio circuits to over 87
terminals in 81 countries.
British Telecom is developing several new telecommunications services. At
the beginning of 1982 it inaugurated a new range of digital transmission
services known as X-Stream. They comprise MegaStream and KiloStream
(private circuit services), SwitchStream (a switched digital service in two
versions, the first of which is in operation as the public packet switched
service, see above and SatStream (a service due to start in 1984, which is
intended for private business telecommunications across Western Europe
and will use small-dish aerials linked by microwave radio beams to two
European communications satellites).
Optical fibres (very thin strands of glass capable of carrying large
numbers of telephone calls simultaneously) are being installed in the
telephone cable network. They are expected to result in substantial savings
as they are smaller than conventional cables and require less amplifying
equipment to boost long-distance calls. By August 1982 over 25,000
kilometres (15,500 miles) of fibre had been ordered, made up into 3,250
kilometres (2,020 miles) of cable. Over 750 kilometres (470 miles) of cable
have been brought into service including the world’s longest optical fibre
link, stretching 205 kilometres (127 miles) from London to Birmingham,
with the remainder due to begin operation by 1984-85.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
303
THE POST
OFFICE
Specialist
Services
British Telecom has an extensive research and development programme,
amounting to some £158 million in 1981-82, mostly carried out at its
research centre at Martlesham Heath (Suffolk).
The Post Office, founded in 1635, pioneered postal services and was the
first to issue adhesive postage stamps as proof of advance payment for mail.
The Royal Mail provides deliveries to 22 million addresses and handles
more than 35 million letters and parcels each working day (10,000 million
items a year). Mail is collected from over 100,000 posting boxes, as well as
from post offices and large postal users. The Post Office has a monopoly on
the conveyance of letters, but under the British Telecommunications Act
1981 the Secretary of State for Industry has the power to suspend the
monopoly in certain areas or for certain categories of mail and to license
others to provide competing services. The Government has relaxed the
monopoly on express mail, the transfer of mail between document ex¬
changes and the delivery of Christmas cards by charities.
Mechanisation of mail handling is in progress and 50 of the 84 offices
which will eventually take over the work of hundreds of sorting offices
handling letters manually are in operation. All addresses in Britain have a
postcode and the British system is the most sophisticated in the world,
allowing mechanised sorting down to part of a street on a postman’s round
and, in some cases, to an individual address. Some 35 large parcel centres,
each serving a group of counties, have taken over the work of 1,200 offices
which handled parcels manually.
There are 22,500 post offices, of which 1,600 are operated directly by the
Post Office and the remainder on an agency basis by sub-postmasters.
Besides using postal and National Girobank facilities at a post office,
a person may, among other transactions, draw a pension or a family
allowance, buy a dog licence or television licence, renew a motor vehicle
licence, obtain a British visitor’s passport, buy national insurance stamps,
and use the facilities of the National Savings Bank. In much of its counter
service the Post Office acts as agent for government departments and local
authorities.
The Post Office provides a range of specialist services. ‘Datapost’, a door-
to-door delivery service, has overnight links throughout Britain and inter¬
national services to 21 countries including most of Europe, North America
and the People’s Republic of China. An ‘Expresspost’ messenger service
provides a rapid delivery within or between 29 main cities and towns.
Intelpost, the world’s first international public facsimile transmission
service sending letters and other documents by satellite, was inaugurated
in 1980 between London and Toronto. The system has been expanded to
provide high-speed electronic mail links between 50 towns and cities in
Britain as well as to and from the United States, the Netherlands and
further cities in Canada. The Philatelic Bureau in Edinburgh handles about
one-third of the Post Office’s philatelic business, much of it involving sales
to overseas collectors or dealers. The British Postal Consultancy Service
offers advice and assistance on all aspects of postal business to overseas
postal administrations, and over 30 countries have used its services since
1965.
i6 Employment
TRENDS IN
EMPLOYMENT
As a major industrial country, Britain has a labour force with high levels of
technical and commercial skill, but it is acknowledged that the increasing
pace of technological change calls for even greater flexibility in the work¬
force and improvements in training, which are being made. With develop¬
ments in microtechnology affecting much of industry, there is considerable
public discussion about the balance between employment opportunities
created by new technology and jobs lost as a result of increasingly rapid
automation. The Government deplores the major human problems of the
high levels of unemployment which Britain, in common with other in¬
dustrialised countries, has suffered in recent years (in September 1982,
3 3 million or 14 per cent of the working population were unemployed),
and has introduced a range of measures to provide work and mitigate hard¬
ship during a period of decline of traditional industries, which is seen as an
unavoidable process in the restructuring of industry and employment on a
technologically advanced basis. Market forces are considered to be a major
determinant in this, but the Government plays an important role in the
labour market by providing employment services; by supplementing the
training undertaken by employers; by policies to promote regional de¬
velopment and labour mobility; by measures to alleviate unemployment
and promote better use of manpower; through legislation to regulate terms
and conditions of employment and improve industrial relations; and
through legislation relating to health and safety at work.
The total workforce in June 1981 was 26-1 million, 60 per cent of the total
population aged 16 and over. If the unemployed, the self-employed, and
Table 26: Manpower in Britain 1971-81
Thousands
Employees
Year in
(June) employment
Armed
Self-employed Unemployed* forces
Total
working
population
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
22,122
22,121
22,664
22,789
22,710
22,543
22,619
22,757
22,920
22,511
21,198
1,909
1,899
T947
T925
T937
1,909
1,880
1,868
1,856"
1,856"
1,856"
724
804
575
542
866
T332
I,45°
1,446
T344
1,660
2,681
368
37i
361
345
336
336
327
318
314
323
334
25,123
25,195
25,547
25,601
25,849
26,120
26,276
26,389
26,434
26,350
26,069
Source: Employment Gazette
“Part-time workers are counted as full units.
^Excluding adult students.
Estimates.
EMPLOYMENT
305
the armed forces are omitted from the working population, there re¬
mained 212 million employees (12 3 million men and 8 9 million women)
in employment. The percentage of women in employment (particularly
those working part-time) continues to rise, although at a reduced rate
compared with previous years. The great majority of the working popu¬
lation work for a wage or salary, but nearly 2 million are self-employed.
Despite the increase in the population of working age, the labour force has
not grown significantly in the early 1980s.
The distribution of employees by industry in 1971 and 1981 is shown in
T able 27. There has been a substantial change in the pattern of employment
Table 27: Analysis of Civil Employment in Britain 1971 and 1981
Industry or Service
1971 1981“
Thousands Per cent Thousands Per cent
Primary sector
Agriculture, forestry and
fishing 734 31 657 2-7
Mining and quarrying 397 1-7 345 i -4
Manufacturing industries
Chemicals and allied
industries 483 20 471 19
Metal manufacture 558 2 3 402 i -6
Textiles, leather and
clothing 1,147 4'8 831 34
Engineering and allied
industries 33650 15-2 33I5° I2'9
Food, drink and tobacco 777 3 2 690 2 8
Other manufactures 13565 6 5 !3385 5'7
Other production
industries
Construction 135 9 4 6-6 13672 69
Gas, electricity and water 377 i -6 347 14
Services
Transport and
communications 13639 6-8 13582 65
Distributive trades 3,088 12 9 35i59 I3 °
Professional, financial,
scientific and
miscellaneous services* 6,512 27-1 8,081 33 2
National and local
government service I3509 6 3 I3596 6 5
Total in civil employment 24,031 24,367
of whom employees 22,122 22,511
Self-employed I3909 i3856c
Source: Department of Employment
‘'Provisional estimates.
^Excludes private domestic service.
■June 1979 estimate.
The differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
306
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
during the last decade, with the growth of employment in service industries
and its decline in manufacturing industries. New and, in some cases,
cheaper services have been introduced through advances in technology,
while improvements in living standards have led to an increasing demand
for services. Within manufacturing, over the same period, there has been a
rise in the proportion of non-manual workers from 27 4 per cent in October
1971 to 29-6 per cent in September 1981.
UNEMPLOY¬
MENT
With some fluctuations unemployment rose sharply during the 1970s and
by 1982 reached the highest level since the 1930s. While remaining rela¬
tively low in the south-east of England, it has been consistently higher in
those parts of the country which have the greatest dependence on tradi¬
tional industries. Government measures to assist the unemployed have
been expanded for 1982-83 and are expected to cost £1,500 million.
Special emphasis has been placed on those for unemployed young people
and especially school leavers, whose numbers are growing partly because of
the birth-rate ‘bulge’ of the 1960s but mainly due to the general increase in
unemployment. The main measure for young people is the Youth Oppor¬
tunities Programme, which in 1982-83 will provide around 630,000 young
people with work experience and training opportunities designed to im¬
prove their prospects of obtaining permanent jobs. There is also the
Community Industry scheme for unemployed young people who suffer
additional personal or social disadvantages.
As part of a new training initiative (see p 309) it is intended to replace the
Youth Opportunities Programme in 1983 with a comprehensive Youth
Training Scheme which will provide a bridge for a year between school and
work for all 16-year-old school leavers. One of the ultimate aims of the new
training initiative is to reach the position where all young people under 18
have the opportunity of continuing in full-time education or entering a
period of planned work experience combined with work-related training
and education. A Young Workers’ Scheme encourages employers to take
on more young people at wage rates which reflect their lack of training and
relative inexperience.
While it recognises that special measures cannot achieve as much for the
adult unemployed as for the young, the Government wants to ease the
transition as far as possible to a situation where new jobs can be founded on
sound economic development. The emphasis in adult schemes is placed on
work of environmental improvement, with encouragement for projects
arranged by voluntary agencies. A new nationwide scheme for the longer
term unemployed, incorporating the Community Enterprise Programme,
is to be introduced in October 1982. The scheme will be based upon
projects for community work put forward by sponsors such as local
authorities, voluntary organisations and churches. Other measures for the
adult unemployed include: a scheme to encourage employers to use short-
time working as an alternative to redundancies; a ‘job release’ scheme to
encourage older workers to take early retirement and release jobs for
unemployed people; a ‘job introduction’ scheme for disabled people; a
scheme (to be introduced at the beginning of 1983) to encourage job
sharing; and support for training places in industry. Experimental new
enterprise allowance schemes, to encourage the growth of new businesses,
have been set up in five areas; longer term unemployed people who live and
work in these areas can claim an allowance of £40 a week while they start a
new business. Various other government measures to stimulate economic
EMPLOYMENT
307
FINDING
EMPLOYMENT
Manpower
Services
Commission
Employment
Services
Services for
Disabled People
activity by assistance and encouragement to small firms (see p 207) and the
establishment of enterprise zones (see p 171) may assist job creation.
In Great Britain the Department of Employment is generally responsible
for employment policy, industrial relations and pay policy and for the
payment of unemployment benefit, but the Manpower Services Commis¬
sion (MSC) advises the Government on manpower policy issues.
The MSC, on which employers, employees, local authorities and educa¬
tional interests are represented, is separate from the Government but
accountable to the Secretaries of State for Employment, Scotland and
Wales. Scottish and Welsh committees of the MSC consider special
Scottish and Welsh aspects of manpower issues. Most of the MSC’s
activities are financed from public funds. It is advised by a network of
district manpower committees on which employers, employees and other
local interests are represented.
The MSC’s main duty is to help people to select, train for, obtain and
retain jobs, and to assist employers to obtain employees. The services in
Northern Ireland are run on similar lines by the Department of Economic
Development.
The main public employment services (other than the careers service) are
provided in Great Britain by the MSC’s Employment Service which
provides a comprehensive service for employers needing staff and for
people, whether or not already in employment, seeking jobs. It operates
through a network of about 1,000 local jobcentres which handle all occu¬
pations except professional, scientific, technical and managerial, for which
the MSC’s Professional and Executive Recruitment is responsible. Job-
centres, where the provision of self-service facilities for job-seekers is a
standard feature, have largely replaced employment offices where such
facilities do not always exist.
From October 1982 registration for employment will be voluntary for all
unemployed people, whether or not they wish to claim benefits. Employers
will continue to notify vacancies on a voluntary basis. In the year to March
1982, 6 3 million people registered for employment, i-8 million vacancies
were notified and 15 million people were placed in employment; these
statistics include job-seekers who were registered for work and placed in a
job more than once during the year.
The public employment service has long provided a resettlement service to
disabled people. Over 500 specially trained Disablement Resettlement
Officers advise on rehabilitation and training courses and on the compre¬
hensive range of special schemes and facilities available. They can also
advise employers about employing disabled people, and the grants avail¬
able for adaptation to premises and equipment so that they can employ or
retrain a disabled person. In 1981-82 the MSC found jobs for some 35,000
disabled people. The Disabled Persons (Employment) Act 1944 requires
employers who employ 20 or more people to include 3 per cent registered
disabled people within their workforce. The quota scheme has, however,
become less effective over the years and is now under review. As part of its
‘Fit for Work’ campaign to improve the employment prospects of disabled
people, the MSC has instituted a scheme of annual awards to give public
recognition to firms which excel in carrying out constructive policies on the
employment of disabled people.
3°8
Geographical
Mobility Schemes
Professional and
Executive
Recruitment
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The MSC’s Employment Service runs a network of 27 Employment
Rehabilitation Centres, which provide facilities for those who have been ill
or injured or are handicapped to return to working fitness (some 16,000 a
year). The Service also supports a number of agency centres run by local
authorities and voluntary bodies specialising in the employment rehabili¬
tation of the blind, the mentally ill and people with cerebral palsy.
Sheltered employment is provided for the severely disabled in Great
Britain by Remploy Ltd, a non-profit-making company, and in Northern
Ireland by Ulster Sheltered Employment Ltd, a company constituted
similarly to Remploy, and by local authorities and voluntary organisations.
Sheltered Employment Procurement and Consultancy Services is a unit of
the MSC set up to offer consultancy, and other services, to sheltered
workshops.
In order to help to fill vacancies which cannot be filled locally, the MSC can
provide grants, allowances and other financial help under the Job Search
and Employment Transfer Scheme to assist people who are unemployed,
or under threat of redundancy, to look for and move to jobs in other areas.
The help available includes the cost of attending interviews, visiting new
areas to look for work, and living away from home and moving home to the
new area. The National Mobility Scheme (see p 166) makes movement
easier for public sector housing tenants in England and Wales. Similar aims
in Scotland are promoted by provisions in the Tenants’ Rights (Scotland)
Act 1980.
Professional and Executive Recruitment (PER) is a specialist branch of the
MSC which helps employers looking for professional, managerial, scientific
or technical staff and assists people seeking employment at this level. PER
operates nationally, through a network of offices, and offers a comprehen¬
sive recruitment service based on a weekly jobs newspaper which is issued
to all enrolled job-seekers. For them the service is free, while employers are
charged a fee based on the type of service used. There is a broadly similar
service, known as Professional and Executive Personnel and free to both
employers and candidates, in Northern Ireland.
Careers Service Local education authorities must under the Employment and Training Act
1973 provide a careers service to include vocational guidance for people
attending all educational institutions (except universities, which have their
own careers service) and an employment service for those leaving them.
Authorities also provide an employment service for people, especially
young people, in their early years at work. They work closely with the
MSC’s Employment Service which also caters for those who have left
school and choose to use its facilities in preference to those of the careers
service.
In Northern Ireland the careers service is an integral part of the Depart¬
ment of Economic Development.
The MSC Careers and Occupational Information Centre publishes a
wide range of material to help people looking for jobs to make an informed
choice, and distributes careers literature to some 15,000 schools, careers
offices and other centres.
TRAINING The main responsibility for carrying out industrial and commercial train-
SERVICES ing lies with individual employers, but in recent years the MSC, with
government support, has evolved a comprehensive strategy to help to
EMPLOYMENT
309
Training in
Industry
Training
Opportunities
Scheme
Training
Services to
Industry
improve the supply of trained manpower needed by the economy, to
provide opportunities for people to acquire new skills, and to improve the
effectiveness of training generally. The MSC’s Training Services Division
is responsible for putting these programmes into effect. In 1981 the
Government announced a new initiative on training, spelling out three
important objectives for the 1980s and beyond: better arrangements for
skilled training to agreed standards; improving the vocational education
and training of all young people; and opening up more opportunities for
adults to train. This was followed by a White Paper setting out the
Government’s plans for achieving these objectives. There will be increased
incentives for employers to provide better training for young people in jobs
and also a new Youth Training Scheme for young people generally, setting
a target date of 1985 for recognised standards for all the main craft,
technical and professional skills to replace time-serving and age-restricted
apprenticeships. There will also be an ‘Open Tech’ programme to make
training at a technical and supervisory level accessible to all adults who can
benefit from it. Seven or eight major operational projects are to be com¬
missioned by the end of 1982.
There are a number of statutory industrial training boards and other
industrial training organisations concerned with the promotion of training
within their respective industries. Statutory industrial training boards may
raise funds by a levy on employers within the industry. Following a re¬
appraisal of the effectiveness of the boards, their number is being reduced
and will be funded entirely by the industry concerned. The Government
has encouraged the development of effective voluntary training arrange¬
ments in industries where boards are being abolished.
The Training Opportunities Scheme (TOPS) complements the training
given in industry and commerce by providing people aged 19 and over with
the opportunity to acquire new skills. Training is carried out at the
Training Services Division’s own skillcentres and annexes and at many
colleges and employers’ establishments. Skillcentre courses concentrate
mainly on engineering, construction and automotive trades and those
elsewhere on clerical and commercial, management, technician and other
skills. Special priority has been given to expanding and developing tech¬
nician training and, in particular, electronics engineering courses biased
towards microprocessor applications. In all, about 500 different courses are
available in a wide range of occupations. Trainees are paid allowances
which vary with domestic responsibilities and may receive, among other
things, travelling expenses and lodging and meals allowances. Some 61,000
adults were trained under TOPS in 1981-82.
Through its training services to industry the MSC provides training in the
construction and engineering trades designed to equip selected employees
with new or improved skills of direct and immediate benefit to their
companies. This training, specially tailored to the employer’s needs, is
carried out either at the local skillcentre or in the company’s own workshop.
The MSC also provides regular courses in instructional techniques for
skilled craftsmen and programmes of training in supervisory skills in the
broad areas of leadership and safety. Training services at skillcentres and
courses at instructor training colleges are also available to trainees from
overseas.
3io
CONDITIONS OF
EMPLOYMENT
Immigrant
Workers
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Britain has been a pioneer in the introduction of protective legislation for
the safety, health and welfare of employees. The determination by statute
of minimum wages, holidays and holiday pay is limited to certain trades and
industries where the organisation of employers or workers, or both, is
inadequate to negotiate collective agreements and to ensure their observance.
The Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act 1978 provides consider¬
able safeguards for employees in their terms of employment.
An employer must give employees written information on their terms
and conditions of employment, the disciplinary rules applicable to them
and the procedure available to employees wishing to raise complaints;
minimum periods of notice when employment is to be terminated are also
laid down for both employers and employees. Employees with a minimum
period of service of two years are entitled to lump-sum redundancy pay¬
ments if their jobs cease to exist (for example, because of technological
improvements or a fall in demand) and their employers cannot offer
suitable alternative work, the cost being partly met from a fund subscribed
to by both sides of industry. Protection against unfair dismissal is provided
by machinery under which an employee who has been in continuous
employment for one year or more may complain against an employer of
unfair dismissal, and, if successful, obtain reinstatement, re-engagement or
compensation; under the Employment Act 1980, however, new employees
in companies employing 20 or fewer people must be employed for two years
before they have the right to complain of unfair dismissal. Legal support is
given to the right to trade union organisation by making it unfair to dismiss
a person because of membership or participation in the activities of an
independent trade union; rights of employees are also protected in regard
to penalisation short of dismissal because of trade union membership or
activities. Other rights include limited payment when work is not available
for reasons other than as a result of trade dispute, and maternity rights for
female employees, including protection from dismissal because of preg¬
nancy, time off for antenatal care, maternity pay for the first six weeks of
absence, and the right, within certain limits, to return to work after
confinement.
In general, people coming to Britain for employment need a work permit
issued by the Department of Employment. People admitted as holders of
work permits may change their jobs only with the approval of the Depart¬
ment of Employment but the Home Office will consider an application to
remove the conditions attached to their stay after four years in approved
employment, and, if granted, a worker may change employment without
restriction. Among other conditions, work permits are issued only for work
requiring a recognised professional qualification, or a high degree of skill or
experience, where the Department of Employment is satisfied that the
worker is necessary and there is no suitable worker in Britain or in other
European Community countries to fill the post, and where the wages and
conditions are not less favourable than for similar work. In general, the age
limits for permits in most categories are 23-54 years. People coming for
certain kinds of specialist employment (for example, doctors or dentists
taking up professional appointments; ministers of religion; representatives
of overseas newspapers, news agencies or broadcasting organisations; the
self-employed) do not require work permits but may require entry clear¬
ances issued by a British Consulate or High Commission.
Permits are also issued under the Training and Work Experience
EMPLOYMENT
Discrimination
Employment of
Women and
Children
Earnings
311
Scheme for nationals of countries outside the European Community who
are undertaking limited periods of training or work experience leading to
the acquisition of a particular occupational skill or qualification and to
young people from outside the European Community to undertake short
periods of employment to broaden their industrial or commercial ex¬
perience and, if appropriate, to improve their knowledge of English.
European Community workers entering another member state have the
same rights as nationals of that state as regards facilities of the national
employment services, pay and working conditions, trade union rights,
vocational training and retraining facilities, access to housing and property,
and social security and industrial injury benefits.
The Race Relations Act 1976 (see p 29) makes it unlawful to discriminate
on grounds of colour, race, nationality (including citizenship) or ethnic or
national origin, in employment, training and related matters. The Depart¬
ment of Employment operates a Race Relations Employment Advisory
Service with advisers based in the main areas where ethnic minorities have
settled. Its general aim is to promote equal opportunity in employment and
its advisers offer help and guidance to employers and unions on a wide range
of issues which arise in the employment of a multiracial workforce.
Legislation forbids any employment of children under 14 years of age,
and employment in any industrial undertaking of children who have not
reached the statutory minimum school-leaving age (16); of women and
young people underground in mines and in certain other dangerous
occupations (for example, certain processes connected with lead manu¬
facture); and of women in factories and workshops within four weeks after
childbirth. It also limits and defines the permissible hours of employment
for women and young people.
The employment provisions of the Sex Discrimination Act (see p 28)
make it unlawful to discriminate on the grounds of sex or marital status in
employment, training and related matters. The Equal Pay Act 1970 re¬
quires that a woman doing the same or broadly similar work as a man, or
work that has been given equal value by job evaluation, should receive equal
pay and conditions of employment.
Pay for manual occupations, and increasingly for non-manual occupations,
is normally set by collective bargaining (see p 317). In a small number of
industries and trades legally enforceable minimum rates are set by wages
councils.
Basic rates of pay vary widely, and in private industry rates paid locally
often exceed the rates specified in national agreements. Higher rates are
usually paid for overtime and shift work, and weekly earnings may be
further increased by incentive bonus schemes. Piecework, or payment-by¬
results, is still common, though of declining importance as production
methods in many industries increasingly influence the pace of work.
According to the latest annual survey conducted by the Department of
Employment into the earnings and hours of work of manual workers, the
average weekly earnings in April 1981 of full-time male workers aged 21
and over were, including overtime, £140-50, while for full-time female
workers aged 18 and over they were £91-40. Women’s earnings are thus
markedly lower than those of men, partly because on average they work
shorter hours, with less overtime paid at premium rates, and partly because
they tend to be concentrated in the less well-paid jobs.
Hours of Work
Holidays with
Pay
Additional
Benefits
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Remuneration in commercial, technical and professional careers is
normally by annual salary paid monthly, often on a scale carrying annual
increments. Starting salaries may be in the range of £3,000 to £3,500 (lower
for 16- to 18-year-old trainees and higher for some graduates entering
industry). Most of the senior posts in business, the professions and the Civil
Service command salaries in the range of £14,000 to £20,000 a year gross
before tax. The posts with salaries in the range of £20,000 to £50,000 a year
include those of Cabinet Ministers, top-ranking judicial appointments, the
highest positions in government departments and the largest municipal
authorities, editors of daily newspapers, leading members of professions
and in the higher managerial posts in industry, commerce and banking.
Salaries of chairmen of major companies may exceed £75,000 a year gross,
and other people such as star entertainers often receive more through fees
or fixed contracts. The range of net incomes in the country as a whole is
reduced by a system of progressive direct taxation.
The basic working week in Britain is in the range 37 5-40 hours for manual
work and 35-38 for non-manual work; a five-day week is usually worked.
Actual hours worked in manual occupations differ from their basic hours;
in 1981 they were 44 for men compared with 39 5 for women. Men and
women in non-manual occupations generally work less overtime than
manual workers.
National legislation limits and defines permissible hours of work for
women and young people in industrial work—the maximum, with limited
exceptions, being 48 hours a week and 10 hours a day (9 hours a day for
6-day-week workers) in premises covered by the Factories Act for adult
women over 18 and young people between 16 and 18. The employment of
women and young people at night is in principle prohibited in industrial
undertakings, except for young men over 16 working in some continuous-
process industries (subject to certain conditions). The Health and Safety
Executive can make exemptions from these restrictions to maintain or
increase efficiency. In general, the hours of work of adult men, or of people
not working in factories, are not restricted by statute.
Apart from industries where conditions are controlled by wages councils
(see p 319), there are no general statutory entitlements to holidays and
holiday entitlements are normally determined by collective agreements.
These generally provide for at least four weeks’ paid holiday a year, and
more than 60 per cent of manual workers covered by agreements have
entitlements of more than four weeks. Non-manual workers tend to have
longer holidays than manual workers. Additional holidays, dependent
upon length of service, are also quite common.
Additional benefits exist in varying degrees. About half of employees in
employment are covered by pension schemes provided by their employers.
Many employees are also covered by occupational sick pay schemes which
are additional or complementary to the state schemes, and by schemes to
provide private medical treatment. A smaller number are covered by
schemes for redundancy payments above the statutory minimum. Such
benefits are more usual among clerical and professional employees
receiving a standard salary than among manual workers, who are more
likely to have the opportunity to augment their pay. Employees may
have use of a company car and some firms provide profit-sharing and
EMPLOYMENT
313
Employers’ Health
Services
Other Amenities
Human
Relations in
Industry
TRADE
UNIONS
share-saving schemes. In accord with its view that share ownership and
profit-sharing can help in developing employees’ understanding of, and
commitment to, business and industry, the Government has extended
fiscal measures designed to encourage profit-sharing.
Social security benefits, which include unemployment, sickness and
industrial injury benefits, are described in the Social Welfare chapter.
Many employers voluntarily maintain medical services for their employees
over and above the statutory requirements. The big employers, including
the State and the boards of nationalised industries, have taken the lead but a
number of smaller factories also provide medical services and in a few cases
have joined together in group medical services.
An increasing number of firms pay part or all of the cost of recreational
facilities. Some have their own rehabilitation centres or support convales¬
cent homes. The provision of low-priced meals at the place of employment
has become usual in large undertakings and quite common in smaller ones.
Many offices and shops which are unable to provide canteen facilities for
their staff-have adopted luncheon voucher schemes.
Research has been sponsored or conducted by the Social Science Research
Council and the Medical Research Council into the factors affecting human
relationships and efficiency in industry. A number of independent bodies
also research and advise on matters such as management and job satis¬
faction. The Department of Employment’s Work Research Unit, advised
by a steering group chaired by a minister on which the CBI (for industry)
and the TUC (for trade unions) are represented, advises employers and
trade unions on improving the quality of working life.
In nearly all industries and occupations some workers (and in some in¬
dustries nearly all workers) are organised into trade unions. These have
grown up gradually and independently over many years and, consequently,
their form and organisation vary considerably, as do their traditions.
During the 1970s trade unionism increased particularly among clerical,
supervisory, technical and administrative workers but rising unemploy¬
ment has led to a decline in union membership, especially in unions
representing manual workers. Trade unions may be organised either by
occupation (for example, they may recruit clerks or fitters wherever em¬
ployed) or by industry. Some are based on a combination of both principles.
In some companies membership of the relevant trade union is required by
agreement between the employer and union (‘closed shops’). At the end of
1980 the total membership of British trade unions was 13 million. There
were 438 unions, but nearly 80 per cent of all trade unionists were in the 25
largest unions, each with a membership of 100,000 or over. Among the
largest unions are the Transport and General Workers Union (1-9 million
members), the Amalgamated Union of Engineering Workers (1-3 million)
and the General and Municipal Workers Union (916,000); of the non-
manual workers’ unions, which have grown considerably in size in recent
years while manual workers’ unions have tended to decline, the largest
is the National and Local Government Officers’ Association (782,000
members).
The Certification Officer appointed under the Employment Protection
3M
Trades Union
Congress
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Act 1975 is required to maintain a list of trade unions. To be eligible for
entry on the list a trade union must show that it consists wholly or mainly of
workers and that its principal purposes include the regulation of relations
between workers and employers, or between workers and employers’
associations. Certain rights and privileges are reserved for independent
trade unions.
The central organisation of most large unions consists of a national
executive council, usually elected by and responsible to the annual con¬
ference of delegates from local branches. Between conferences, councils are
the highest authority of unions, and carry out policy decisions made by the
conference delegates. Most unions also have regional and district organi¬
sations. At the level of the individual member there are local branches,
covering one or more workplaces. Members may attend branch meetings,
make suggestions about terms and conditions of employment, discuss the
work of the union, and take part in the election of the union’s officers. The
branch takes action on certain matters considered to be entirely, or mainly,
of local interest and forwards its views on wider issues for action by the
union’s national or regional bodies. The organising of members in in¬
dividual places of work, and the negotiation of local pay agreements with
managements at the factory or plant, may be done by full-time district
officials of the union, or, increasingly, by ‘shop stewards’, who are chosen
by their fellow members in the place of work to represent them. Trade
unions vary in the degree to which shop stewards are integrated into their
organisation. Where two or more unions have members in the same work¬
place, shop stewards’ committees may be formed to discuss matters of com¬
mon concern.
Many unions provide ‘strike pay’ for members involved in official in¬
dustrial action which may vary from an amount equal to full net pay to a
largely nominal sum. They also provide legal advice for members who
suffer injury or contract diseases at work, and may pay members’ legal costs
where a case for compensation goes to court. Some unions pay benefits in
case of illness, accident, death and retirement (additional to those payable
under the national insurance scheme) financed out of membership contri¬
butions. Many trade unions are affiliated to the Labour Party. Any trade
union wishing to use money for political purposes must set up a separate
fund, subject to special rules, one of which must allow any member who
objects to contributing to the fund to opt out.
In Britain the national centre of the trade union movement is the Trades
Union Congress (TUC), which was founded in 1868. The TUC’s objects
are to promote the interests of its affiliated organisations and to improve the
economic and social conditions of working people. Its affiliated member¬
ship comprises 108 trade unions which together represent n-6 million
workpeople, or 90 per cent of all trade unionists in Britain, and it exercises
power less through a formal structure than through influence. The TUC
deals with all general questions which concern trade unions both nationally
and internationally and gives assistance on questions relating to particular
trades or industries. Through membership of the National Economic
Development Council (see p 190), it participates in discussions relating to
the national economy. There are eight TUC regional councils for England,
and a Wales Trades Union Council.
The annual Congress convenes in September to discuss matters of
concern to trade unionists and to employees generally. It elects a General
EMPLOYMENT
315
Scotland
and Northern
Ireland
Legal
Framework
Council which represents it between Congresses and is responsible for
carrying out Congress decisions, watching economic and social develop¬
ments, providing educational and advisory services to unions, and present¬
ing to the Government the trade union viewpoint on economic, social and
industrial issues. The council is also empowered to mediate in inter-union
disputes in certain circumstances, and uses its authority to deal with
unauthorised and unconstitutional stoppages of work, as well as official
disputes.
The TUC, as well as many individual unions, conducts extensive educa¬
tional services for members, mainly concerned with industrial subjects,
trade unionism and the principles and practice of industrial relations.
The TUC plays an active part in international trade union activity,
through its affiliation to the International Confederation of Free Trade
Unions and the European Trade Union Confederation. It also nominates
the British workers’ delegation to the annual International Labour
Conference.
Trade unions in Scotland also have their own national central body, the
Scottish Trades Union Congress, which in many respects is similar in
constitution and function to the TUC. Trade unions in Northern Ireland
are represented by the Northern Ireland Committee of the Irish Congress
of Trade Unions (ICTU), though the majority of trade unionists in
Northern Ireland belong to unions based in Great Britain. Almost 90 per
cent of Northern Ireland trade unionists are members of organisations
affiliated to the ICTU, while the majority belong to unions which are also
affiliated to the TUC.
The Trade Union and Labour Relations Act 1974 defines the status of trade
unions and employers’ associations and sets out certain legal requirements
which they must observe. The Act confers immunities on those organising
actions taken in support of a trade dispute, allows peaceful picketing, and
also provides that collective agreements shall not be legally enforceable
unless they are written agreements and specifically provide for this.
The Employment Protection Act 1975 placed the Advisory, Conciliation
and Arbitration Service on a statutory basis, provided for the appointment
of a Certification Officer and for the setting up of the Central Arbitration
Committee. It also established an Employment Appeal Tribunal to hear
appeals concerning decisions of the Certification Officer and of industrial
tribunals. (Industrial tribunals are independent judicial bodies which deal,
in general, with complaints from employees on infringements of individual
rights under a number of Acts concerning, for example, redundancy
payments, contracts of employment, equal pay, unfair dismissals and sex
discrimination.)
The Employment Act 1980 and 1982 Employment Bill seek to redress
the balance between rights and responsibilities in industrial relations, seen
by the Government as having shifted too much against the interests of
employers and employees in favour of the trade unions. The 1980 Act
enables the Government to make funds available to encourage the wider use
of secret union ballots and to produce codes of practice to promote good
industrial relations. It limits lawful picketing to the picket’s own place of
work and restricts the scope for secondary action such as blacking and
sympathetic strikes. It provides greater protection for the individual in
relation to the closed shop and removes legal protection from any new
3i6
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
closed shop which has not been approved in a secret ballot by 80 per cent of
the employees affected. It makes a number of changes to employment
protection legislation, particularly to help small firms. As provided for in
the Act, the Government has published codes of practice on the conduct of
picketing and the closed shop.
The 1982 Bill is designed to carry the process further. It would increase
the compensation for employees unfairly dismissed for non-membership
or membership of a union and introduce compensation (from government
funds) for certain employees dismissed because of non-membership of a
union in a closed shop between 1974 and 1980, when they had no
protection. The Bill would also remove legal protection from all closed
shops (not only from new ones, as in the 1980 Act) where within one or two
years of the legislation taking effect the closed shop had not been supported
in a secret ballot held in the previous five years by 80 per cent of the
employees affected or by 85 per cent of those voting in the ballot. Where
legal protection was removed, any dismissal for non-membership of a
union would be unfair. Terms in commercial contracts specifying the use of
union labour only would be made unenforceable and discrimination on the
basis of union membership in the awarding of contracts would be made
unlawful. Industrial action which sought to persuade employers to dis¬
criminate in this way or to interfere with the supply of goods or services on
grounds of union membership would be unlawful. The Bill would also end
the position which gives trade unions almost complete immunity from all
civil actions by bringing their position into line with that of their individual
officials and members. This would mean that trade unions would have
immunity only for action taken in furtherance or contemplation of a lawful
trade dispute. There are also proposed changes to the definition of a trade
dispute upon which immunity for civil actions depends. Disputes between
employer and employees (that is, most industrial action) would continue
to qualify as lawful trade disputes. Disputes which would become unlaw¬
ful are those where there is no disagreement between employer and his
employees, or those which have little to do with the normal subject of a
trade dispute (such as terms and conditions of work) or concern matters
wholly outside Britain, and other such disputes which do not involve
employers.
Northern Ireland has a broadly similar but separate system of industrial
relations legislation.
EMPLOYERS’ Many employers in Britain are members of employers’ organisations, some
ORGANISATIONS of which are wholly concerned with labour matters although others are also
concerned with commercial matters or trade associations. The primary
aims of such organisations are to help to establish suitable terms and
conditions of employment, including a sound wage structure and proper
standards of safety, health and welfare; to promote good relations with
employees and the efficient use of manpower; and to provide means of
settling any disputes which may arise. Combined employers’ organisations
and trade associations may also represent members’ points of view as
manufacturers or traders to the Government on commercial matters.
Employers’ organisations are usually organised on an industry basis
rather than a product basis, for example, the Engineering Employers’
Federation. A few are purely local in character or deal with a section of
an industry; most are national in scope and are concerned with the whole
of an industry. In some of the main industries there are local or regional
EMPLOYMENT
317
Confederation
of British
Industry
INDUSTRIAL
RELATIONS
Collective
Bargaining and
Joint
Consultation
organisations combined into national federations, while in others, within
which different firms are engaged in making different principal products,
there is a complex structure with national and regional federations for parts
of an industry as well as for the industry as a whole. Altogether there are
some 150 national employers’ organisations, which negotiate the national
collective agreements for their industry with the trade unions concerned;
most of these national organisations belong to the Confederation of British
Industry.
The Confederation of British Industry (CBI) is the largest central em¬
ployers’ organisation in Britain, representing directly or indirectly some
300,000 companies which together employ 12 million people. It exists
primarily to ensure that Government, national and international institu¬
tions and the public understand the needs, intentions and problems of
businessmen. Membership ranges from the smallest to the largest com¬
panies, private and nationalised, and covers a broad spectrum which
includes manufacturing, agriculture, construction, distribution, mining,
finance, retailing and insurance. Most national employers’ organisations,
trade associations and some chambers of commerce are members. Policy is
determined by a council of 400 members, and there is a permanent staff of
350 including regional offices and an office in Brussels. The CBI is the
British member of the Union of Industries of the European Community.
The CBI nominates the employers’ representatives on the National
Economic Development Council, and on the Manpower Services Commis¬
sion, the Health and Safety Commission and the Advisory, Conciliation
and Arbitration Service.
The structure of industrial relations in Britain has been established mainly
on a voluntary basis. The system is based chiefly on the organisation of
employees and employers into trade unions and employers’ associations,
and on freely conducted negotiations between them at all levels. The State
is ready to provide assistance where the organisation of employees, em¬
ployers, or both, is inadequate to conduct negotiations, or where the usual
methods of resolving disagreements have failed. The number of stoppages
of work due to industrial disputes in 1981 was the lowest since 1941, while
the number of working days lost was well below the 1980 figure and less
than a third of the annual average for the period 1971-80. Because of the
publicity they receive, strikes are commonly thought to occur much more
frequently in Britain than in other countries. International comparisons
show, however, that Britain’s record on industrial disputes is better than
those of a number of other major industrial countries, ranking about half¬
way in a list of 19 countries drawn up by the International Labour Office.
In most industries terms and conditions of employment and procedures for
the conduct of industrial relations are settled by negotiation and agreement
between employers and trade unions. Agreements may be industry-wide,
supplemented as necessary by local agreements in companies or factories
(plant bargaining). In the public sector, agreements are generally reached
at industry level. In some industries, companies and factories, negotiations
are conducted by meetings held when necessary, while in others, joint
negotiating councils or committees have been established on a permanent
basis. The scope of the various joint bodies (from the national joint in-
Advisory,
Conciliation and
Arbitration Service
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
dustrial councils for whole industries to the works councils and committees
in individual workplaces) varies widely, and has frequently been extended
to cover such additional matters as production plans, absenteeism, train¬
ing, education and welfare. Normally these arrangements for collective
bargaining suffice to settle all questions which are raised, but provision is
sometimes made for matters not so settled to be referred for settlement to
independent conciliation or arbitration. The Employment Protection Act
1975 mside provision for information needed for collective bargaining
purposes to be disclosed by employers to trade unions, subject to certain
safeguards.
There are standing arrangements for consultation at national level be¬
tween the Government, the TUG, the CBI, and the nationalised industries
through the National Economic Development Council on matters in which
employers and workers have a common interest. The operation of collective
bargaining has from time to time been restricted in an attempt to control
inflation.
The Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service (ACAS) has the
general duty of promoting the improvement of industrial relations, and
in particular of encouraging the extension of collective bargaining and
the development and (where necessary) reform of collective bargaining
machinery. ACAS is under the control of a council consisting of an
independent chairman and nine other members experienced in industrial
relations, of which three are nominated after consultation with the CBI,
three after consultation with the TUC, and three are independent. The
service conciliates in industrial disputes in both the public and private
sectors of industry on a voluntary basis where this is thought to be helpful.
ACAS assistance is sought in about 2,000 disputes each year. In addition,
there are requests for ACAS to provide arbitration in a further 250-300
disputes, which it may do either by appointing single arbitrators or boards
of arbitration or by referring cases to the Central Arbitration Committee
(see below).
Although ACAS has prime responsibility for intervention in disputes,
the Secretary of State for Employment retains powers to appoint a court of
inquiry or committee of investigation into a dispute, but these are rarely
used.
The service gives advice on all aspects of industrial relations and
personnel management. It conducts surveys to diagnose the causes of
industrial relations problems and suggests remedial action to management
and trade unions or employee representatives. It carries particular respon¬
sibility for attempting conciliation on complaints of infringement of
individual employee rights (such as individual complaints of unfair dis¬
missal, complaints under the Equal Pay Act 1970 and complaints on
employment matters under the Sex Discrimination Act 1975 and the Race
Relations Act 1976). The service is also required to inquire into questions
concerning wages councils (see p 139) referred by the Secretary of State for
Employment.
The Central Arbitration Committee is an independent body working
nationally in industrial relations. It provides boards of arbitration for the
settlement of trade disputes referred to it with the consent of the parties
concerned; adjudicates on claims made under the disclosure of information
provisions of the Employment Protection Act and the Equal Pay Act; and
decides questions of compliance with the Fair Wages Resolution (concern-
EMPLOYMENT
319
ing wages and conditions of employment to be observed by government
contractors), and similar ‘fair wage’ provisions in a number of statutes.
Office of
Manpower
Economics
Statutory
Negotiating
Machinery
The Office of Manpower Economics is an independent non-statutory
organisation responsible for servicing independent review bodies which
advise on sectors of public service pay where negotiating machinery is not
appropriate. These are the Top Salaries Review Body (covering the higher
judiciary, senior civil servants and senior officers of the armed forces), the
Armed Forces Pay Review Body (covering more junior ranks) and the
Doctors’ and Dentists’ Review Body. The Office also services the Pharma¬
cists Review Panel, the Police Negotiating Board, the Civil Service
Arbitration Tribunal, and other bodies of inquiry, convened as necessary.
In a small number of industries and trades where the organisation of
employers or employees or both is not strong enough to provide a basis for
successful voluntary arrangements, there are statutory wage-regulating
bodies, known as wages councils. These are composed of equal numbers of
representatives of employers and employees in the respective sectors of
industry, with three independent members. Wages councils publish pro¬
posals for minimum remuneration, holidays, holiday remuneration and
other terms and conditions of employment. After considering any repre¬
sentations the councils make orders giving statutory force to such proposals.
The Department of Employment’s Wages Inspectorate enforces the pro¬
visions of these wages orders. About 2 7 million workers are covered by
such arrangements.
The Secretary of State for Employment has power to convert a wages
council into a statutory joint industrial council (SJIC), a body which
functions in the same ways as a wages council, except that it has no
independent members. Such conversion is intended to assist in the de¬
velopment of collective bargaining, an SJIC being seen as a half-way stage
between the statutory system and full voluntary collective bargaining.
Agricultural wages boards (there are boards for England and Wales, for
Scotland and for Northern Ireland) perform similar functions in relation to
employment in agriculture.
HEALTH AND
SAFETY
AT WORK
Employers have a duty at civil and criminal law to take reasonable care of
their employees, and others affected by their work activities, and to provide
a safe system of working, while employees have a duty of care towards each
other and also to take care of their own safety. The principal legislation is
the Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974. Its purpose is to secure the
health, safety and welfare of people at work and to provide for the pro¬
tection of the public whose health and safety might be affected by work
activities. The Act places general duties on everyone concerned with work
activities, including employers, the self-employed, employees; manufac¬
turers, designers, suppliers, importers of articles and substances for use at
work; and those in control of premises.
The 1974 Act is superimposed on earlier health and safety legislation,
such as the Mines and Quarries Act 1954, the Factories Act 1961 and the
Offices, Shops and Railway Premises Act 1963 and the various regulations
made under them. The earlier legislation imposes specific obligations and
standards on, for example, occupiers of particular types of premises or
employers engaged in particular activities and covers such matters as the
320
The Health and
Safety
Commission
The Health and
Safety
Executive
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
fencing of machinery, precautions against the exposure of people to toxic
dusts and gases, precautions against fire, dangerous substances and special
risks, the safe condition of premises, and cleanliness, lighting, temperature
and ventilation.
Some of the earlier legislation was replaced immediately by the 1974 Act,
but the remainder continued in force pending its progressive replacement
by regulations and codes of practice approved by the Health and Safety
Commission. Replacement regulations have been introduced to require the
notification of accidents and dangerous occurrences and to control work
with lead, each set being supported by either an approved code of practice
or other guidance material, and there are others in the course of development.
The Health and Safety Commission, established by the Health and Safety
at Work Act and accountable to Parliament through the Secretary of State
for Employment, has responsibility for developing policies, including
guidance, codes of practice, or proposals for regulations to further the
implementation of the Act. In the case of proposals for changes in
legislation, the Commission consults the people who will be affected by
them and makes recommendations to the Secretary of State concerned.
The Commission has an independent chairman, three members appointed
after consultation with the Confederation of British Industry, three after
consultation with the Trades Union Congress, and two after consultation
with local authority associations. The Commission has three subject ad¬
visory committees (on toxic substances, on dangerous substances and the
Medical Advisory Committee), two committees concerned with particular
hazards (major hazards and nuclear installations), and nine industry ad¬
visory committees, for agriculture, ceramics, construction, foundries,
health services, oil, paper and board, printing and railways.
The Act also set up the Health and Safety Executive, which includes
government inspectorates covering a range of work activities: the Factory
Inspectorate (which also deals with a large number of activities outside
factories such as hospitals and educational establishments) and inspector¬
ates for mines and quarries, agriculture, major sources of industrial air
pollution, nuclear installations, and hazardous installations. It also in¬
cludes the Employment Medical Advisory Service and the Research and
Laboratory Services Division. The inspectors, who have powers of entry
and enforcement, seek compliance with health and safety legislation in
individual workplaces and give advice. The Employment Medical Advisory
Service provides a nationwide service of advice on the medical aspects
of employment problems to employers, employees, trade unions, doctors
and others. It carries out medical examinations of workers in hazardous
occupations and surveys of employment hazards, advises the staff of the
Manpower Services Commission on medical aspects of job placement,
rehabilitation and industrial training, and co-operates with school medical
officers and careers officers in helping to solve the employment problems of
handicapped school leavers.
The Research and Laboratory Services Division provides scientific and
medical support and testing services, and carries out research both in its
own laboratories and through universities and other institutions on a
contract basis, often jointly funded by industry. Areas of study include
explosion risks, fires, protective equipment, methods for monitoring and
measuring airborne contaminants, occupational medicine and hygiene, and
the safety of engineering systems.
EMPLOYMENT
321
Northern
Ireland
Health and safety legislation is enforced in most offices and shops by
inspectors appointed by local authorities, working under guidance from the
Health and Safety Executive. Some other official bodies work under agency
agreements with the Health and Safety Executive, for example, the Railway
Inspectorate (concerned with worker safety on railways), the Industrial
Pollution Inspectorate for Scotland and the Department of Energy (con¬
cerned with health and safety in the oil and gas industry).
A basic principle underlying the Health and Safety at Work Act is that
employers, in consultation with their employees, should have the respon¬
sibility of working out health and safety arrangements, within the broad
obligations of the law, to suit their own workplaces. Employers with five or
more employees must draw up a written policy for safety and health,
including arrangements for implementing it and keeping it up to date, and
communicate it to their employees. Recognised and independent trade
unions may appoint safety representatives to be the employees’ official
channel for representation and consultation over safety matters. Two
safety representatives may make a written request to the employer to
establish a safety committee, which must then be set up within three
months.
In Northern Ireland, the Health and Safety Agency, roughly correspond¬
ing to the Health and Safety Commission, and an Employment Medical
Advisory Service, were set up by the Health and Safety at Work (NI) Order
1978. The Northern Ireland Department of Economic Development,
through its Factory Inspectorate, is responsible for seeking compliance
with health and safety legislation, which is broadly similar to that for Great
Britain.
i7 Public Finance
Through the public finance system government raises money from in¬
dividuals and companies by taxation, borrowing and other means, and
spends it on behalf of the community in the provision of goods and services
such as education, health and defence, in payments to people and or¬
ganisations, and in capital investment. The term public finance also covers
the raising of revenue and its expenditure by local authorities and certain
other public bodies and the financial relationship between these agencies
and central government.
The broad principle of public finance is based on an assessment of
expenditure needs, accompanied by proposals for raising the required
amounts of money. Public expenditure plans are normally published
annually, in recent years at the same time as the Budget, which consists of
proposals for changes in taxation necessary to raise the revenue to finance
public spending. Tax revenue and other receipts are paid into the Con¬
solidated Fund, the Government’s account at the Bank of England from
which most of the Government’s sterling expenditure is financed. Any
excess of expenditure over receipts is met by borrowing, most of it from the
National Loans Fund, also operated as an official sterling account at the
Bank of England.
THE PUBLIC The public expenditure planning total includes the planned current and
SECTOR capital expenditure of central government and local authoi ities (collectively
known as general government), finance for the nationalised industries and
the capital expenditure of certain other public corporations. This definition
is used for published figures of public expenditure totals, in particular for
the Government’s annual public expenditure White Paper. The planning
total also includes a contingency reserve to cover essential unforeseen or
unquantifiable expenditure. It does not include payment of debt interest.
The estimated outturn for the 1981-82 planning total was £106,000
million; net debt interest is estimated to have been £6,200 million.
Expenditure by central government (including finance for the national¬
ised industries) accounted for just under three-quarters of the planning
total in 1981—82 and that by local authorities for about one-quarter. Social
security accounted for 27 per cent of the total, while health and personal
social services and defence each accounted for 12 per cent. The planning
total for 1982-83 was £115,000 million, which incorporates the changes
made in the 1982 Budget to the figure given in the public expenditure White
Paper of March 1982. The total (excluding the Budget changes) is analysed
in the diagram on p 323.
Current expenditure in 1981-82 accounted for 89 per cent of total
expenditure (excluding certain minor adjustments) and capital expenditure
for 11 per cent. The major item of current expenditure was wages and
salaries, closely followed by grants to individuals (mainly social security
benefits). Nearly half of capital expenditure consisted of fixed investment.
The planned rate of increase of public expenditure between 1981-82 and
1982-83 is 8 5 per cent, with increases of 5-1 per cent in 1983-84 and 6 per
cent in 1984-85. Public expenditure as a proportion of gross domestic
product (GDP) at market prices in 1981-82 is estimated at 45 per cent.
PUBLIC FINANCE
323
The Estimates
Planned Public
Expenditure 1982-83
£000m
Defence
Contingency reserve
and special sales of assets
The 1982 public expenditure White Paper expressed the plans in cash
instead of the volume terms used in previous years. This change embodies
the principle, already well established in the system of cash limits, that
levels of service must be determined in the light of the finance available.
Each December government departments submit to the Treasury esti¬
mates of their cash requirements for the financial year beginning in the
following April. After approval by the Treasury the Supply Estimates are
presented to Parliament at the same time as the Budget (see p 325) which is
introduced in March or April. They are approved in July as the annual
324
Public
Expenditure
Surveys
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Appropriation Act, expenditure between April and this date being covered
by a Vote on Account before the start of the financial year. Supplementary
Estimates may also be presented to Parliament during the course of the
year. If any Vote is overspent the Public Accounts Committee (see p 325)
will consider the provision of an Excess Vote and may ask for evidence
from the department concerned. In each parliamentary session there are
29 ‘supply’ days on which the Opposition may choose the subject for
debate. Supply days originally provided Parliament with an opportunity
for scrutiny and discussion of government proposals for expenditure.
Gradually, however, the debates evolved into general discussions of depart¬
mental policy and administration, and debates on the Supply Estimates have
been supplemented by other means of controlling government expenditure
(see below).
Some items of expenditure, for example, the salaries and pensions of
judges, are not subject to annual approval by Parliament but are paid directly
from the Consolidated Fund in accordance with Acts of Parliament which
allow payments to continue from one year to the next.
Each year, a survey is made of the whole range of projected public ex¬
penditure over the medium term. This culminates in the publication (in
recent years on Budget day) of the public expenditure White Paper, which
gives the expected outturn for the current financial year (ending on 31
March) together with plans for the following three years.
Control and
Examination of
Public
Expenditure
Control of public expenditure additional to control inherent in parliamentary
approval of the estimates is exercised through the system of cash limits and
by the Comptroller and Auditor General. Examination of public expendi¬
ture is carried out by Select Committees of the House of Commons.
Cash Limits Some 40 per cent of public expenditure is subject to control by cash limits
(external financing limits in the case of nationalised industries). Another 40
per cent consists of ‘demand-determined’ services (for example, social
security benefits) on which, once policy and rates of payment have been
determined, expenditure in the short run depends on the number of eligible
recipients. The remaining 20 per cent is current expenditure of local
authorities, which central government does not directly control; however,
the major part of the contribution by central government to such expendi¬
ture, the rate support grant (see p 66), is subject to cash limits. Once fixed,
cash limits are not usually revised during the course of the year unless a
decision is taken to alter the level of provision for the service concerned.
The general policy is that, if any overspending occurs, a corresponding
deduction is made from the cash limit for the following year. As in the case
of overspending on votes, the Public Accounts Committee may ask for
evidence from the department concerned when overspending occurs.
Comptroller and The Comptroller and Auditor General, a crown official independent of the
Auditor General Government and Parliament, has two functions. As Comptroller General
he has the duty to ensure that all revenue and other public money payable to
the Consolidated Fund and the National Loans Fund is duly paid and that
all payments out of these funds are authorised by statute. As Auditor
General he audits, on behalf of the House of Commons, accounts of the
transactions of the Consolidated Fund and the National Loans Fund,
PUBLIC FINANCE
325
Select Committees
of the House of
Commons
Contingency
Reserve
THE BUDGET
Appropriation Accounts and various other accounts of government depart¬
ments and statutory boards and authorities. He submits reports on these
and other accounts to Parliament.
Public expenditure is also examined by Select Committees of the House of
Commons, which study in detail the activities of government departments
and require the attendance of ministers and officials for cross-examination.
The Public Accounts Committee considers the accounts of each govern¬
ment department and the reports on them of the Comptroller and Auditor
General. The Committee submits to Parliament reports which carry con¬
siderable weight, and its recommendations are taken very seriously by the
departments and organisations that it examines. The Government’s formal
reply to the reports is presented to Parliament by the Treasury in the form
of a Treasury minute and the reports and minute are debated annually in
the House of Commons.
Planned expenditure includes an unallocated reserve for contingencies and
other requirements that cannot be quantified when plans are being drawn
up. The reserve is a control figure for the financial year ahead; any new
decisions to incur expenditure which cannot be accommodated within
existing programmes are contained within the reserve.
The Budget incorporates the Government’s proposals for financing its
expenditure, particularly for changes in taxation. The proposals are
announced to the House of Commons, usually in March or April, although
supplementary budgetary measures may also be introduced at other times
of the year. The Budget speech by the Chancellor of the Exchequer is
followed by the moving of a set of Ways and Means (or Budget) resolutions
in which the proposals are embodied. These resolutions, when passed by
the House, become the foundation of the Finance Bill, in which the
proposals are set out for detailed consideration by Parliament, becoming
law as the Finance Act, usually in July.
A major function of the Budget is to act as an instrument of economic
management. The Budget statement is normally the main occasion for a
review of general economic policy and is accompanied by the publication of
the Financial Statement and Budget Report. The Budget is concerned with
the balance between the total of goods and services which are likely to be
available to the nation and the total claims which are likely to be made on
them. Through taxation the Government can exert a considerable influence
on the volume of demand for goods and services; its measures can also have
a broader influence on the pattern of demand and through, for instance,
increasing incentives, on the long-term performance of the economy.
The bulk of taxation proposals in the Budget are concerned with changes
in the rates or- coverage of existing taxes, the introduction of new taxes or
the abolition of existing ones and changes in the administrative machinery
relating to taxation. In two cases (income tax and corporation tax), how¬
ever, annual Ways and Means resolutions followed by a Finance Act clause
are necessary to maintain the taxes in existence at all, since they are annual
taxes. Thus a Budget at or about the beginning of each financial year is a
necessity.
Changes in tax coming into effect before the Finance Bill has received
Royal Assent, usually from Budget Day or from the start of the tax year, are
dealt with under the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act. This enables the
326
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Government to collect certain taxes provisionally; income tax, for example,
either at the rates previously in operation or at new rates following the
passage of the appropriate Ways and Means resolutions. Some changes
affecting expenditure, such as increases in pensions and family allowances,
are usually announced in the Budget statement. Such measures, however,
are generally given effect by separate legislation, statutory instruments or
administrative action. Other ways of changing taxation are by special
legislation or the use of the regulator, which permits limited changes
between Budgets in the rates of value added tax (by up to 25 per cent) and
the main excise duties (by up to 10 per cent).
Table 28 shows estimated total revenue from taxation and other sources
in 1981-82 and the forecasts for 1982-83.
SOURCES OF
REVENUE
The three principal sources of tax revenue are: taxes on income, which
include income tax and corporation tax; taxes on capital, which include
capital transfer tax and capital gains tax; and taxes on expenditure (in¬
cluding taxes on the ownership or use of certain assets), which include
customs and excise duties, value added tax (VAT), the national insurance
surcharge, local rates (see p 66), stamp duties and licence duties (for
example, on motor vehicles). Taxes on individual incomes are progressive
in that larger incomes bear a proportionately higher rate of tax. The Inland
Revenue assesses and collects the taxes on income and capital and the stamp
duties. The Customs and Excise collects the most important taxes on
expenditure (the customs and excise duties and VAT), while a variety of
authorities is responsible for the collection of the remainder.
Taxes on
Income
Income Tax
Income tax is imposed for the year of assessment beginning on 6 April. The
basic rate of 30 per cent applies to the first £ 12,800 of taxable income. A rate
of 40 per cent applies to the £12,801-^15,100 band of taxable income, 45
per cent to the £15,101-£ 19,100 band, 50 per cent to the £ 19,1 oi-£25,300
band and 55 per cent to the £25,30i-£31,500 band, ending with a maxi¬
mum rate of 60 per cent on taxable income over £31,500. These rates apply
to both earned and investment incomes. Investment incomes are also liable
to a surcharge of 15 per cent on their excess over £6,250. The tax imposed
on an individual is graduated by means of personal allowances (£ 1,565 for a
single person or a wife and £2,445 for a married man) and reliefs. These are
given for, among other things, premiums on a life assurance policy. As part
of the business start-up scheme, certain investors in new companies are
able to obtain relief on up to £20,000 invested in any one year.
In general, the income of married couples is taxed as one but a husband
and wife may choose to have the wife’s earnings charged separately for tax
on condition that the husband receives the single instead of the married
personal allowance. Any investment income is taxed jointly.
In 1982-83 a single person earning £5,000 a year pays £1,031 in income
tax while a married man with the same earned income pays £767. The
amount of tax payable by a single person varies from, for example, £ 131 on
an earned annual income of £2,000 to £14,231 on one of £35,000.
Most wage and salary earners pay their income tax under a Pay as You
Earn (PAYE) system whereby tax is deducted (and accounted for to the
Inland Revenue) by the employer, thus enabling them to keep as up to date
as possible with their tax payments.
In general, income tax is charged on all income which originates in
Britain and on all income arising abroad of persons resident in Britain.
PUBLIC FINANCE
327
Table 28: Sources of Tax and Other Receipts 1981-82 and 1982-83
1981-82 1982-83
outturn Budget Percentage
forecast of total“
£m
Inland Revenue*
Income taxc
Corporation tax^
Petroleum revenue tax
Supplementary petroleum duty
Capital gains tax
Development land tax
Estate duty6
Capital transfer tax
Stamp duties
Special tax on banking deposits
28,726
4,926
2,390
2,029
525
38
17
481
797
355
30,777
4,850
2,290
2,040
600
40
10
465
810
371
59
28
2’5
0-7
o-6
i-o
Total Inland Revenue
40,284 41,882
50-5
Customs and Excise^
Value added tax 12,300 14,750
Oil 4,550 5,ioo
Tobacco 3,325 3>525
Spirits, beer, wine, cider and perry 3,000 3,275
Betting and gaming 500 550
Car tax 525 600
Other excise duties 20 20
European Community own resources^
Customs duties, etc 920 1,060
Agricultural levies 210 270
17-8
6-2
43
4-0
0-7
0-7
i’3
0'3
Total Customs and Excise
25,248 29,150
35-2
Vehicle excise duties
National Insurance surcharge
1,640
3,597
1,854
3)443
2-2
4'2
Total taxation
Miscellaneous receipts*
70,769
5)765
76,329
6,568
92-1
T9
Total
76,534 82,897
1000
Sources: Financial Statistics and Financial Statement and Budget Report 1982-83
aThe totals of percentages may not equal sums of the sub-totals because of rounding.
fcThe breakdown for Inland Revenue taxes shows the amounts received by the Inland Revenue. The totals
of these do not equal exactly the total paid into the Consolidated Fund.
^Including surtax. This was absorbed with income tax into a unified form of personal taxation in 1973 but
sums are still due from before the time of abolition.
^Receipts include payments of advance corporation tax:
Net of repayments 2,076 2,170 2-6
£Superseded by capital transfer tax in 1975 but sums are still due in respect of deaths that occurred before
abolition.
/The breakdown for Customs and Excise duties is provisional and the sums of the component parts do not
equal the totals exactly.
^Customs duties and agricultural levies are accountable to the European Community as ‘own resources’.
* Includes broadcast receiving licences, interest and dividends, gas levy, oil royalties, proceeds from special
sales of assets and other miscellaneous receipts.
328
Corporation Tax
Special Tax on
Banking Deposits
Oil Taxation
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Interest on certain British government securities belonging to persons not
ordinarily resident in Britain is exempt. Britain has entered into agree¬
ments with many countries providing for relief from double taxation;
where such agreements are not in force unilateral relief is often allowed.
Individuals who are resident in but domiciled outside Britain and who
work for non-resident employers are entitled to a special allowance under
which only half of their gross salary (or three-quarters after nine years of
residence) is considered for purposes of British taxation.
Companies pay corporation tax on their profits, but the amount of taxable
profit is that remaining after deduction of allowances for investment and
certain other costs. Only a proportion of any capital gains is included in
total profits, with the result that chargeable gains as a whole are subject to a
lower elfective rate of tax. A company which distributes profits to its share¬
holders is required to make to the Inland Revenue an advance payment of
corporation tax. In general, this payment is set against a company’s liability
to corporation tax on its income and the recipient of the distribution in
respect of which the advance payment was made is entitled to a tax credit,
which satisfies his or her liability to income tax at the basic rate.
The rate of corporation tax is fixed retrospectively in the Budget for the
past financial year; for the financial year 1981 (1 April 1981-31 March
1982) it is 52 per cent with a reduced rate of 40 per cent for small companies
(such companies being defined in the relevant Finance Act). The system of
corporation tax is designed to encourage expansion and reinvestment,
particularly when an enterprise is relatively new, and substantial incentives
and reliefs are available. Companies are encouraged to invest by generous
tax allowances while stock relief reduces the liability to tax by taking
account of increases in the cost of holding stock. As part of its policy for
encouraging small businesses the Government has raised the qualifying
profits limits for the small companies rate of corporation tax to £90,000 for
full relief and £225,000 for marginal relief. If all allowances and reliefs are
taken into account, British companies in aggregate pay only 15 per cent of
their historic cost profits in corporation tax (excluding advance corporation
tax). The tax is assessed on the profits of accounting periods, the rate of tax
being the rate for the financial year in which the accounting period falls.
Where an accounting period straddles 31 March the profits are apportioned
on a time basis.
In the Budget of 1981 a special tax, for one year only, was imposed on
banking deposits. The tax was payable by banks on non-interest-bearing
sterling deposits in excess of £15 million at the rate of 2 per cent on the first
£200 million and 2 5 per cent on the remainder.
Under the Oil Taxation Act 1975, petroleum revenue tax (deductible in
computing profits for corporation tax) is charged on profits from the
production, as opposed to the refining or other forms of processing, of oil
and gas under licence in Britain and on its continental shelf. The rate of tax
is 75 per cent. Each licensee of an oilfield is charged on the profits from that
field after deduction of certain allowances and reliefs, computed at half-
yearly intervals. A recent development is the introduction, from 1983, of a
new system of advance payments of petroleum revenue tax in the early
years of production from a field. These payments will be credited against
petroleum revenue tax subsequently due, with any balance repaid after five
PUBLIC FINANCE
329
Taxes on
Capital
Capital Transfer
Tax
Capital Gains
Tax
Development
Land Tax
Taxes on
Expenditure
Value Added Tax
years from the first payment. The bulk of both taxes will be collected in
monthly instalments.
Capital transfer tax applies to transfers of personal wealth in three main
areas: lifetime gifts; transfers on death; and transfers relating to settled
property (that is any property held in trust). The tax is chargeable on a
cumulative basis in respect of lifetime transfers as they occur and on death
as if the deceased had given away the whole of his or her estate immediately
before death. In both cases the tax on a particular transfer is arrived at by
adding to it the value of the chargeable transfers made within 10 years up to
the date of the transfer in question. The rates of tax applicable are pro¬
gressively higher on successive slices of the cumulative total of chargeable
transfers, with a lower scale of tax for lifetime transfers than for transfers on
death. The higher scale applies to transfers made on death or up to three
years before the transferor’s death. Under both scales the first £55,000 of
transfers is exempt. The rates on amounts over this figure rise from 30 per
cent (higher scale) and 15 per cent (lower scale) on the slice between
£55,000 and £75,000 to 75 per cent (higher scale) and 50 per cent (lower
scale) on the excess over £2 5 million.
Capital gains accruing on the disposal of assets are liable to capital gains tax
or, in the case of companies, to corporation tax. The rate of tax is 30 per cent
but individuals are exempt from tax in respect of total net gains of up to
£5,000 in any one year. The effects of inflation are taken into account when
measuring gains. For small businesses the tax on gifts and certain deemed
disposals of business assets may be deferred until the assets are sold.
Certain assets, including the principal private residence, chattels worth less
than £3,000 (and any chattels, except those used for the purpose of trade,
with a predictable life of less than 50 years), private motor cars and National
Savings Certificates are normally exempt. Gains on government securities
are exempt frc m the tax if they have been held for more than 12 months.
Under the Development Land Tax Act 1976 any assessable development
value realised on the disposal of an interest in land is chargeable to tax at the
rate of 60 per cent but the first £50,000 of any such development value
realised in any financial year is completely exempt. Other exemptions
include the sale or development of owner-occupied residences.
Value added tax (VAT) is a broadly-based tax, currently chargeable at 15
per cent. It is collected at each stage in the production and distribution of
goods and services by taxable persons (generally those carrying on a
business with a turnover of more than £17,000 a year). The final tax is
borne by the consumer. The taxable person is charged by suppliers of goods
and services with VAT (input tax) and then charges the customer with
VAT on goods and services supplied (output tax). It is the difference
between output and input tax that is paid to Customs and Excise.
There are two methods by which certain goods and services are relieved
from VAT: one is by charging VAT at a zero rate (a taxable person does not
charge tax to a customer but reclaims any input tax paid to suppliers); the
other is by exemption (a taxable person does not charge a customer any
output tax and is not entitled to deduct or reclaim the input tax). Zero¬
rating applies to most types of food (except in the course of catering);
books, newspapers and periodicals; fuel (except for petrol and other fuels
for road use); construction of, and certain alterations to, buildings; ex¬
ports; public transport fares; young children’s clothing and footwear; and
330
Customs Duties
Excise Duties
Car Tax
Stamp Duty
National Insurance
Surcharge
PUBLIC
SECTOR
BORROWING
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
drugs and medicines supplied on prescription. Exemption applies to land
(including rents), insurance, postal services, betting, gaming (other than by
gaming machines and lotteries), finance, education, health, and burial and
cremation.
Customs duties are chargeable in accordance with the Common Customs
Tariff of the European Community (no such duties are chargeable on goods
which qualify as Community goods). Special customs import and export
procedures are operated under the Common Agricultural Policy and Com¬
munity levies are chargeable on a wide range of agricultural products from
non-Community countries.
Oils used for road fuel bear duty at the basic rate. Heavy oil not used for
road fuel and light oil used for furnace fuel bear a lower duty and, except for
lubricating oil, are zero-rated for VAT. Oil used as chemical feedstocks or
otherwise than as a fuel or lubricant in manufacturing is relieved from duty.
There are duties on spirits, beer, wine, madewine, cider and perry, mainly
related to alcoholic strength. The cigarette duty is based partly on a charge
per 1,000 cigarettes and partly on a percent age of retail price. Duty on other
tobacco products is based on the weight of the finished product. The
principal betting duties are the general betting duty, which is charged at a
rate of 8 per cent of the stake money, except for on-course betting, which is
charged at 4 per cent; pool betting duty (which applies to football pools),
charged at a rate of 42 5 per cent of the stake money; and bingo duty,
charged at 10 per cent. Revenue is also raised from duties on the operation
of gaming machines and casinos.
The licence duty on a private motor car is £80 a year; for motorcycles and
three-wheel vehicles, etc., it amounts to £8, £16 or £32 a year according to
engine capacity. Goods vehicles are taxed by gross weight and, if over 12
tonnes, according to the number of axles. Taxis and buses are taxed by
seating capacity.
New cars, motorcycles, scooters, mopeds and caravans, whether British
made or imported, are chargeable with car tax at 10 per cent on the
wholesale value. VA F falls on the price including car tax.
Transfers of property (other than of stocks and shares, which are liable to
duty at 2 per cent) up to a value of £25,000 are exempt from stamp duty.
Above this threshold stamp duty is chargeable at rates of 0 5 per cent, 1 per
cent and 15 per cent on transfers valued up to £30,000, £35,000 and
£40,000, respectively, with the full rate of 2 per cent applying to values
above £40,000.
The National Insurance surcharge took effect from the start of the 1977-78
financial year. It is in the form of a levy paid by employers, along with their
National Insurance contributions, of 2 5 per cent (2 per cent until 5 April
1983) of employees’ earnings of between £2950 a week and £220 (churches
and charities are exempt). The proceeds are not paid into the National
Insurance Fund but, together with other tax proceeds, go into the
Consolidated Fund.
To raise the money it requires over and above tax revenue and other
receipts the Government issues marketable and non-marketable debt.
Marketable debt consists of Treasury bills and government stock (known
as gilt-edged stock as there is no risk of default). Each Friday the
PUBLIC FINANCE
331
The National
Debt
Government sells by tender a quantity of Treasury bills with a life of 91
days. These are bought by the discount houses (see p 336), which guarantee
to take up the whole of any offer. The discount houses may hold the
Treasury bills or sell them to the banks (which do not bid directly at the
tender).
Gilt-edged stock is marketed on the Stock Exchange by the Government
broker; some stocks are also available at post offices through the National
Savings Stock Register. In 1981 the Government began to issue indexed
stock on which both principal and interest are linked to the movement in
retail prices.
Non-marketable debt comprises the various forms of national savings
designed to attract the smaller saver. These enable the Government to raise
funds from the personal sector and have, over the last few years, increased
relative to gilt-edged stock as a source of funds (see p 336) and certificates of
tax deposits.1 The bulk of public corporations’ borrowing is met by central
government through the National Loans Fund, although public corpora¬
tions’ temporary borrowing needs are met largely from the market under
Treasury guarantee. That part of local authority borrowing met by central
government is dealt with through the National Investment and Loans
Office (set up in 1980 as a result of the merger of the Public Works Loan
Board and the National Debt Office) which has recourse to the National
Loans Fund. The local authorities also borrow directly from the market,
both short-term and long-term, through a range of different investments.
Some public corporations and local authorities also borrow, under special
statutory power and with Treasury consent, in foreign currencies.
The Government has also, in the past, borrowed from abroad on the
international capital markets, from international agencies such as the
International Monetary Fund and from governments, as with the North
American government loans.
After allowing for the changes introduced by the 1982 Budget the central
government borrowing requirement for 1982-83 is expected to be £933°°
million, compared with £7,600 million in 1981-82, and the public sector
borrowing requirement (PSBR) £9,500 million compared with £8,800
million in 1981-82. A continuing reduction in the PSBR as a percentage of
gross domestic product is an important part of the Government’s medium-
term financial strategy. As part of the policy of controlling the money stock,
the Government seeks to finance most of its borrowing requirement (the
excess of expenditure over tax revenue and other receipts) by sales of long¬
term debt to the public outside the banking system.
Net central government borrowing each year represents an addition to the
National Debt. At the end of March 1982 the National Debt amounted to
some £118,000 million of which £2,000 million was in currencies other
than sterling. Of the £116,000 million sterling debt, £91,000 million
consisted of gilt-edged stock; of this, 28 per cent had a maturity of up to
five years, 37 per cent a maturity of over five years and up to 15 years and
34 per cent a maturity of over 15 years or undated. The remaining sterling
debt was made up mainly of national savings, certificates of tax deposits,
Treasury bills, and Ways and Means advances (very short-term internal
government borrowing).
1 The certificate of tax deposits scheme is operated by the Inland Revenue. Certificates may be purchased by
individuals or corporate bodies to be tendered in settlement of a wide range of taxes.
i8 Banking
and Financial
Institutions
Britain’s position as a major financial centre reflects the wide range of
specialised financial services provided. The City of London has the greatest
concentration of banks in the world, the world’s biggest insurance market
and a Stock Exchange with a larger listing of securities than any other
exchange, and remains the principal international centre for transactions in
a large number of commodities. Its tradition of informal dealing and its
position between the time zones of the United States and the Far East
enable it to complete large-scale transactions with economy and speed.
Among the major developments in the activities of financial institutions in
recent years have been the rapid growth of overseas bank representation in
London and the establishment of new futures markets.
The main institutions which form the British banking system are the
Bank of England (the central bank), the clearing banks (offering a wide
range of services), the National Girobank, the Trustee Savings Banks, the
overseas banks, the merchant banks, the discount market and the National
Savings Bank. Specialised financial services outside the banking system
are provided by, among others, finance houses, leasing companies, factor¬
ing companies, finance corporations, pension funds, investment and unit
trusts, building societies, credit unions, the insurance market, the Stock
Exchange, the foreign exchange market, the London gold market, com¬
modity markets and futures markets.
The Bank The Bank of England was established in 1694 by Act of Parliament and
of England Royal Charter as a corporate body; the entire capital stock was acquired by
the Government under the Bank of England Act 1946. The Bank’s main
functions are to act as note-issuing authority, to advise the Government on
financial matters, to execute monetary policy and to act as banker to the
Government. It also exercises prudential supervision over the banking
system and manages the Exchange Equalisation Account on behalf of the
Treasury.
The Bank of England has the sole right in England and Wales of issuing
bank notes. The note issue is fiduciary, that is to say, it is no longer backed
by gold but by government and other securities. The Scottish and
Northern Ireland banks have limited rights to issue notes; these issues,
apart from an amount specified by legislation for each bank, must be fully
covered by holdings of Bank of England notes. Responsibility for the
provision of coin for circulation lies with the Royal A4.int, a government
department.
The Government’s economic policy, of which the reduction of inflation
is a major aspect, accords considerable importance to control of the money
supply. The Bank seeks to influence the trend of the growth of the money
supply in accordance with target rates of growth. Announced monetary
BANKING AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
333
The Deposit
Banks
targets were adopted in 1976 and are incorporated in the Government’s
medium-term financial strategy. Figures announced in the 1982 Budget
give targets for 1982-83 and illustrative ranges for 1983-84 and 1984-85.
The ranges for the two later years will be reconsidered nearer the time and
account will be taken of structural and institutional changes which may
affect the economic significance of the different monetary aggregates.
As banker to the Government, the Bank of England is responsible for
arranging the financing of government borrowing and for managing the
National Debt.
The Bank is able to influence money market conditions through its
dealings with the discount houses (see p 336), which developed in the
nineteenth century as bill brokers for industrialists. The discount houses
hold mainly Treasury, local authority and commercial bills financed by
short-term loans frc m the banks. If there is a shortage of cash in the banking
system as a result, for example, of large tax payments or heavy sales of
government securities, the Bank relieves the shortage either by buying bills
from the discount houses or by lending directly to them. This permits the
banks to replenish their cash balances at the Bank by recalling some of their
short-term loans to the discount houses.
The methods by which the Bank operates in the money markets, how¬
ever, have undergone some change. Until August 1981 the Bank was ready
to lend directly to the discount houses at rates at or near its announced
Minimum Lending Rate, in addition to its open-market dealings with the
discount houses in bills. Under subsequent arrangements, the Bank no
longer undertakes to announce continuously the rate at which it will supply
cash to the market, but conducts its operations in such a way as to keep
short-term interest rates within an unpublished band. More emphasis is
now put on open-market operations in bills than on direct lending to the
discount houses.
Under the Banking Act 1979 deposit-taking businesses require authori¬
sation from the Bank of England and are subject to its continuing super¬
vision. Institutions may be authorised either as recognised banks or as
licensed deposit-takers.
On behalf of the Treasury the Bank manages the Exchange Equalisation
Account (EEA), which holds Britain’s official reserves of gold, foreign
exchange, Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) on the International Monetary
Fund and European Currency Units (ECUs). Using the resources of the
EEA, the Bank may intervene in the foreign exchange market to check
undue fluctuations in the exchange value of sterling.
The major deposit (or clearing) banks are Barclays, Lloyds, Midland and
National Westminster and, in Scotland, the Bank of Scotland, Clydesdale
Bank and the Royal Bank of Scotland. Their primary business is receiving,
transferring and paying deposits, together with providing overdraft and
other loan facilities to personal and commercial customers. Customers may
deposit money in two main types of account, current accounts and deposit
accounts. Although no interest is paid on current accounts, withdrawals
may be made on demand and amounts transferred by cheque. Interest is
paid on deposit accounts but seven days’ notice is required for withdrawals.
Bank profits arise from the difference between the interest earned from
lending and the costs incurred, including the interest paid to depositors.
(Bank lending rates are determined by base rate, which may differ between
334
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
banks. The greater the creditworthiness of a borrower the smaller is the
premium charged above base rate.)
The clearing banks provide full banking services throughout Britain;
however, other institutions, especially building societies (see p 339), have
begun to compete strongly in this area. The ‘big four’ banks operate
through some 11,000 branches and sub-branches. National W’estminster
has the largest number (3,200), followed by Barclays (3,000), Midland
(2,500) and Lloyds (2,300). The banks are increasingly involved in inter¬
national banking activities and, since the late 1970s, have become import¬
ant lenders for house purchase, providing roughly one in three of all new
mortgages. They have also acquired substantial interests in finance houses
and leasing agencies and some have set up their own unit trusts and
merchant banks.
The deposit banks’ main liquid assets consist of balances at the Bank of
England, money at call (mainly loans to discount houses), their holdings
of Treasury and some other bills and short-dated British government
securities. The banks also hold a proportion of their assets as portfolio
investments (mainly longer-dated British government securities) or trade
investments.
The introduction in 1981 of a loan guarantee scheme (see p 207) has
widened the involvement of banks in financing small businesses. Steps had
already been taken in this direction by, for example, the establishment in
1979 by Midland Bank of an independent business banking unit and a
venture capital scheme; most other banks have similar schemes.
The bank giro, a credit transfer scheme, and direct debiting, by which a
creditor, with the prior approval of the debtor, may claim mom y due direct
from the latter s bank account, have greatly speeded the money trans¬
mission services. An increasing number of banks have automatic cash
dispensing machines and many are also introducing more automated bank¬
ing facilities. Cheque cards entitle holders to cash a cheque up to the value
of £50 at any office of major British and Irish banks and are also generally
acceptable as a guarantee for payments by cheque up to that amount. Credit
cards (Access and Barclaycard) associated with the clearing banks are also a
widely used method of payment; Access operates within the international
Mastercard system and Barclaycard within the VISA system.
Membership of the London Bankers’ Clearing House, which deals with
the clearing of cheques and drafts, consists of the Bank of England, the
London clearing banks, the Co-operative Bank and the Central Trustee
Savings Bank. The National Giro bank (see below) is to join the clearing
house. In 1981 cheques and drafts worth over £4,800,000 million passed
through the London clearing system. Town clearing enables transfers of
funds between banks within the City of London to be settled the same
day. By 1983 the proposed Clearing House Automated Payment System
(CHAPS) will make available same-day settlement elsewhere in Britain. A
similar approach in automated banking is the agreement by the clearing
banks to introduce point-of-sale terminals in retail outlets, which would
enable the value of shoppers’ purchases to be deducted from their personal
bank accounts.
The National Girobank, part of the Post Office, was established in 1968 to
provide a low-cost current account banking and money transfer service. It
operates through more than 20,000 post offices in Britain. All accounts and
transactions are maintained by means of a computer complex at Bootle,
National
Girobank
BANKING AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
335
Trustee
Savings Banks
Overseas
Banks
Merchant
Banks
Merseyside. In March 1982 Girobank had over 11 million account
holders, with balances of over £600 million. The number of transactions
was over 300 million in the year ended March 1982. In addition to its
services to individuals, Girobank’s services to business customers include a
facility whereby organisations with dispersed branches, depots and repre¬
sentatives can rapidly channel receipts into their central account. Some 190
local authorities as well as voluntary housing associations use Girobank’s
rent collection services. Girobank’s international services also provide
money transfer facilities for the 20 million account holders in the European
Community and other countries.
The range of banking services provided by Girobank includes current
accounts, personal loans, a cheque guarantee card, limited overdrawing
for personal customers and overdrafts for corporate customers, deposit
accounts, budget accounts, bridging loans, travellers’ cheques and foreign
currency, bureaux de change and postcheques for drawing cash at post
offices in 29 overseas countries.
The Trustee Savings Banks (TSBs), most of which were founded in the
nineteenth century, operate under their own trustees but are subject under
legislation to the supervision of the Trustee Savings Banks Central Board
and the Treasury. Following a planned programme of amalgamations,
there were 16 individual banks in June 1982 (compared with 67 in 1975)
with about 1,650 branches, 14 million accounts and total deposits of £6,100
million. TSBs provide a full range of banking services including cheque
accounts and credit services.
Interest is paid on seven-day and one-month deposits and a higher rate
on larger sums deposited for periods up to five years. Credit services
include personal loans, overdrafts and mortgages. The TSBs have their
own credit card, Trustcard, which operates within the VISA system, and
TSB Trust Company provides a wide range of savings, insurance, life
assurance and unit trust facilities. The TSBs have also begun to lend to
smaller companies in the form of term loans.
Well over 450 overseas banks and financial institutions were represented in
London in 1982 through branches, subsidiaries, representative offices and
consortia. Some 390 banks were directly represented, while about 60 banks
and financial institutions were represented through a stake in one or more of
the 30 or so joint venture banks operating in London. Of those directly
represented, some 85 were from the United States, about 30 from Japan
and some 130 from Europe, of which well over half were from the European
Community. They provide a comprehensive banking service in many parts
of the world and engage in the financing of trade not only between Britain
and other countries but also between third countries.
Merchant banks have traditionally been primarily concerned with accep¬
tances1 and with the sponsoring of capital issues on behalf of their
customers. Today they have a widely diversified and complex range of
activities with an important role in international finance and the short-term
capital markets, the provision of expert advice and financial services to
'The term is derived from the method of financing trade by which commercial bills are ‘accepted’ or
guaranteed by a merchant bank against documents, after which they may be discounted for cash by a
discount house or other intermediary.
336
The Discount
Market
National
Savings
National Savings
Bank
National Savings
Certificates
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
British industrial companies, especially where mergers, takeovers and
other forms of corporate reorganisation are involved, and in the manage¬
ment of investment holdings, including trusts, pensions and other funds.
The discount market, an institution unique to the City of London, provides
a financial mechanism which promotes an orderly flow of short-term funds
by the discount houses borrowing ‘at call’ or at short notice from the banks
and lending to the Government by buying Treasury bills (see p 330). The
discount houses have recourse to the Bank of England as ‘lender of last
resort’.
Assets of the discount houses mainly consist of Treasury and commercial
bills, government and local authority securities and negotiable certificates
of deposit denominated in both sterling and United States dollars. Dis¬
count houses accept formal responsibility for covering the Government’s
need to borrow on Treasury bills which are offered for tender each week.
The Department for National Savings is responsible for the administration
of government savings schemes: National Savings Bank accounts, National
Savings Certificates, National Savings Income Bonds, Premium Savings
Bonds and Save As You Earn contracts. Government policy has tradition¬
ally been directed towards encouraging investment, primarily of personal
savings, in these schemes, particularly as they represent a major source of
funds for financing the public sector borrowing requirement. In May 1982
National Savings totalled £20,500 million. Facilities are provided by the
Department for the purchase of government stocks; a selection of over 50
stocks is held on the National Savings Stock Register. Since 1980 initiatives
to raise a larger share of personal savings directly for the public sector have
been introduced and some existing facilities made more competitive.
The National Savings Bank provides a system for depositing and with¬
drawing savings at over 20,000 post offices around the country or by post.
There are about 20 million active accounts. Ordinary Accounts earn
interest at 5 per cent a year and the first £70 of annual interest is tax free. Up
to £100 can be withdrawn on demand at any Savings Bank post office but a
few days’ notice is required for larger amounts. Investment Accounts earn a
higher rate of interest (which is taxable) and one month’s notice is required
for withdrawals. At the end of May 1982 the sum of the two accounts
totalled some £4,700 million.
National Savings Certificates, in units of £10 (index-linked issue) and £25
(conventional issue), are encashable at par at any time. Interest, which is
free of income tax (including investment income surcharge) and capital
gains tax, is paid only on encashment. The maximum permitted holding of
the current twenty-fourth issue is £2,500. Under the terms of the second
index-linked issue of National Savings Certificates, the repayment value is
related to the movement of the retail prices index (subject to the certificates
being held for one year). If held for five years a bonus of 4 per cent of the
purchase price is added to the repayment value. The maximum permitted
holding is £10,000.
In May 1982 the total investment in all forms of National Savings
Certificate was £12,400 million.
National Savings
Income Bonds
National Savings Income Bonds, introduced in 1982, are designed to
provide savers with a regular monthly income. Bonds are sold in multiples
Premium Savings
Bonds
Save As You Earn
OTHER
FINANCIAL
INSTITUTIONS
Finance
Houses
Leasing
Companies
BANKING AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 337
of £ 1,000, with a minimum holding of £5,000 and a maximum of £200,000.
Repayment is at either three or six months’ notice.
Premium Savings Bonds are in units of £1 (minimum purchase is £5) and
individual holdings are limited to £10,000. After a qualifying period of
three months the bonds give investors a chance to win tax-free prizes.
There is a weekly draw for prizes of £100,000, £50,000 and £25,000 and a
monthly draw offering thousands of prizes ranging in value from £50 to
£250,000. Total net sales of bonds to May 1982 were £1,510 million.
The third issue of the Save As You Earn (SAVE) scheme, introduced in
1975, allows for regular monthly savings of fixed amounts, from £4 to £50,
over five years. On the fifth anniversary of the start of the contract each
payment is revalued in line with the retail prices index. Alternatively, the
payments may remain invested until the seventh anniversary, when they
will be index-linked again and a bonus equal to two monthly payments
added. Uncompleted contracts repaid between the first and seventh anni¬
versaries earn annual interest of 6 per cent but no interest is payable if
repayment occurs before the first anniversary.
The fourth issue of SAYE, introduced in 1980, runs concurrently with
the third issue and is available to individuals entitled to purchase shares
under a share option scheme approved by the Inland Revenue. Regular
monthly payments, of between £10 and £50, by deduction from pay over
five years, qualify for bonuses equal to 18 and 36 monthly contributions on
the fifth and seventh anniversaries respectively. Interest at the rate of 8 per
cent a year is payable on completed contracts repaid between the fifth and
seventh anniversaries and also on repayment of uncompleted contracts
between the first and seventh anniversaries.
Any interest or bonus under a third or fourth issue savings contract is free
from income tax (including investment income surcharge) and capital gains
tax.
Many special financial facilities, supplementary to the credit facilities of the
banks, are provided through institutions outside the banking system.
These include institutions providing credit in specialised forms, such as
finance houses, leasing and factoring companies; finance corporations;
institutions which manage investments on behalf of the public, such as
pension funds, and investment and unit trusts; intermediaries which are
less dependent on the financial markets of the City of London, such as
building societies and credit unions; the insurance market; institutions
which provide financial services, such as the Stock Exchange; the foreign
exchange market; the London gold market, commodity markets and the
financial futures market.
Finance houses are major suppliers of hire purchase finance for the per¬
sonal sector and of short-term credit and leasing to the corporate sector.
Over 80 per cent of all their business is accounted for by the 43 firms which
constitute the Finance Houses Association (FHA). At the end of June 1982
credit outstanding to the members of the FHA was £11,030 million.
Leasing companies buy and own plant or equipment required and chosen
by businesses and lease it at an agreed rental. This form of finance has
grown quickly in importance, partly because the leasing companies can take
338
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Factoring
Companies
Finance
Corporations
Pension Funds
Investment
and Unit
Trusts
advantage of investment incentives to the benefit of customers whose tax
position would otherwise make them unavailable. In 1981 the 58 members
of the Equipment Leasing Association acquired assets in Britain valued
at some £2,100 million, which represented about 11 per cent of total
investment in plant, equipment and vehicles.
Factoring consists of making cash available to a company in exchange for its
debts. Over the last 20 years it has developed as a major financial service,
covering exports from and imports to Britain as well as domestic trade. In
1981 the Association of British Factors handled business of over £2,000
million and some 2,700 companies made use of the Association’s services.
Finance corporations meet the need for medium- and long-term capital
when such funds are not easily or directly available from traditional sources
such as the Stock Exchange or the banks.
Finance for Industry Limited (FFI) was formed in 1973 as the holding
company for two previously separate but related corporations, the Finance
Corporation for Industry (FCI) and the Industrial and Commercial
Finance Corporation (ICFC). The purpose of the merger was to provide, in
one specialist financial institution, the capacity to support investment
programmes over the whole range of industry. During the year ended
31 March 1982 FCI advanced a total of £31 million. The ICFC provides
medium- and long-term funds at fixed interest rates for the small and
medium sectors of industry. Within the last few years the ICFC has be¬
come increasingly prominent in financing management ‘buy-outs’, which
involve the purchase of businesses by managing and other staff from their
owners. At the end of March 1982 the ICFC had gross facilities outstand¬
ing of £515 million in 4,300 companies. The shares in FFI are owned by the
Bank of England (15 per cent) and the individual London and Scottish
clearing banks.
Other finance corporations include Equity Capital for Industry, the
Agricultural Mortgage Corporation, the Commonwealth Development
Finance Company and the Commonwealth Development Corporation (the
last two being no longer confined to the Commonwealth in their activities).
Pension funds are administered by trustees in order to invest members’
pension contributions, either directly in the market or through inter¬
mediaries such as insurance companies. The market value of assets held by
pension funds rose from £2,000 million in 1957 to about £53,000 million in
1980 when 22 per cent was in British government securities and 53 per cent
in company securities. The growth of pension funds over the last two
decades has been reflected in a marked decrease in the proportion of shares
held by individual private investors.
Investment and unit trusts enable investors to spread their risks and obtain
the benefit of skilled management. Investment trusts are companies which
observe certain requirements of the Stock Exchange and the tax authorities
and invest in securities for the benefit of their shareholders. At the end of
1981 their investments totalled nearly £9,000 million, of which 42 per cent
was held overseas.
Unit trusts are constituted by trust deed between a management
company and a trustee company which holds the assets. Normally, the
managers sell units to the public and also repurchase them on demand. The
BANKING AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
339
Building
Societies
Credit Unions
The Insurance
Market
sums held must be invested in securities. The costs of running the trust are
defrayed partly by an initial charge which forms part of the price of a unit
and partly by a periodic service charge which is usually taken out of the
trust’s income. Authorisation by the Department of Trade is needed before
units can be offered to the public; this is only granted if the trust deed meets
the Department’s requirements. In 1981 the Department granted unit
trusts permission to hold up to 20 per cent of their assets in shares traded on
the unlisted securities market (see p 341), in addition to the 5 per cent of
assets that they were already allowed to hold in unlisted securities, whether
or not traded on this market. In May 1982 there were i-8 million unit
holdings with a total value of £6,200 million.
Building societies are non-profit-making mutual institutions which borrow
mainly short-term from individual savers, who are generally able to with¬
draw their money on demand (although fixed-term investments at higher
rates of interest have become increasingly popular) and provide long-term
loans at variable rates of interest on the security of private dwellings
purchased for owner occupation. They also lend to a limited extent on the
security of business or commercial property. Most societies pay and charge
interest on the basis of a structure of rates recommended periodically by
The Building Societies Association, the movement’s representative body.
Building societies account for most lending for house purchase in Britain
and in recent years they have overtaken the banks as the principal
repository for the personal sector’s total liquid assets. They have become
increasingly involved in offering investors a full range of personal services
comparable with those provided by the banks; various savings schemes
have been expanded, cheque book facilities (provided in collaboration with
banks) have been established and pension-linked loans have been intro¬
duced. Business has become concentrated in the hands of a few large
societies, the five largest accounting for 55 per cent of the total assets of the
movement. At the end of 1981 there were 251 registered building societies
with total assets of £62,000 million and in the course of the year almost
£12,000 million was advanced in new mortgages. Building societies are
supervised by the Chief Registrar of Friendly Societies under the Building
Societies Act 1962.
Credit unions are small savings and loan clubs where members agree to pool
part of their savings in order to provide themselves with low cost credit.
They have developed in Northern Ireland since the time of the Industrial
and Provident Societies Act (Northern Ireland) 1969 and, more recently,
have grown elsewhere in Britain. There are now nearly 80 in Great Britain.
The Credit Unions Act 1979 requires that members of a credit union
should have a ‘common bond’, such as working in the same factory, and
provides a system for their registration and supervision by the Chief
Registrar of Friendly Societies.
The British insurance industry provides a comprehensive and competitive
service domestically and internationally. It has been estimated that British
insurers handle some 20 per cent of general insurance business placed on
the international market. The London market is the world’s leading centre
for insurance where, in addition to most British companies and Lloyd’s, a
large number of overseas companies are also represented. It is the world
centre for the placement of international reinsurance and, partly as a
340
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Insurance
Companies
Lloyd’s
Insurance Brokers
International
Insurance
Services
consequence of this, many British companies have formed close relation¬
ships with overseas companies.
Some British insurance companies confine their activities to domestic
business but most large companies undertaking general business transact a
substantial amount overseas through branches, agencies or affiliated local
companies. There are about 800 companies authorised to carry on one or
more classes of insurance business in Britain, of which about 180 are
overseas companies.
Some 340 companies belong to the British Insurance Association and
these account for about 95 per cent of the world-wide business of the British
insurance companies market.
Life assurance is handled by some 300 authorised insurance companies
and is also available through certain friendly societies and Lloyd’s
underwriters. About 90 per cent of this business is transacted through the
73 members of the Life Offices’ Association or the nine members of the
Associated Scottish Life Offices.
Lloyd’s, established in the seventeenth century, is an incorporated society
of private insurers in London. Although its activities were originally
confined to the conduct of marine insurance business, a very considerable
world-wide market for the transaction of other classes of insurance
business in non-marine, aviation and motor markets has been built up.
Lloyd’s, which does not accept insurance itself, is regulated by a series of
special Acts of Parliament, dating from 1871 to 1982.
Lloyd’s is not a company but a market for insurance administered by the
Committee of Lloyd’s, where business is transacted by individual under¬
writers for their own account and risk and in competition with each other
and with insurance companies. Insurance may only be placed through
Lloyd’s brokers (see below), who negotiate with Lloyd’s underwriters on
behalf of the insured. Only elected underwriting members of Lloyd’s, who
must transact insurance with unlimited liability and who have met the most
stringent financial regulations laid down by the Committee, are permitted
to transact business at Lloyd’s; these safeguards give security to the
Lloyd’s policy.
There are over 20,000 underwriting members of Lloyd’s grouped into
about 430 syndicates and represented at Lloyd’s by underwriting agents
who accept risks on behalf of the members of their syndicates.
Insurance brokers, acting on behalf of the insured, are an essential part of
the Lloyd’s market and a valuable part of the company market. Many
brokers specialise in reinsurance business, acting as intermediaries in the
exchange of contracts between companies, both British and overseas, and
often acting as London representatives of the latter. The Insurance Brokers
(Registration) Act 1977 provides for the registration of insurance brokers
by a Registration Council and makes Britain the first country to introduce
self-regulation of insurance brokers.
The British Insurance Brokers’ Association, which sponsored the Act,
has over 4,000 members. They produce some £10,000 million annually in
premiums for Lloyd’s and insurance companies.
About one-half of the general (that is, non-life) business of members of the
British Insurance Association originates from about too overseas countries,
through establishments abroad, including overseas branches and agencies,
and through reinsurance placed on the London market.
BANKING AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
341
The Stock
Exchange
The Foreign
Exchange
Market
In accordance with the Treaty of Rome, insurance and reinsurance in the
European Community are regulated by directives addressed to the govern¬
ments of member states and intended to harmonise the legislation of the
various member countries, thus providing a ‘common market’, which
would avoid distortion of competition. Directives cover reinsurance,
compulsory motor insurance, freedom of establishment for life and non¬
life insurers, Community co-insurance and insurance intermediaries.
These directives have been implemented in British legislation.
The Stock Exchange has its main trading floor and central administra¬
tion in London. There are also trading floors in Glasgow, Liverpool,
Manchester, Birmingham and Dublin.
The number and variety of securities officially listed on the Stock
Exchange are greater than in any other market in the world and its turnover
of company securities is roughly equivalent to that of all the other European
exchanges combined. Some 7,200 securities are quoted on the Stock
Exchange; at the end of March 1982 these had a total market value of
£456,000 million. About 5,600 securities of companies were quoted, in¬
cluding a number of leading overseas securities. Company issues repre¬
sent more than three-quarters of the securities at market valuation, the
remainder being British, Irish Republic and other overseas government
and corporation stocks. Institutional investors, such as pension funds, now
own a higher proportion of ordinary shares than individuals. A market in
unlisted securities (generally those of small companies unable or unwilling
to obtain a Stock Exchange listing) was opened in 1980.
A market in traded share options was opened in 1978 on the Stock
Exchange. The market, in the shares of 15 prominent British companies,
enables investors not only to buy options to purchase or sell shares in future
at pre-fixed prices but also to trade in the options themselves.
The securities industy is subject to a combination of statutory and non-
statutory regulation by the Council for the Securities Industry, formed in
1978 to provide cohesion between the self-regulatory elements. The law on
investor protection is under review.
The market consists of banks and several firms of foreign exchange brokers
which act as intermediaries between the banks. It provides those engaged in
international trade with foreign currencies for their transactions. The
foreign exchange banks are in close contact with financial centres abroad
and are able to quote buying and selling rates for both spot and future
delivery. The forward market enables traders who, at a given date in the
future, are due to receive or make a specific foreign currency payment, to
contract in advance to sell or buy the foreign currency involved for sterling
at a precise fixed exchange rate.
The eurocurrency market provides a network of bank deposits and loans
denominated in a currency other than that of the country in which the bank
is situated. The eurobond market performs a similar service in transferring
funds from lenders to borrowers but by means of bonds issued in currencies
other than that of the issuing country. Transactions in both markets tend to
be in large denominations. The markets developed in the late 1950s
following the restoration of convertibility between the major currencies
partly in order to avoid incurring the costs of exchange control and other
regulations.
342
The London
Gold Market
Commodity
Markets
Financial
Futures
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Anyone may deal in gold but, in practice, dealings are largely concentrated
in the hands of the five members of the London gold market. The five
members meet twice daily to establish a London fixing price for gold. This
price provides a reference point for world-wide dealings in gold. Although
much interest centres upon the fixings, active dealing takes place through¬
out the day. With the opening in April 1982 of the London Gold Futures
Market, the only one in the European time zone, futures dealings in the
metal around the world are now possible 24 hours a day.
Britain remains the principal international centre for transactions in a large
number of commodities, although most of the sales negotiated in London
relate to consignments which never pass through the ports of Britain. The
need for close links with sources of finance and with shipping and insurance
services often determined the location of these markets in the City of
London. There are also futures markets in cocoa, coffee, grains (wheat and
barley), rubber, soya bean meal and oil, sugar, wool and non-ferrous metals
(aluminium, copper, lead, nickel, silver, tin and zinc), potatoes and gas oil.
The London International Financial Futures Exchange began trading on
the floor of the Royal Exchange in late 1982. Over 250 banks and other
financial institutions are members of the market, which allows parties
affected by movements in interest rates or exchange rates to reduce their
vulnerability. Trading takes place in financial instruments of differing
maturities and denominated in a number of currencies.
iq Overseas Trade
and Payments
Although small in area and accounting for only about 14 per cent of the
world’s population, Britain is the fifth largest trading nation in the world—
and, as a member of the European Community, part of the world’s largest
trading area, which accounts for about one-third of all trade.
Overseas trade has been of vital importance to the economy for hundreds
of years, and especially since the mid-nineteenth century, when the rapid
growth of industry, commerce and shipping was accompanied by Britain’s
development as an international trading centre. It has become increasingly
so during the 1970s and early 1980s with the lowering of trade barriers and
greater specialisation of international production. Exports are equivalent
to about 30 per cent of the gross domestic product at factor cost. Britain is
a major supplier of machinery, vehicles, aerospace products, metal manu¬
factures, electrical equipment, chemicals and textiles, and a growing oil
exporter. It relies upon imports for about two-fifths of total consumption of
foodstuffs, and for most of the raw materials needed for its industries.
Invisible trade is also of great significance to the economy, accounting for
one-third of overseas earnings; and Britain’s net earnings from invisibles
are second only to those of the United States.
OVERSEAS TRADE
In 1980 Britain’s exports of goods were valued at about £47,400 million and
its imports of goods at about £46,200 million (both values are free on board,
defined in T able 29, and are on a balance of payments basis, as distinct from
an overseas trade statistics basis, which for imports includes the cost of
insurance and freight, and for both exports and imports includes returned
goods).1 Between 1979 and 1980 the value of exports rose by 16 per cent
while that of imports increased by 5 per cent. However, in terms of volume
exports rose by 2 per cent, while imports fell by 5 5 per cent.
Commodity Britain has traditionally been an importer of food and raw materials and an
Composition exporter of manufactured goods. However, in recent years the import
pattern has changed considerably, with nearly two-thirds being accounted
for by finished and semi-finished manufactures, almost double the pro¬
portion of i960.
Manufactured goods are still responsible for the bulk of exports (see
Table 30), although there has been a shift towards finished, rather than semi¬
finished, goods. By far the most important group is machinery and trans¬
port equipment, which in 1980 accounted for 34 per cent of total exports.
Exports of machinery alone accounted for 24 per cent of the total. The share
VISIBLE
TRADE
‘Publication of most of the visible trade statistics for 1981 has been delayed. Accordingly, this section
describes visible trade in 1980, although Table 29 contains some published import statistics for 1981 and
Table 33 contains a provisional estimate of the visible trade balance.
344
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Geographical
Distribution of
Trade
Table 29: Exports and Imports 1971—81 (balance of payments basis)
1971 1976 1979 1980 1981
Value (£ million)
Exports f.o.b.
Exports f.o.b.a
Imports f.o.b.
Imports c.i.f.a
Volume index (1975 = 100):
Exports
Imports
Unit value index (1975 = 100):
Exports
Imports
Terms of trade (1975:=: ioo)fc
9,043 25,191 40,687 47,396 na
9,070 25,277 40,637 47,339 na
8,853 29,120 44,136 46,211 48,087
9,799 31,084 46,925 49,886 51,348
85-9 109-9 1257 1280 na
85'5 105-8 125-6 119-1 119-1
537 ii9’6
44-8 122-2
119-8 97-9
171-7
161-6
106-3
1928 na
185-8 2041
103-7 Ha
'Edition ' M°mhly RevieW of External Trade Statistics and United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1982
“On an overseas trade statistics basis.
'’Export unit value index as a percentage of import unit value index.
Notes: f.o.b. = free on board, that is all costs accruing up to the time of placing the goods on board the
exporting vessel having been paid by the seller.
c.i.f. =cost, insurance and freight, that is including shipping, insurance and other expenses
incurred in the delivery of goods as far as their place of importation in Britain. Some of these
expenses represent earnings by companies resident in Britain and are more appropriate to
the invisibles account.
na = not available.
of chemicals has also grown fairly steadily, to reach 11 per cent. The greater
importance of North Sea oil exports is reflected in the recent rapid rise in
the share of fuels in total exports, from 4 per cent in 1975 to 14 per cent
in 1980. Sectors which have become relatively less important include
passenger motor cars and textiles, the latter accounting for under 3 per cent
of exports in 1980, compared with 7 per cent in i960.
Recent changes in Britain’s import pattern are similar to those which
have affected other major industrialised countries, although to a lesser
degree. There has been a large rise in the share of finished manufactures and
semi-finished goods, particularly the former which accounted for 35 per
cent of imports in 1980, as against 11 per cent in i960. Since i962imports of
semi-manufactures have formed a larger part of the total import bill than
basic materials, reflecting the tendency for producer countries to undertake
processing of primary products up to the semi-finished and occasionally
finished stage. The decline in the proportion of food imports reflects the
increasing extent to which demand for food has been met by domestic
agriculture and the smaller share of expenditure devoted to food.
About three-quarters of Britain’s exports and imports are with other
developed countries. In the last 30 years trade with the rest of Western
Europe has become increasingly important, representing nearly 60 per cent
of Britain’s trade in 1980, compared with about 30 per cent in 1950.
European Community countries account for six of the top ten export
markets and for six of the ten leading suppliers of goods to Britain (see
Table 31), and in 1980 Britain had a surplus on trade with the rest of the
Community. In general, there has been a decline in the importance of
North America (the United States and Canada) as a trading partner, while
OVERSEAS TRADE AND PAYMENTS
345
INVISIBLE
TRANSACTIONS
Table 30: Commodity Composition of Trade 1980"
Exports (f.o.b.) Imports (c.i.f.)
£ million per cent £ million per cent
Non-manufactures: 11,136 235
Food, beverages and tobacco 33269 6-9
Basic materials I3450 31
Fuels 6,417 13-6
Manufactured goods: 34>8i4 73-5
Semi-manufactures of which, 143O36 29 6
Chemicals 5 >290 112
Textiles 1,363 29
Iron and steel 984 21
Non-ferrous metals 1,760 3-7
Metal manufactures 1,310 2-8
Other 3,329 7-0
Finished manufactures of which, 20,778 43 9
Machinery 11,473 242
Road vehicles 3,156 6-7
Other transport equipment 1,645 3-5
Other manufactures 4,5°4 9'5
Miscellaneous 1)388 29
17)136
6,178
4,050
6,908
31,240
133493
3,148
i,545
C449
2,487
866
3,997
173747
7>733
3,348
1,489
5,i77
i,5io
34 4
124
81
13-8
62 6
27-0
63
31
29
50
1-7
80
356
15'5
6-7
30
104
3 0
Total
47,339
100 49,886
100
Source: Monthly Review of External Trade Statistics
“On an overseas trade statistics basis.
Note : Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
other recent features of Britain’s trade have been a decline in the proportion
of trade with other Commonwealth countries and the emergence of oil¬
exporting countries as a major market for British exports.
Britain has nearly always earned a surplus from its invisible transactions.
These fall into three main groups: services (receipts and payments arising
from services, as distinct from goods, supplied to and received from
overseas residents); interest, profits and dividends (income arising from
outward and inward investment and other capital transactions); and trans¬
fers between Britain and other countries. In 1981 there was a surplus of
£3,023 million on Britain’s invisible earnings (see Table 32), some £1,340
million more than in 1980, mainly as a result of a return to a substantial
surplus on interest, profits and dividends.
Gross earnings from invisible exports (which amounted to £29,338
million in 1981) are normally equivalent to about half of the earnings from
visible exports. Earnings from services rose by 6 per cent in 1981 to £ 16,754
million, although in volume terms this represented a fall of about 7 per cent.
Debits, at £12,779 million, were 9 per cent higher by value but 1 per cent
lower by volume. A notable feature was a 22 per cent rise in net earnings
from financial services to £1,954 million in 1981. Earnings from travel
moved into deficit with debits 20 per cent higher than in 1980 as the number
of British residents travelling abroad rose by 9 per cent and their average
expenditure per visit by 10 per cent. Earnings from sea transport were also
346
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
COMMERCIAL
POLICY
Table 31: Principal British Markets and Suppliers 1980"
Main markets
Value
£ million
Share
per cent
Exports
Federal Republic of Germany
United States
Netherlands
France
Irish Republic
Belgium/Luxembourg
Switzerland
Italy
Sweden
Nigeria
Imports
United States
Federal Republic of Germany
France
Netherlands
Belgium/Luxembourg
Italy
Switzerland
Saudi Arabia
Irish Republic
Japan
5,071
4,535
3,843
3,586
2,637
2,259
i,953
1.896
1,618
i,i95
6,034
5,666
3,851
3,407
2,384
2,304
1.897
1,887
i,773
1,709
10-7
96
81
76
5- 6
48
41
4-0
34
2'5
121
H'4
7.7
6- 8
48
46
38
38
36
34
Source: Monthly Review of External Trade Statistics
aOn an overseas trade statistics basis. Exports are f.o.b., imports c.i.f.
in deficit, but earnings from other types of service showed substantial
surpluses.
There was a surplus on interest, profits and dividends of £1,004 million
in 1981, compared with a deficit of £273 million in 1980, as credits rose by
22 per cent, partly as a result of a fall in sterling’s exchange rate. Earnings on
borrowing and lending abroad by British banks rose particularly strongly
and earnings from portfolio investment (investment in overseas securities)
continued to rise, mainly reflecting the large increase in such investment
since the abolition of exchange controls (see p 350).
Substantial government transfer payments comprise contributions to
the European Community, contributions and subscriptions to international
organisations, and bilateral aid. There was a significant improvement in the
balance of transfers with the European Community where the deficit fell
from £825 million in 198010 £530 million in 1981, mainly owing to a rise in
gross budget refunds as a result of the agreement negotiated in 1980.
Britain has long been an advocate of the removal of artificial barriers to
trade, and to this end has taken a leading part in the activities of such
organisations as the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), the
International Monetary Fund (IMF), the Organisation for Economic Co-
OVERSEAS TRADE AND PAYMENTS
347
General
Agreement on
Tariffs and
Trade
Table 32: Britain’s Invisible Transactions 1981
£ million
Credits Debits Balance
Services:
Private sector and public corporations of
which,
Sea transport
Civil aviation
Travel
Financial services'1
Other
General government
Interest, profits and dividends:
Private sector and public corporations
General government
Transfers:
Private
General government
16,754 12,779 +3,975
16,290
3,772
2,359
2,999
C954
5,206
464
10,082
9,142
940
2,502
844
1,658
11,540
3,870
1,922
3,285
2,483
1,239
9,078
7.458
1,620
4.458
1,119
3,339
+ 4,750
-98
+ 437
-286
+ C954
+ 2,743
-775
+1,004
+ 1,684
-680
-1,956
-275
— 1,681
Total invisible transactions
29,338 26,315 +3,023
Source: United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1982 Edition
aThe figure is obtained net of overseas payments, and similar earnings in Britain by overseas financial
institutions are negligible. For these reasons the item appears only as a credit entry.
operation and Development (OECD) and the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) (see p 90). Since joining the
European Community in 1973, Britain has conducted many of these
activities in collaboration with its Community partners. Britain also
participates in the development of the Community’s commercial policy.
The Community’s common customs tariff is, on average, at a similar level
to the tariffs of other major industrial countries.
Protective tariffs have mostly been considerably reduced in recent years as a
result of negotiations held under the auspices of the GATT. These also
reduced other barriers to trade and discrimination in international com¬
merce. In the latest series of the GATT Multilateral Trade Negotiations,
the ‘Tokyo Round’ (1973-79), a number of agreements dealing with both
tariff and non-tariff barriers to trade were concluded. The non-tariff
agreements have the common aim of reducing or eliminating existing non-
tariff barriers to trade and preventing the erection of new obstacles. They
cover areas such as technical barriers (calling for the use of international
standards whenever possible), government procurement (calling for
liberalisation of government purchasing), customs valuation (aiming at
greater uniformity for customs valuation methods), and an agreement on
subsidies and countervailing duties. Developed countries have undertaken
not to grant any forms of export subsidies and all signatories undertake not
to apply countervailing duties unless it can be clearly demonstrated that a
subsidy causes or threatens to cause material injury to the domestic market
of the country concerned.
The GATT Anti-Dumping Code sets out criteria for the investigation of
complaints of alleged dumping and the imposition of appropriate remedies.
348
Community
Trade
Agreements
CONTROLS
ON TRADE
Import
Controls
Export
Controls
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
As a signatory of the code, the European Community has adopted an
implementing regulation to provide for action in cases in which industry
in Britain or other Community countries is suffering from unfair trade
practices.
With the exception of transitional tariff arrangements for certain products
from Greece, all tariffs on trade between Britain and the other European
Community countries have been eliminated. Britain applies the common
customs tariff to all countries neither belonging to, nor having any special
arrangement with, the Community, subject to special arrangements for
some industrial materials.
The Community has reciprocal preferential trading agreements with the
European Free Trade Association (EFTA) countries (Austria, Finland,
Iceland, Norway, Portugal, Sweden and Switzerland), Cyprus, Israel,
Malta, Spain and Turkey, and non-reciprocal agreements with Algeria,
Morocco, Tunisia, Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, Yugoslavia, and a
group of African, Caribbean and Pacific countries (see below). Tariff
preference is also given to developing countries (under the Generalised
Scheme of Preferences), the Faroe Islands and the overseas countries and
territories of member countries.
Former Commonwealth preferential agreements have been phased out
and replaced, in the case of a number of developing Commonwealth
countries in Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific, by the trade provisions
of the Convention of Lome which came into effect in 1975. This was
succeeded by a second convention, Lome II, in 1981. A number of non-
Commonwealth developing countries within the same geographical area
are also signatories.
Britain maintains few restrictions on its international trade. Most goods
may be imported freely and only a narrow range of goods is subject to any
sort of export control.
In accordance with its international obligations under the GATT and to
the European Community, Britain has progressively removed almost all
quantitative restrictions imposed on economic grounds. The few remaining
quantitative controls mainly affect textile goods (in view of the rapid
contraction of the domestic textile industry in the face of competition from
low-cost supplying countries). All quantitative restrictions have been
removed from imports of goods of Community origin, with the exception of
certain internationally recognised restrictions operated by the Department
of Trade on a few goods such as firearms, ammunition and radioactive
materials. Other government departments operate certain restrictions on
non-economic grounds (on goods such as animals and plants and some of
their derivatives, drugs, explosives, certain ‘citizens band’ radios and
pornographic material) for reasons of health, safety, conservation or social
policy.
The great majority of British exports are not subject to any government
control or direction. However, there are controls governing exports of
military and strategic significance which also apply to certain metals, metal
products (including certain British coins), waste and scrap; on cattle,
sheep, swine, goats, horses, asses and mules, for humanitarian purposes; on
salmon and trout, to inhibit out-of-season fishing; on cattle, swine and
OVERSEAS TRADE AND PAYMENTS
349
GOVERNMENT
SERVICES
British
Overseas Trade
Board
Export Credit
Insurance
certain meat exported to another member state of the European Com¬
munity, for health certification purposes; on endangered species of animals
and plants and some of their derivatives, in accordance with international
agreements; on photographic material over 60 years old and valued at £200
or more per item and other articles over 50 years old, to restrict the export of
items of national importance; on dangerous drugs; on British spirits
(beverages) in casks of less than 40 litres; and on Common Agricultural
Policy products.
The Government assists exporters by creating conditions favourable to the
export trade and by providing information and advice about opportunities
for trade in other countries and credit insurance facilities. Export promo¬
tion is also assisted by the Scottish Council (Development and Industry),
the Development Corporation for Wales and in Northern Ireland by the
Department of Economic Development.
The British Overseas Trade Board (BOTB) directs Britain’s official export
promotion services, which include the provision of export intelligence
assistance to British exporters in appointing agents and locating potential
customers, help at trade fairs and other promotional events overseas, and
support for firms participating in trade missions. It includes represen¬
tatives of commerce and industry, the Trades Union Congress, the Depart¬
ment of Trade and the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and operates
under the general authority of the Secretary of State for Trade, who is the
president.
Exporters wanting assistance and advice can consult the offices of the
BOTB throughout Britain and, through these offices, the commercial posts
of the British Diplomatic Service overseas.
The Export Credits Guarantee Department (ECGD) provides credit in¬
surance for about a third of the country’s export trade and insures exports
of both goods and services. The main risks covered include insolvency or
protracted default of the buyer, governmental action which stops the
British exporter receiving payment, new import restrictions, and war or
civil disturbance in the buyer’s country. Cover may commence from the
date of contract or (at lower premiums) from the date of shipment.
This insurance may be supplemented by unconditional guarantees of
repayment given direct to banks financing exporters, whether in sterling or
foreign currencies. Alternatively, for contracts over £1 million the ECGD
will guarantee loans direct to overseas buyers enabling them to pay on cash
terms, or ‘lines of credit’ similarly covering an agreed buying programme of
an overseas country. The banks provide finance against these guarantees.
The ECGD is also prepared to support the issue of performance bonds in
the commercial market in respect of cash or near-cash contracts worth over
£250,000.
Investment insurance is provided for new British investment overseas
against expropriation, war damage and restrictions on remittances.
BALANCE OF PAYMENTS
The balance of payments statistics record transactions between residents of
Britain and non-residents. The balance on current account shows whether
Britain has a surplus of income over expenditure.
350
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In recent years Britain’s balance of payments has usually shown a deficit
on visible trade offset wholly or partially by a surplus on invisible earnings.
However, in 1980 there was a substantial improvement in visible trade,
resulting in the first visible trade surplus since 1971, and there was also a
large visible trade surplus in 1981. As the balance on invisible transactions
also rose substantially in 1981, there was a large current account surplus
estimated at £6,036 million (see Table 33). This indicates a substantial
increase in Britain’s net overseas assets. Although non-residents continued
to invest substantially in Britain during 1981, the total invested was lower
than in 1980, while Britain’s overseas investment rose sharply. Total
investment and other capital transactions resulted in a large net outflow
from Britain, reflecting the current account surplus.
A description of visible trade and invisible transactions is given on
PP 343~7 and capital transactions are described below.
CAPITAL
FLOWS
Table 33: Britain’s Balance of Payments 1971-81
£ million
1971 1976 1979 1980 1981
Visible trade balance
Invisible transactions
balance
Current balance
Investment and other
capital transactions
Allocation of Special
Drawing Rights
Official financing:
Net transactions with
overseas monetary
authorities
Foreign currency borrowing
(net) by the Government
and public sector
Official reserves6
Balancing item
+ 190 -3,929 -3,449
+ 934 +3,054 +2,596
+ 1,185 + 3,013*
+ 1,680 +3,023
+ 1,124 -875 -853
+ 1,790 -3,009 +2,307
+ 125 — +195
-1,817 +984 -596
+ 82 + 1,791 -250
1,536 +853 -1,059
+ 232 +256 +256
+ 2,865 +6,036
-1,864 —7,209
+ 180 +158
140
145
-941 -1,587
-291 +2,419
+191 +328
Source: United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1982 Edition
^Calculated using a provisional estimate of exports for 1981, based on data for ten months.
^Drawings on (+ )/additions to (—).
Britain’s exchange controls were abolished during 1979 and residents are
free to acquire foreign currency for any purpose including direct and
portfolio investment overseas. Controls on the lending of sterling abroad
have also been removed and non-residents may freely acquire sterling for
any purpose. Gold may be freely bought and sold. The abolition of
exchange controls means that Britain meets its full obligations on capital
movements under the OECD Code on Capital Movements and under
European Community directives. The Government welcomes both inward
and outward investment. Outward investment encourages output abroad
and develops markets for British exports, while providing earnings in the
OVERSEAS TRADE AND PAYMENTS
EXTERNAL
ASSETS AND
LIABILITIES
35i
form of interest payments, profits and dividends. Foreign investment in
Britain often helps to increase the efficiency of industry by introducing new
technological developments.
In 1981 direct investment overseas by British companies, excluding oil
companies, was £5,157 million, while British residents’ portfolio invest¬
ment overseas totalled £4,100 million, over four times the amount in 1979,
as the overseas proportion of portfolios has gradually been built up to the
desired level. The inflow of direct, portfolio and other investment into the
British private sector amounted to £3,168 million. An analysis of invest¬
ment and other capital transactions is given in Table 34.
At the end of 1981 Britain’s aggregate identified external assets were valued
at £106,148 million1: £89,921 million belonging to the private sector
(£64,780 million of investment overseas and £25,141 million of banking
and commercial claims) and £16,227 million to the public sector including
official reserves (gold, convertible currencies and IMF Special Drawing
Rights) estimated at £ 11,960 million.
Table 34: Analysis of Investment and Other Capital Transactions
1979-81°
£ million
1979 1980 1981
Overseas investment in Britain:
British public sector + 902
British private sector -f 3,459
British private investment overseas — 6,555
Official long-term capital — 401
Import credit* -f-6x
Export credit* _ 856
Foreign currency borrowing or
lending abroad by British banks + 1,623
Changes in external sterling liabilitiesc + 3,336
External sterling lending by British banks'* + 205
Other external borrowing or lending +601
Other transactions — 68
+ 589 +188
+ 4,654 +3,168
— 8,204 ~ 10,637
-9i -334
— 268 +115
- 902 - 999
+ 2,018
+ 3,820
-2,500
-763
-217
+1,404
+ 2,747
-2,98c
+ 39
+ 8c
Total
+ 2,307 -1,864 -7,209
Source: United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1982 Edition
a Assets: increase ( - )/decrease ( +); liabilities: increase ( + )/decrease ( -). Excludes official financing.
Excluding trade credit between related firms; after deducting advance and progress payments to suppliers.
cExchange reserves and other external banking and money market liabilities in sterling.
^Excluding credit for exports from Britain.
At the end of 1981 direct private investment overseas (investment in
branches, subsidiaries and associated companies), excluding insurance
(other than in the United States) and oil, totalled £32,560 million, portfolio
investment £22,000 million and investment by oil companies £9,100
’The significance of any inventory of Britain’s aggregate external assets and liabilities is limited because a
variety of claims and obligations are included that are very dissimilar in kind, in degree of liquidity and in
method of valuation.
352
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
million. At the end of 1978 over three-quarters of direct investment
(including investment by oil companies) was in other developed countries,
with North America and the European Community each receiving about
one-quarter. The main individual countries were the United States (which
has about 21 per cent of Britain’s overseas direct investment), Australia (13
per cent) and the Federal Republic of Germany (7 per cent). Just under half
of direct investment is in manufacturing units, 13 per cent in distribution
and just over 40 per cent in other activities.
Britain’s aggregate identified external liabilities were valued at £78)275
million at the end of 1981. Overseas investment in the private sector
accounted for £63,818 million, comprising £16,975 million of direct in¬
vestment (excluding that of oil and insurance companies), £5,800 million of
portfolio holdings of British company securities and £9,550 million of
investment by overseas oil companies. At the end of 1978 investment from
developed countries accounted for virtually all of overseas direct invest¬
ment (excluding insurance) in Britain, with 60 per cent originating in the
United States and 23 per cent in the European Community. Slightly under
50 per cent is in manufacturing industry.
Promotion
of Science and
Technology
Britain has for centuries encouraged research and innovation, and its
record of achievement in relation to size of population is in many respects
unsurpassed. This record has been maintained throughout the twentieth
century. For example, fundamental contributions to modern molecular
genetics were made by the working out of the structure of the molecule
of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) by Professor Francis Crick, Professor
Maurice Wilkins, and an American colleague, James Watson, at Cambridge
University in 1952. A more recent achievement was the research carried out
by Mr Patrick Steptoe and Dr Robert Edwards which made possible the
birth of the world’s first test-tube baby in Britain in 1978. Other notable
contributions in recent years have been made by Professor Dennis Gabor
on holography (the production of three-dimensional images using lasers),
Dr Brian Josephson on superconductivity (abnormally high electrical
conductivity at low temperatures), Professor Stephen Hawking on black
holes (hypothetical regions of space). Sir Martin Ryle and Professor
Antony Hewish on radio-astrophysics. Professor Frederick Sanger on
molecular biology, and Dr Godfrey Hounsfield on computer-assisted
tomography (for medical diagnosis), among others. Nobel prizes for
science have been won by 64 British citizens, a number exceeded only by
the United States.
The Government keeps under review facilities for training scientists and
ensures that adequate research is devoted to matters of national interest,
which include defence, industrial innovation, environmental protection,
use and conservation of natural resources, the provision of good food,
shelter and energy and of efficient transport and communications.
Total expenditure in Britain on scientific research and development in
1978-79 (the latest year for which complete estimates are available) was
£3,250 million, or 2 per cent of the gross domestic product. About half was
provided by industrial enterprises, with a significant contribution also
being made by private endowments, trusts and charities. The other half
was financed by the Government, which carries out roughly a quarter of
Britain’s research and development in its own establishments. Govern¬
ment finance for research and development also went to industry and the
universities.
Responsibility for basic civil science in Britain rests with the Secretary of
State for Education and Science, and responsibility for technology mainly
with the Secretary of State for Industry, but in all cases the Prime Minister
has overall responsibility. Other government departments are concerned
with research and development related to their functions. Government
responsibility for space activities is undertaken by the Secretary of State for
Industry, the Secretary of State for Education and Science (through the
Science and Engineering Research Council, see p 355), and the Secretary of
354 BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
State for Defence according to the nature of the project. Applied research
and development is controlled by the ‘customer-contractor principle’
under which government departments, as customers, define their research
requirements. The work is undertaken by contractors who may be, for
example, government laboratories, research councils, research associa¬
tions, industry or the universities. Departments with major technological
needs generally have a Chief Scientist’s organisation, which helps to
formulate requirements, select the most suitable contractors and co¬
operate with them to obtain the best value for money.
Advice on scientific and technological matters is provided by the
Advisory Board for the Research Councils, the Advisory Council for
Applied Research and Development, and a committee of Chief Scientists
and Permanent Secretaries. These bodies ensure that scientific questions
are brought before ministers as appropriate and that scientific priorities
reflect those of the Government as a whole.
Expenditure Total government expenditure on research and development in 1982-83 is
estimated (at outturn prices) to be some £3,500 million. The largest
departmental research and development budget is that of the Ministry of
Defence for defence equipment (see also p 93). The main civil depart¬
ments involved are the Department of Education and Science, which
supports the research councils and the universities; the Department of
Industry; the Department of Energy; the Ministry of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food and the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for
Scotland; and the Department of the Environment and the Department of
Transport. More details of the kinds of research carried out are given in the
relevant chapters.
The
Department of
Education and
Science
The Department of Education and Science discharges its responsibilities
for basic and applied civil science mainly through the five research councils
to which it allocates funds from its science budget (the budget, at cash
prices, totals £478 million in 1982-83). The councils and their allocations
are: the Science and Engineering Research Council (£234 4 million), the
Medical Research Council (£107-4 million), the Natural Environment
Research Council (£57 6 million), the Agricultural Research Council
(£43'6 million) and the Social Science Research Council (£20 9 million).
Science budget grants are also made to the British Museum (Natural
History) and to the Royal Society. The budget is allocated for research
grants and contracts to universities, polytechnics and elsewhere, research
units and other establishments of the research councils, postgraduate
support and subscriptions to international scientific organisations. The
Department is also responsible for some aspects of international scientific
relations (see p 362) and helps to co-ordinate government policy regarding
scientific and technical information.
The Advisory
Board for the
Research Councils
The Advisory Board for the Research Councils advises the Secretary of
State on civil science, particularly with regard to the research council
system, on the support of postgraduate students, on the proper balance
between national and international scientific activities, and on the allo¬
cation of the science budget among research councils and other bodies. It
also promotes close liaison between the councils and users of their research.
Its membership includes the chairman or secretary of each of the research
councils, the chairman of the University Grants Committee, the Chief
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
THE
RESEARCH
COUNCILS
Science and
Engineering
Research
Council
Research
Establishments
International
Collaboration
355
Scientists from departments with a major interest in the work of the
research councils, the Chief Scientist to the Central Policy Review Staff,
and independent members drawn from universities, industry and the Royal
Society.
Each of the five research councils is an autonomous body established under
Royal Charter with membership drawn from the universities, professions,
industry and the Government. They conduct research through their own
research establishments and by supporting selected research in universities
and other higher education establishments. As well as being financed from
the science budget, three of the councils receive commissions, estimated
(at cash prices) at £77 million in 1982-83, from departments under the
customer-contractor principle. In 1982-83 the Agricultural Research
Council is expected to earn 51 per cent of its total income from commis¬
sions, the Natural Environment Research Council 31 per cent and the
Medical Research Council o-6 per cent.
The Science and Engineering Research Council (SERC) supports basic
research in astronomy, geophysics, the biological sciences, chemistry,
mathematics, physics, and engineering and applied sciences, in furthering
its primary purpose of sustaining standards of education and research in the
universities and polytechnics. A large proportion of the SERC’s resources
is devoted to the provision of research grants to help academic staff to carry
out fundamental research, either in their own institutions or in the
Council s research establishments or elsewhere; the encouragement of
active collaboration between higher education establishments and industry,
particularly in areas of national importance; the award of studentships to
suitable graduates for training in methods of research or a specialised
branch of science or engineering of importance to British industry; and the
award of fellowships to promising scientists or engineers to enable them to
carry out their own independent research programmes.
The SERC maintains four research establishments: the Daresbury
Laboratory at Warrington (Cheshire), the Royal Greenwich Observatory
at Herstmonceux (East Sussex), the Royal Observatory, Edinburgh, and
the Rutherford Appleton Laboratory at Chilton (Oxfordshire). The estab¬
lishments are centres of specialised research, and are also used for the
development and operation of central experimental facilities beyond the
resources of an academic institution. They provide support for scientists
whose research needs access to facilities run by international research
organisations, such as the powerful particle accelerators at the European
Organisation for Nuclear Research (CERN) near Geneva, Switzerland,
and the high-flux neutron source at the Institut Laue-Langevin (ILL) at
Grenoble, France.
The SERC provides national contributions to CERN, the civil science
programme of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation, the Anglo-
Australian Telescope, and the European Incoherent Scatter Project; and,
also, part of Britain’s contribution to the European Space Agency (see
P 363)- It also contributes to, and shares with its French and Federal
German partners, the control of the ILL nuclear reactor at Grenoble. In
addition, the SERC encourages scientists and engineers to initiate or
extend collaborative projects with colleagues overseas, particularly in
Europe, by using its existing fellowships, studentships and grant schemes.
356
Engineering
Astronomy
Nuclear Physics
Natural Sciences
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Developments in engineering research and training geared to the needs of
industry are major concerns of the SERC. Some special programmes are
being supported within a general effort to develop research and post¬
graduate training in university and polytechnic engineering departments.
Subjects receiving major support include biotechnology, marine tech¬
nology, polymer engineering, microelectronics and computer applications
(such as industrial robotics), materials conservation, energy in buildings,
radio communications systems, medical engineering, combustion engines
and coal technology. The Teaching Company Scheme, jointly sponsored
by the SERC and the Department of Industry, supports collaborative
ventures between academic engineering departments and industrial
companies to improve their manufacturing methods and performance. A
network to provide an interactive computing facility to universities has
been built up and is serviced at Chilton.
Astronomy uses both ground-based techniques, such as optical and radio
telescopes, and space-based methods (see p 363). Optical astronomy is
carried out in university departments and, within the SERC, at the Royal
Greenwich Observatory and the Royal Observatory, Edinburgh. Instru¬
ments include the Royal Greenwich Observatory’s Isaac Newton Tele¬
scope, of diameter 2 5 metres, which is being installed at a new site on the
island of La Palma in the Canary Islands (the 4-2-metre Herschel Tele¬
scope, destined for La Palma, is under construction); the Anglo-Australian
Telescope, of diameter 3 9 metres, at Siding Spring, Australia, in a joint
project with the Australian Government; a 1-2-metre Schmidt telescope
on the same site; optical telescopes operated by the South African Astro¬
nomical Observatory, to which the SERC contributes; and a 3-8-metre
infra-red telescope, the largest telescope in the world designed specifically
to make infra-red observations, at Mauna Kea, Hawaii. The SERC is also
proposing to construct on Hawaii a special 15-metre radio telescope for
observing wavelengths of less than a millimetre. Cambridge and Manchester
Universities are the main centres for research in radio astronomy with
substantial support from the SERC. The Starlink network of computer
systems, centred at Chilton and located at many centres of astronomical
research in Britain, provides and co-ordinates image processing and data
reduction facilities for use by British astronomers.
The SERC establishments concerned with the provision of facilities for
university research in nuclear physics are at Chilton, which supports
university teams engaged in experiments in particle physics at CERN and
other centres, and the Daresbury Laboratory, where a 30 million-volt
tandem accelerator for research into nuclear structure is due for completion
by the end of 1982. Research projects using these and other facilities are
funded through research grants to universities.
Support is provided for high-quality research in biological and natural
sciences, mathematics and science-based archaeology. Where experimental
facilities are too expensive to be provided for individual universities and
polytechnics, central facilities have been provided. For example, at the
Daresbury Laboratory a new synchrotron storage ring came into operation
in 1980. It provides high intensity electromagnetic radiation used in a wide
range of experiments in materials science, surface physics, crystallography
and molecular biology. Other central facilities include a high-powered laser
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
Medical
Research
Council
357
facility at Chilton, which is used to study plasmas, and a spallation neutron
source being built, also at Chilton, to provide a pulsed beam of neutrons.
The Medical Research Council (MRC) is the main government agency for
the support of biomedical research. Its major research establishments are
the National Institute for Medical Research at Mill Hill, London, which
carries out fundamental research relevant to medicine, the Clinical
Research Centre at Northwick Park Hospital, London, and the Laboratory
of Molecular Biology at Cambridge. The Council also has over 50 research
units, mostly located in university departments, medical schools and
hospitals in Britain. In addition to the work it supports in its own estab¬
lishments, the Council provides further support for research through
grants to workers in universities, polytechnics and other centres, and
through awards for those undertaking research training.
The MRC is assisted by four advisory boards: the Neurobiology and
Mental Health Board; the Cell Biology and Disorders Board; the Physio¬
logical Systems and Disorders Board; and the Tropical Medicine Research
Board.
Natural
Environment
Research
Council
Agricultural
Research
Council
The Natural Environment Research Council (NERC) is responsible for
encouraging, planning and executing research in the physical and biological
sciences relating to man’s natural environment and its resources. The work
is broadly divided into groups defined as: the Solid Earth—its physical
properties and mineral resources; Seas and Oceans—their behaviour and
living and mineral resources; Inland Waters—their behaviour and living
resources; Terrestrial Environments—wildlife communities and their re¬
sources; Atmosphere—its structure and interactions; and a number of
interdisciplinary studies including pollution and the physical and biological
properties of the Antarctic environment. Research programmes which the
NERC is planning to expand include those on geological work in connec¬
tion with deep drilling and mapping, which is important for future mineral
and energy exploration; new means of insect pest control using viruses
harmless to man; the climate; remote sensing by satellite, for resource and
ecological surveys; and modelling the behaviour of British estuaries.
The Council’s research institutes are: the British Antarctic Survey, the
Institute of Geological Sciences, the Institute of Hydrology, the Institute
of Marine Biochemistry, the Institute for Marine Environmental Research,
the Institute of Oceanographic Sciences, the Institute of Terrestrial
Ecology, the Institute of Virology and the Sea Mammal Research Unit.
The Council also operates the Research Vessel Services and maintains a
central computing service in support of all its institutes.
Research institutes aided by council grants are: the Freshwater Biological
Association, the Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom, the
Scottish Marine Biological Association, the Unit of Marine Invertebrate
Biology, the Unit of Comparative Plant Ecology and some university units.
The Agricultural Research Council (ARC) has eight institutes under its
direct control: the Animal Breeding Research Organisation, the Institute
for Research on Animal Diseases, the Institute of Animal Physiology, the
Food Research Institute, the Letcombe Laboratory, dealing with the
growth of crops in relation to soil conditions and cultivation, the Meat
Research Institute, the Poultry Research Centre, and the Weed Research
Organisation. There are four ARC units under distinguished scientists
358
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Social Science
Research
Council
UNIVERSITY
RESEARCH
associated with universities. The ARC is also responsible for 15 indepen¬
dent state-aided agricultural research institutes, notably the Rothamsted
Experimental Station, at Harpenden (Hertfordshire), which is the largest
agricultural research institute in Britain (and was the first in the world to be
established, in 1843), and deals with research on soils, fertilisers, crop
physiology and crop husbandry; and the National Institute of Agricultural
Engineering, at Silsoe (Bedfordshire). There are also seven independent
institutes in Scotland financed by the Department of Agriculture and
Fisheries for Scotland with advice from the ARC on their scientific pro¬
grammes, staffing and equipment.
The ARC is planning to devote additional sums to research in a number
of areas including the study of photosynthesis with the aim of increasing
crop yields, the genetic manipulation of plants, the breeding of plants
which could make their own nitrogen and so bring savings in the use of
fertilisers, and work on studying animal behaviour and diseases to obtain
healthier and more productive livestock.
The Social Science Research Council’s (SSRC) interest covers the broad
areas of social affairs, education and human development, industry and
employment, economic affairs, environment and planning, and govern¬
ment and law. It sponsors a number of designated research centres and
initiates research into such topics as industrial policy, energy policy,
population studies, central and local government, young people in society
and inner city areas. Grants are provided for research projects at univer¬
sities and other institutions, and awards made to postgraduate students.
The SSRC also has five research units: the Industrial Relations Research
Unit; the Cambridge Group for the History of Population and Social
Structure; the Research Unit on Ethnic Relations; the Centre for Socio-
legal Studies; and the Social and Applied Psychology Unit (run jointly with
the Medical Research Council).
Of the total estimated university expenditure on scientific research in the
academic year 1980-81 (£508 million), the largest government contribution
(£275 million) was through the University Grants Committee.
Scientific research in the universities and other institutions of higher
education is also supported through the research councils. This support
takes two forms. First, nearly two-thirds of the postgraduate students in
science and technology receive maintenance awards from the research
councils, through postgraduate studentships. These awards are in some
cases for periods of up to three years of training in research work and in
others for shorter periods for advanced studies. Second, grants and con¬
tracts are given to the universities and other institutions by the research
councils for specified projects, particularly in new or developing areas of
research. The ARC, MRC and SSRC maintain a number of research units
within universities. In addition, the research councils provide central
facilities in their own establishments for use by university research
workers. The other main channels of support for scientific research in the
universities are various government departments, the Royal Society, in¬
dustry and the independent foundations.
A number of universities in industrial centres have acquired outstanding
reputations in studies relating to their local industries, and on a national
scale close relationships are fostered between the universities, industries
and the Government in numerous joint projects. Britain has six science
—
old and new building
A large area of 18th century warehousing in the City of London has been redeveloped,
harmonising new building with the historic atmosphere of the area. Cutlers Gardens includes
offices, linked shopping arcades, sports facilities and residential units.
1 lr
■kJb 1U
1
/II M
v 1
1 19
Tlf •
6/ !
Museums
Above: The City
Museum and Art
Gallery at Stoke-on-
Trent in the heart of
the ‘Potteries’ region
of England was
chosen as the 1982
Museum of the Year.
It includes among its
exhibits one of the
finest collections of
ceramics in the
world.
Right: The main
exhibition hall of the
new British
Engineerium, Hove,
East Sussex. In
addition to
collecting, restoring
and exhibiting
mechanical
antiquities, it
provides courses
and lectures on the
national engineering
heritage.
spp
\ \
Hi \ t M
NEW
FRUIT
The Scottish Crop
Research Institute,
Dundee, has, after
nearly 20 years’
work, developed the
‘Tayberry’ (named
after the nearby
River Tay) which is a
cross between a
blackberry and a
raspberry.
Below: The size of
the fruit compared
with a top coin.
Sport
The 1982 London
Marathon in which
over 16,000 men and
women took part.
Many of the athletes
were sponsored and
raised thousands of
pounds for various
charities.
Below: The men’s
start.
Right: The finish on
Westminster Bridge.
Far right: Cyclist
Mandy Jones
winning the 1982
women’s 38-mile
(61 km) road race, to
become world
champion.
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
359
THE LEARNED
SOCIETIES
Royal Society
parks, with a further 15 being constructed or planned. These are sites
usually near universities containing science-based industries and designed
to facilitate commercial developments in advanced technology through
collaboration between university and industrial scientists and technologists.
Although today most research is conducted under other auspices, the
learned societies, of which there are more than 300, have retained their
traditional function of facilitating the spread of knowledge. The most
eminent of those concerned with science in its broadest aspects (as distinct
from those societies with specialised interests and activities) are the Royal
Society, Royal Society of Arts, Royal Institution and British Association.
The Royal Society, or, more fully, the Royal Society of London for
Improving Natural Knowledge, founded in 1660, occupies a unique place
in Britain’s scientific affairs and is equivalent to national academies of
sciences in other countries. It is the oldest such academy in the world to
have enjoyed continuous existence. There are today three main categories
of Fellowship: Royal Fellows; Foreign Members, of whom there are about
85; and the main body of Fellows numbering about 950. Election to the
Fellowship, which is for life, is restricted to 40 persons a year. The Royal
Society is governed by a council of 21 members. The President of the
Society is consulted on scientific appointments to research councils (other
than the Social Science Research Council) and Fellows serve on most
governmental advisory councils and committees concerned with research.
The Royal Society recognises the highest standards of scientific and
technological achievements through its elections to the Fellowship and the
award of its medals and endowed lectureships. It awards 14 medals (not all
annually) including the Copley Medal (its highest award) and three Royal
Medals, while there are seven endowed lectureships. The Society encour¬
ages research through the award of grants and research appointments. It
administers 18 research professorships, of which four are supported from
private funds and the remainder from its parliamentary grant. A further 12
senior research fellowships and 30 other research fellowships are supported
in British universities. Grants for research are made from its private funds
and from its parliamentary grant, and particular funds are available for
scientific investigations and expeditions, for travel by individual scientists,
for studies in the history of science and for scientific publications. The
dissemination of scientific knowledge is encouraged by a programme of
scientific discussion meetings and through its publications. It has an
extensive library of works relating to the history of science. The council
gives advice to the Government and other bodies on matters relating
to science and technology and their application, and study groups on
particular aspects of science are established at intervals to prepare reports
which are widely distributed to the scientific community. A number of
committees of the council, some of them jointly with other bodies, promote
improvements in education in science subjects and emphasise the import¬
ance of the applied sciences and engineeering in industry.
The international relations of the Royal Society are extensive. As the
national academy of science, it represents Britain in all but one of the 18
international unions comprising the International Council of Scientific
Unions. It is a member of the European Science Foundation and certain
other organisations, and also plays a leading part in international scientific
programmes. It has agreements for exchange visits by scientists and
36° BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
co-operative research with many academies throughout the world, and
maintains informal relations to promote scientific co-operation with many
other countries. The largest formal scheme is the European Science
Exchange Programme, which provides for fellowships (usually of one year)
and study visits (lasting about two months) with 16 other countries in
Western Europe.
Royal Society The Royal Society of Arts (properly, the Royal Society for the Encourage¬
ment of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce) is concerned with arts, archi¬
tecture and design, science and technology, industry and commerce, the
environment and education. Since its foundation in 1754, one of the
Society’s principal objects has been to promote the progress of all branches
of practical knowledge, chiefly by means of lectures and conferences,
and by the publication of a monthly journal designed to enable leading
authorities to report on developments of public as well as specialist interest.
|*oy.al . The R°yal Institution was founded in 1799 as a public body for facilitating
nstitution the introduction of useful mechanical inventions and improvements, and
for teaching the application of science to everyday life. Later it undertook
the ‘promotion of chemical science by experiments and lectures for im¬
proving arts and manufactures’, and ‘the diffusion and extension of useful
knowledge’. Its character, however, was largely determined by the early
nineteenth-century work of Sir Humphry Davy and Michael Faraday, who
established a tradition of research. Today the Royal Institution has exten¬
sive laboratories which undertake research on subjects including fast
chemical kinetics, photosynthesis and solar energy. Lectures are given on
recent developments in science and other branches of knowledge with
particular emphasis on encouraging young people to take an interest in
science.
British
Association
Professional
Institutions
The British Association for the Advancement of Science was founded in
1831 to promote general interest in science and its applications. One of its
chief activities is the Annual Meeting, attended by many young students as
well as by eminent scientists. In addition, the Association plans special
lectures, exhibitions and discussions (some designed for young audiences),
the publication of pamphlets, the organisation of conferences, and the
appointment of study groups. The Association has 16 branches and five
lectureships for young scientists (dealing with the physical, biological and
social sciences) to encourage scientists to make their activities known to
wider audiences. The British Association has made an important contri¬
bution to the development of science by taking or recommending action to
remove obstacles to the discovery and application of scientific knowledge.
There are numerous technical institutions and professional associations,
many of which promote their own disciplines or are interested in the
education and professional well-being of their members. The Council of
Engineering Institutions represents the chartered engineering institu¬
tions, such as those for electrical, mechanical, civil and chemical engineers.
The Council of Science and Technology Institutes is a federal body with
11 member institutes representing, among others, biologists, chemists,
mathematicians, metallurgists, physicists and geologists.
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
361
The Fellowship
of Engineering
Zoological
Gardens
Botanical
Gardens
Scientific
Museums
The Fellowship of Engineering was formed in 1976 from distinguished
engineers in the Royal Society and the leading chartered engineering
institutions. Its object is the pursuit, encouragement and maintenance
of excellence in engineering. It provides, through the interdisciplinary
character of its membership, advice on all aspects of engineering to the
Government and other relevant bodies. It also arranges lectures, seminars
and conferences on matters of national importance in engineering. Some 60
leading engineers in Britain are elected each year and there were 450
Fellows in 1982.
The Zoological Society of London, whose main function is as a scientific
organisation, runs the world-famous London Zoo, opened in 1828, which
occupies 14 hectares (36 acres) of Regent’s Park, London. In 1931 the
Society opened Whipsnade Park Zoo near Dunstable (Bedfordshire) where
over 2,000 animals roam a 200-hectare (500-acre) park. The Society is
responsible for the Institute of Zoology, which carries out research in
conservation and comparative medicine. It also organises scientific meet¬
ings and symposia for zoologists, publishes scientific journals and main¬
tains one of the largest zoological libraries in the world. Other well-known
zoos (of which there are some 150 in Britain), include those at Edinburgh,
Bristol, Chester, Dudley, Marwell (near Winchester), Chessington and
Jersey. There are also a number of‘safari parks’ containing reservations of
wild animals through which the public can pass in closed motor cars.
The Royal Botanic Garden (founded in 1759) covers 120 hectares (300
acres) at Kew (West London) and a 200-hectare (500-acre) estate at
Wakehurst Place, Ardingly (West Sussex). The Herbarium houses one of
the largest collections of specimens in the world and is primarily concerned
with research into the classification of plants and the preparation of floras
and plant lists as well as the identification of about 50,000 specimens a year
from overseas. A Conservation Unit gathers and provides information on
endangered species of plant on a world-wide basis. The study of plant
anatomy, plant biochemistry, cytology and genetics is undertaken in the
Jodrell Laboratory at Kew. The laboratory’s plant physiology section is
based at Wakehurst Place where research is being carried out into seed
germination and storage. A wide range of living plants, comprising some
110,000 different kinds of plant representing most plant families, is dis¬
played at Kew.
The Royal Botanic Garden at Edinburgh was founded in 1670. Associ¬
ated gardens are the Logan Botanic Garden at Ardwell near Stranraer, the
Younger Botanic Garden at Benmore near Dunoon, and Dawyck Garden
at Stobo near Peebles. The large collection of living plants, both out of
doors and in greenhouses, is used for taxonomic research (into plant
classification).
The British Museum (Natural History) is one of the world’s principal
centres for the general study of natural history, particularly for specialised
research into taxonomy. It has five scientific departments: botany, en¬
tomology, mineralogy, palaeontology and zoology. It possesses extensive
collections of extant and fossil animals and plants and of minerals, rocks and
meteorites. The Science Museum illustrates the development of pure and
applied science in all countries, but chiefly in Britain. The geology of
Britain is probably known in more exact detail than that of any other
362
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
country in the world, and the Institute of Geological Sciences has an
outstanding collection of exhibits in its Geological Museum. These three
museums are in South Kensington, London. Other important collections
include the Museum of Science and Industry, in Birmingham, the
Museum of the History of Science, at Oxford, and the Royal Scottish
Museum, Edinburgh.
INTERNATIONAL Britain is represented on the European Community’s Scientific and
RFKAT^nwi Technical Research Committee, the object of which is to co-ordinate
national policies on these matters and to implement joint projects of
interest to the Community, and the Committee for Scientific and Techno¬
logical Policy of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Develop¬
ment (OECD). Other intergovernmental organisations involved in scienti¬
fic co-operation with which Britain is concerned include: European
Co-operation in Science and Technology; specialised agencies of the
United Nations such as the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organisation; the International Atomic Energy Agency; the
Nuclear Energy Agency and the International Energy Agency of the
OECD; the European Organisation for Nuclear Research; the European
Space Agency; the European Molecular Biology Laboratory; the Inter¬
national Agency for Research on Cancer; and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organisation Science Committee. Among non-governmental organisa¬
tions Britain is represented in the international unions comprising the
International Council of Scientific Unions (see p 359). The five research
councils, the Royal Society and the British Academy were founder mem¬
bers of the European Science Foundation set up in 1974. Since 1968 Britain
has signed over 35 intergovernmental agreements with other countries on
co-operation in science and technology or technical co-operation. These
agreements are usually intended to promote mutually beneficial exchanges
and are administered by various government departments.
There are science and technology offices in the British Embassies in
Washington, Paris, Bonn, Moscow, Tokyo and Peking, whose staff, among
other things, promote contacts in science and technology between Britain
and the countries to which they are accredited. They serve all central
government departments concerned in overseas scientific affairs, as well as
research councils and the Royal Society, which is the main representative of
Britain in areas of non-governmental collaboration.
Increasing use of the services of the overseas science and technology
offices is being made by industrialists. Reports from the embassies on
overseas science and technology are disseminated to several hundred
British companies. Administrative support for the overseas scientific net¬
work is provided in Britain by the Department of Industry’s Overseas
Technical Information Unit.
The British Council (see p 67) fosters co-operation between British
scientists and scientists of overseas countries to promote among overseas
specialists a better understanding and knowledge of Britain and its
scientific achievements, and, in the developing countries, to identify and
manage development projects in the technological, scientific and educa¬
tional sectors. The Council helps British scientists to visit other countries,
makes its own awards for postgraduate study in Britain by scientists from
overseas and supervises programmes for senior specialists and students
who come to Britain through United Nations agencies or bilateral technical
co-operation schemes.
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
363
SPACE
ACTIVITIES
A number of government departments have an interest in space activities,
including the Department of Industry, the Department of Education and
Science (through the Science and Engineering Research Council) and the
Ministry of Defence. Expenditure on civil space activities in 1981-82 was
about £78 million.
Britain is a member of the European Space Agency (ESA) together with
Belgium, Denmark, France, the Federal Republic of Germany, the Irish
Republic, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland. The
Department of Industry is responsible for leading the British delegation to
the ESA and for British participation in its space applications programmes,
with emphasis on the development of land and maritime communications
satellites but including earth observation satellites, and Spacelab, a
manned laboratory to be carried on board the United States Space Shuttle.
In 1982 Britain joined the ESA’s ‘ARIANE’ launcher programme, having
previously been involved in the development and production of equipment
for the project through the bilateral agreement with France. The Depart¬
ment also promotes technological development in Britain’s space industry
through a national space programme; the industry has advanced and wide-
ranging capabilities, particularly in telecommunications. The Department
of Education and Science, through the Science and Engineering Research
Council, provides Britain’s representatives and financial contribution for
the ESA’s scientific satellite programme.
There are bilateral arrangements for space research with other countries,
notably the United States through its National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA). British experiments have provided information
which has helped to increase scientific knowledge, especially in astronomy
and astrophysics, and to interpret climatic patterns. The British Ariel
series of scientific satellites (concluded in 1982 after 20 years) found several
hundred new X-ray sources in space. Britain is to put an X-ray telescope on
board the Federal Republic of Germany’s X-ray satellite ROSAT, due to
be launched on the Space Shuttle in 1987, and other international satellite
missions for astronomy are being planned.
2i Promotion
of the Arts
Artistic and cultural activity in Britain ranges from the highest standards of
professional performance to the enthusiastic support and participation of
amateurs. London is one of the leading world centres for music, drama,
opera and dance, and festivals held in towns and cities throughout the
country attract much interest. Many British playwrights, composers,
sculptors, painters, writers, actors, singers, choreographers and dancers
enjoy international reputations. Television and radio play an important
role in bringing a wide range of artistic events to a large audience. At an
amateur level, activities which make use of local talent and resources take
many forms. Amateur choral, orchestral, operatic, dramatic and other
societies for the arts abound, and increasing numbers of people take an
interest in crafts such as pottery, weaving and woodwork. New art forms
introduced by the ethnic minorities are beginning to flourish and range
from Indian dance to Pakistani poetry and Caribbean steel bands.
Promotion and patronage of the arts are the concern of both ofllcial and
unofficial bodies. The Government and local authorities take an active part,
and a substantial and increasing amount of help also comes from private
sources, including trusts and commercial concerns. Policies towards sup¬
port for the arts are broadly similar, however, and there are two main aims.
One is to maintain the cultural heritage and to encourage interest in the
traditional arts, and to make them more accessible to greater numbers of
people. The other is to provide financial aid to working artists and crafts¬
men, and to encourage more people to take part in creative leisure pursuits.
A Minister of State at the Department of Education and Science, known
as Minister for the Arts, is responsible for general arts policy, and ad¬
ministrative work connected with the arts is undertaken by the Office of
Arts and Libraries within the Department. The Secretaries of State for
Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland are also concerned with cultural
matters. In addition, the Government is responsible for the upkeep of
ancient monuments and historic buildings, and grants are made towards
the maintenance of privately owned historic buildings (see p 171).
Arts education in schools, colleges, polytechnics, evening institutes and
community centres is the responsibility of central government education
departments, in partnership with local education authorities and voluntary
bodies.
Arts Councils Much government support for the arts takes the form of grants to in¬
dependent agencies. The most important of these is the Arts Council of
Great Britain, established by Royal Charter in 1946, whose main objects
are to develop and improve the knowledge, understanding and practice of
the arts, to increase their accessibility to the public, and to advise and
co-operate with government departments, local authorities and other
organisations.
Government allocations to the Arts Council in 1982-83 amount to £86
million. The Council gives financial help and advice to many organisations,
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
365
British Council
Broadcasting
Organisations
Local Support
Business
Sponsorship
Regional Arts
from the major opera, dance and drama companies, orchestras and festi¬
vals, to the smallest touring theatres and experimental groups. It encour¬
ages such interests as contemporary dance, photography and art films, and
helps professional creative writers, choreographers, composers, artists and
photographers through a variety of subsidy schemes. It promotes art
exhibitions and tours of opera, dance and drama companies. Funds are
provided for specialist training courses in the arts and for help with
the construction or conversion of premises under its ‘Housing the Arts’
programme.
Organisations in Scotland and Wales receive their subsidies through the
Scottish and Welsh Arts Councils which are committees of the Arts
Council of Great Britain with a large measure of autonomy.
In Northern Ireland there is an independent Arts Council with aims and
functions similar to those of the Arts Council of Great Britain. It receives an
annual grant from the Northern Ireland Department of Education.
The British Council promotes knowledge of British culture and literature
overseas (see p 70), and maintains libraries in most of the countries in which
it is represented. The Council may initiate or support overseas tours by
British theatre companies, orchestras, choirs, and opera and dance com¬
panies, as well as by individual actors, musicians and artists. It promotes
fine arts and other exhibitions overseas, organises British participation in
international exhibitions, and encourages professional interchange in all
cultural fields between Britain and other countries.
The BBC has orchestras employing many of the country’s full-time pro¬
fessional musicians, and each week it broadcasts nearly too hours of serious
music (both live and recorded) on its Radio 3 channel. It regularly com¬
missions new music, particularly by British composers, and sponsors
concerts, competitions and festivals. Independent television companies
make grants for the promotion of the arts in their regions and transmit
general magazine programmes on the arts. Both the BBC and IBA broad¬
cast a wide range of new drama together with adaptations of novels and
stage plays.
In addition to their responsibilities for education (including specialised art
education) and the public library service, a large number of local authorities
maintain local museums and art galleries. Almost all contribute to regional
arts associations, and many towards the expenses of professional symphony
orchestras and local theatre companies, and towards the cost of new
buildings, especially theatres.
Valuable support for the arts comes from many voluntary sources, a
practice encouraged by the Government. Industrial and commercial con¬
cerns offer a vital source of sponsorship and patronage to a wide range of
arts, for example, museum exhibitions, concerts, and opera seasons, often
advised by the Association for Business Sponsorship of the Arts and the
Arts Council.
Regional co-operation in arts patronage is encouraged through 15 regional
arts associations in England and Wales which aim to ensure that the arts are
more widely available. They offer financial assistance to arts organisations
and advise on and promote activities. They are financed by Arts Council,
local authority and private funds, these interests being represented in the
governing bodies of the associations.
366
Festivals
Arts Centres
DRAMA
Professional
Theatre
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Considerable interest and enthusiasm is shown for more than 200 profes¬
sional arts festivals which take place each year. Those concentrating on
music include the Three Choirs Festival which has taken place annually for
more than 250 years in Gloucester, Worcester or Hereford; the Cheltenham
Festival, largely devoted to contemporary British music; and the Aldeburgh
and Bath festivals. Among others catering for a number of art forms are the
Edinburgh International Festival, the Royal National Eisteddfod of Wales,
the Llangollen International Musical Eisteddfod and those in Belfast,
Brighton, Chichester, Malvern, Harrogate, Salisbury, Windsor and York.
The 200 or so arts centres in Britain provide opportunities for enjoyment of
and participation in the arts. The centres are supported mainly by regional
arts associations and local authorities with some help from the Arts Council
and other organisations. Many theatres and art galleries provide a focal
point for the community by offering facilities for other arts.
Britain is one of the world’s major theatre centres. As well as theatre in
London and the regions, touring companies visit many of the new arts
centres and community festivals. Many British actors and actresses enjoy
international reputations; among those honoured for their work are Dame
Peggy Ashcroft, Glenda Jackson, Lord Olivier, Sir John Gielgud and Sir
Ralph Richardson.
There are some 300 theatres intended for professional use which can
accommodate more than 200 people. Some are owned by non-profit-
distributing companies, 50 of which receive Arts Council subsidies. The
remainder are operated commercially or owned by local authorities.
London is the focus with a hundred or so subsidised and commercial
theatres including those in the suburbs, varying in size from under 100 to
over 1,000 seats. Most are let to producing managements on a commercial
basis, but 17 are permanently occupied by subsidised companies. These
include the National Theatre, which stages classical and modern plays in
its three auditoria on the South Bank of the River Thames, and the Royal
Shakespeare Company which, in addition to presenting seasons of Shakes¬
pearian plays at Stratford-upon-Avon, is now resident at the Barbican
Theatre, in the new Barbican Centre for Arts and Conferences in the City.
Outside London there is a range of theatres, the majority jointly sub¬
sidised by the Arts Council and local authorities. Most present about ten
productions a year on their main stage; some also have studio theatres
which may be made available to small touring companies. A number are
linked with groups which give special performances in schools. Among the
best known are the Cockpit Theatre in Education Team and the Leeds
Playhouse Theatre in Education Company. Some theatres accommodate
tours of the major London productions and performances by companies
specially formed for touring. (Both the National Theatre and the Royal
Shakespeare companies have toured in Britain and overseas.) Many towns
and universities have built theatres which present mixed programmes of
drama and musicals, variety shows and other entertainments, and a number
of towns have old theatres and opera houses which have been handsomely
restored.
In order to encourage the use of theatre premises by the public
throughout the day, many have gallery space, a craft or book shop, and
refreshment facilities.
Amateur
Theatre
Dramatic
Training
Theatre for
Young People
MUSIC, OPERA
AND DANCE
Music
Pop Music
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS 367
The several thousand amateur dramatic societies are encouraged by local
education authorities, other public bodies, and four special organisations:
the British Theatre Association, the National Drama Conference, the
Scottish Community Drama Association and the Association of Ulster
Drama Festivals.
Training for the theatre is provided mainly in drama schools. Among the
best known are the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, the Central School of
Speech and Drama, the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art, and
the Guildhall School of Music and Drama, all of which are in London; the
Old Vic School in Bristol; the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and
Drama in Glasgow; and, in Cardiff, the Welsh College of Music and
Drama. Several universities offer courses in drama.
Theatre for young people is popular and concessionary ticket schemes
encourage attendance. In 1970 the Young Vic was opened in London as a
theatre for young people. The National Youth Theatre is based in London,
and the Scottish Youth Theatre was established in Edinburgh in 1970.
There are some ten specialist companies, including the Unicorn Theatre
for Young People, Theatre Centre and the Polka Company, some of which
are supported by the Arts Council. Most repertory companies provide pro¬
grammes and other types of theatre activity for young people.
Pop music, folk music, jazz, light music and brass bands all have substantial
followings while the widespread interest in classical music is reflected in the
large audiences at choral and orchestral concerts and at performances of
opera, dance and chamber music. Singers like Dame Janet Baker and
Benjamin Luxon and conductors like Sir Colin Davis and Neville Marriner
reach a wide audience through their recordings as well as by their per¬
formances, and the works of composers such as Sir Michael Tippett, Sir
William Walton and the late Lord (Benjamin) Britten enjoy international
acclaim.
The Arts Council offers subsidies to orchestras, opera, dance and mime
companies, music societies and festivals. It also provides bursaries and
commissions for composers, musicians, designers and choreographers.
Other sources of financial assistance include the regional arts associations,
local authorities and commercial sponsorship.
The Master of the Queen’s Music, Malcolm Williamson, holds an office
within the Royal Household, with responsibility for organising and writing
music for state occasions.
Seasons of concerts are promoted every year in many of the large towns and
cities. In central London the principal concert halls are the Royal Festival
Hall, next to which are the Queen Elizabeth Hall and the Purcell Room
accommodating smaller-scale performances; the Royal Albert Hall, where
the annual summer season of Promenade Concerts is given; the Wigmore
Hall, a recital centre; and St John’s, Smith Square. The Barbican Centre
for Arts and Conferences contains a large new concert hall.
Among the characteristics of modern pop music are the diversity of styles,
the frequency with which new styles and stars emerge, and the short life¬
span of many groups. Usually electric guitars and drums provide the
instrumental basis, but there has been an increasing use of brass instru¬
ments, while some groups have abandoned traditional instruments for
368
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Orchestral
Music
Choral Societies
Amateur Interest
Opera and
Dance
electronic synthesizers. Popular music is an integral part of‘youth culture’,
and is generally accepted to have been so since the early 1960s when groups
such as The Beatles and The Rolling Stones, and later The Who and Led
Zeppelin, achieved international success. British groups have continued to
appeal to audiences worldwide and often set new trends in music; some of
the more recent groups to have achieved international renown are Dire
Straits, The Police and Ultravox.
The leading symphony orchestras are the London Philharmonic, the
London Symphony (resident at the new Barbican Centre for Arts and
Conferences), the Philharmonia, the Royal Philharmonic, the Royal
Liverpool Philharmonic, the Halle (Manchester), the City of Birmingham
Symphony, the Bournemouth Symphony, and the Ulster and the Scottish
National. The BBC’s orchestras provide broadcast concerts which are
often open to the public. There are also specialised string and chamber
orchestras such as the English Chamber Orchestra, the Academy of St
Martin-in-the-Fields, the London Mozart Players, the City of London
Sinfonia, the Academy of Ancient Music, the Bournemouth Sinfonietta,
the Northern Sinfonia (Newcastle upon Tyne), the Scottish Baroque
Ensemble and the Scottish Chamber Orchestra. The London Sinfonietta
specialises in performing contemporary music. Early music played on
authentic instruments is attracting increasing interest throughout the
country.
Among the principal choral societies are the Bach Choir, the Royal Choral
Society, the Cardiff Polyphonic Choir, the Edinburgh Royal Choral Union
and the Belfast Philharmonic Society. Almost all the leading orchestras
have close links with particular choirs, such as the Philharmonia Chorus
and the London Symphony Chorus.
Amateur music-making is encouraged by county music committees aided
by the Carnegie United Kingdom Trust and united in the Standing
Conference for Amateur Music. The National Federation of Music
Societies (the organisation for chamber music societies, amateur choirs and
orchestras) receives Arts Council funds to help affiliated societies with the
cost of engaging professional musicians. Some 1,200 music societies are
members of the Federation, which advises them on concert planning and
promotion. The Welsh Amateur Music Federation, funded by the Welsh
Arts Council, and the Scottish Amateur Music Association similarly assist
amateur music-making.
Regular seasons of opera and ballet are given at the Royal Opera House,
Covent Garden, London, which receives financial assistance from the Arts
Council and from private and business sponsorship. The Royal Opera
House has a permanent orchestra which plays for the Royal Opera and the
Royal Ballet. Seasons of opera in English are given by the English National
Opera which performs at the London Coliseum and makes regional tours.
Sadler’s Wells Theatre houses many of the London performances of
visiting opera and dance companies and the Sadler’s Wells Royal Ballet
which performs in London and the regions; the New Sadler’s Wells Opera
Company is to give its opening season early in 1983. Scottish Opera has
regular winter seasons at its permanent home, the Theatre Royal in
Glasgow, and tours mainly in Scotland and northern England. Welsh
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
369
Dance and
Mime
Companies
Training in
Music, Opera
and Dance
FILMS
National Opera has seasons in Cardiff and other cities and, with Kent
Opera, provides most of the touring productions in England. Opera North,
based in Leeds, undertakes tours in the north of England.
An opera season, for which international casts are specially assembled, is
held every summer at Glyndebourne in Sussex; this is followed with an
autumn tour by Glyndebourne Touring Opera with different casts. Opera
in Northern Ireland is promoted by the Northern Ireland Opera Trust and
the Studio Opera Group.
Dance companies also include: London Festival Ballet, which divides its
performances almost equally between London and the regions; Ballet
Rambert (Britain’s oldest ballet company, which re-formed in 1966 as
a leading modern dance company); Scottish Ballet, based in Glasgow;
London Contemporary Dance Theatre (which provides regular seasons of
contemporary dance in London besides touring extensively); and Northern
Ballet Theatre, based in Manchester. Extemporary Dance Company and
Moving Picture Mime Show also provide programmes throughout the
year. Several modern dance groups are supported by regional arts
associations. About 20 small dance and mime groups or performers are
assisted by the Arts Council.
Professional training in music is given mainly at colleges of music. The
leading colleges, which are grant-aided, include the Royal Academy of
Music, the Royal College of Music, the Guildhall School of Music and
Drama and Trinity College of Music in London. There are also the Royal
Scottish Academy of Music and Drama in Glasgow, the Royal Northern
College of Music in Manchester, the Welsh College of Music and Drama,
Cardiff, and the Birmingham School of Music. The National Opera Studio
provides advanced training courses. The leading dance schools are the
Royal Ballet School, the Rambert Academy and the London School of
Contemporary Dance which, with many private schools, have helped in
raising British dance to its present high standard. Dance is now a subject for
degree studies.
Youth and Music, an organisation affiliated to the international Jeunesses
Musicales, encourages attendance by young people at opera, dance and
concert performances. Ballet for All, run by the Royal Academy of
Dancing, presents lecture-demonstrations on classical ballet to young
audiences. Scottish Ballet Workshop works in schools throughout Scotland.
Many children learn to play musical instruments at school, and some take
the examinations of the Associated Board of the Royal Schools of Music.
The National Youth Orchestras of Great Britain, of Scotland and of Wales
and other youth orchestras are noted for their high standards. Over a third
of the players in the European Community Youth Orchestra come from
Britain.
British films, actors and the creative and technical services which support
them have achieved successes in international film festivals and other
events. The British film Chariots of Fire won four United States ‘Oscar’
awards for 1981, including that for best film. Oscars have also been won by
British technicians for work on American financed films made in Britain,
for example, Star Wars. Besides feature films, including co-productions
with other countries, the industry produces films for television as well as
promotional, advertising and training films.
3?o
Cinema
Licensing and
Film
Censorship
Documentary
Films
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
There are about 1,550 cinema screens in Great Britain, and estimated
attendances in 1981 amounted to 86 million. Cinema attendance figures
have been declining since the mid-1950s: in 1953 the average weekly
cinema audience was some 25 million but by 1981 it was less than 10 per
cent of that figure. A major reason for this has been the growth of television
viewing, while a more recent development which is likely to have an effect
on cinema-going is the rapid rise in the sale of home video cassette
recorders, with feature and other films available at low cost for purchase or
hire.
The Government does not invest directly in films. A levy on cinema
admissions, the Eady levy, provides a fund (the British Film Fund) to
benefit the makers of eligible films. The National Film Finance Corpor¬
ation receives money from this fund for the production and distribution of
feature films, and also provides loans for scriptwriting and other pre-
production costs. Grants from the levy can be made to the Children’s Film
Foundation, the British Film Institute Production Board and the National
Film School. The rest of the fund is distributed to makers of eligible films in
proportion to a film’s takings. The Government makes a grant to the Welsh
Film Board as part of the funds allocated each year in support of the Welsh
language.
A specified number of British or European Community main feature
films and supporting programmes must be shown in British cinemas each
year; the quota is 15 per cent.
Local authorities have powers to license cinemas and censor films. They
have a legal duty to prohibit the admission of children under 16 to
unsuitable films, and may censor films for adults. In considering the
suitability of films the authorities normally rely on the judgment of an
independent body, the British Board of Film Censors, to which most films
for public showing are submitted. The Board was set up on the initiative of
the cinema industry, to ensure a proper standard was maintained in films
offered to the public. It does not use any written code of censorship, and
may require cuts to be made before granting a certificate to a film; very
rarely, it refuses a certificate. Films passed by the Board are put into one of
four categories: ‘U’ (for general exhibition); ‘A’ (for general exhibition but
parents are advised that the film contains material which they may not wish
children under the age of 14 years to see); ‘AA’ (for persons of not less than
14 years of age); and ‘X’ (for persons of not less than 18 years of age).
The documentary tradition in short film production in Britain was founded
in 1929 when a group of directors began making factual films of a distinc¬
tive and imaginative kind for the Government, and later for commercial
organisations. The war years saw a big expansion in this field and, since
then, British documentary technicians have continued to produce, for both
cinema and television, high quality factual films which have won numerous
international awards. The British Industrial and Scientific Film Associa¬
tion promotes the use of films in industry, science and commerce. The
Federation of Specialised Film Associations is the trade association of
documentary, short, industrial, advertising and cartoon film makers. The
National Panel for Film Festivals, under the aegis of the British Council, is
responsible for the selection of British entries for international short and
documentary film festivals.
The Government sponsors a wide range of documentary films for
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
371
Children’s
Films
British Film
Institute
Training in
Film
Production
selected viewing and for television in Britain and overseas. They are
produced through the Central Office of Information and the majority are
commissioned from private companies. Several major documentary film
libraries provide films on hire or free of charge to a wide variety of
educational, industrial and other users.
The Arts Council funds, promotes and distributes films on the arts. The
films (many of which have won international awards) cover all arts subjects
and are intended for educational and television use both in Britain and
overseas.
Cinemas which give children’s shows require a special licence from local
authorities. About 145 cinemas provide programmes for children on
Saturday mornings. The Children’s Film Foundation, with aid from the
British Film Fund, produces and distributes entertainment films specially
designed for children.
The development of film and television as an art is promoted by the British
Film Institute, founded in 1933, and in Scotland by the Scottish Film
Council; both bodies receive government grants. The Institute offers
financial and technical help to new and experienced film makers who can¬
not find support elsewhere. It administers the National Film Theatre in
London and the National Film Archive, and has a library from which films
and video cassettes may be hired. The Institute’s Information Division has
extensive international collections of books, periodicals, scripts, stills and
posters, offers an information service on all aspects of film and television,
and produces a range of publications, including the British National Film
Catalogue which records films and video cassettes available in Britain. The
Education Department produces study materials and offers an advisory
service to teachers of film and television at all levels of formal education and
increasingly in adult education.
The National Film Archive contains nearly 40,000 films, including
news-reels and other miscellaneous items, and over 10,000 television
programmes. The National Film Theatre has two cinemas showing films of
outstanding historical, artistic or technical interest. It is unique in offering
regular programmes unrestricted by commercial considerations or by the
age or nationality of the films. Each year it organises the London Film
Festival. The British Film Institute has promoted and helps to fund the
development of some 33 regional film theatres and is involved in establish¬
ing film and television centres with a range of activities and facilities in a
number of major cities. It makes grants to the British Federation of Film
Societies, the British Universities Film Council and the Society for Educa¬
tion in Film and Television. In Wales, the Welsh Arts Council acts as the
Institute’s agent. In Scotland, the Scottish Film Council is responsible for
regional film theatres and administers the Scottish Film Archive; it is also
responsible for promoting the use of film and television in education.
1 ogether with the Scottish Arts Council it makes grants towards film
production in Scotland. Grants in Northern Ireland are made by the Arts
Council of Northern Ireland.
An independent National Film School financed primarily by grants from
the Government and the British Film Fund offers courses for writers,
directors, producers and cameramen. Training in film production is also
given at the London International Film School, the Royal College of Art,
and at some polytechnics and other institutions.
372
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
VISUAL ARTS
The Art Market
Museums and
Art Galleries
National
Collections
A number of modern British sculptors and painters have a high inter¬
national reputation, and have received many international prizes and
commissions for major works in foreign cities. Two of the best known are
Sir Henry Moore and David Hockney.
State support for painting and sculpture mainly takes the form of
maintenance and purchase grants for the national museums and galleries,
purchase grants for municipal museums and galleries, and grants towards
the cost of art education. The Government also encourages high standards
of industrial design and craftsmanship through grants to the Design
Council.
The Arts Council maintains its own collection of contemporary British
art, and organises or offers grants or guarantees for a variety of exhibitions
throughout the country. It runs the Hayward and Serpentine galleries in
London and finances a number of art and photography galleries in London
and the regions; an example is the Side Gallery in Newcastle upon Tyne,
which is the largest gallery in Britain devoted entirely to photography.
The Council also provides support for artists and photographers through
purchasing, commissioning fellowships and residences. Grant aid is also
available to support art and photography books and magazines. The
Scottish and Welsh Arts Councils have galleries in Edinburgh and Cardiff
respectively, and the Northern Ireland Arts Council runs a gallery in
Belfast.
London is a major centre for the international art market and regular sales
of works of art take place in the main auction houses, two of the longest
established being Sotheby’s and Christie’s. Certain items are covered by
export control. These are: works of art and collectors’ items over 50 years
old and worth more than £8,000 (more than £2,000 in the case of British
historical portraits); photographic material over 60 years old and worth
more than £200; documentary material over 50 years old; and British
archaeological material over 50 years old. A licence is required before such
items can be exported, but this is granted automatically in the case of
objects imported into Britain within the last 50 years. In other cases the
application for a licence is considered by the Department of Trade, and, if
the Department’s expert advisers recommend the withholding of a licence,
the matter is referred to the Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works
of Art. If the Committee considers a work to be of national importance it
can advise the Government to withhold the export licence for a specified
time to give a public museum or art gallery an opportunity to buy at a fair
price.
Over 1,000 museums and art galleries are open to the public including the
major national collections and a wide variety of municipally and indepen¬
dently owned institutions. More than 21-6 million people visited the
national art galleries and museums in 1981.
The thirteenth conference of the International Council of Museums,
Museums for a Developing World, is to be held at the Barbican Centre in
London in 1983.
The national museums and art galleries in London contain some of the
most comprehensive collections of objects of artistic, archaeological,
scientific, historical and general interest. They are the British Museum, the
Victoria and Albert Museum, the Science Museum, the National Gallery,
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
373
Other Collections
the Tate Gallery, the National Portrait Gallery, the Imperial War
Museum, the National Army Museum, the Royal Air Force Museum, the
National Maritime Museum, the Wallace Collection, the British Museum
(Natural History) and the Geological Museum. Some of these national
museums also have branches outside London, examples being the National
Railway Museum at York, which is part of the Science Museum, and
portrait collections at Montacute House (Somerset) and Beningborough
Hall (Yorkshire), administered by the National Portrait Gallery in col¬
laboration with the National Trust.
There are three national museums and art galleries in Edinburgh: the
National Museum of Antiquities of Scotland, the Royal Scottish Museum
(including the Scottish United Services Museum), and the National
Galleries of Scotland (comprising the National Gallery of Scotland, the
Scottish National Portrait Gallery, and the Scottish National Gallery of
Modern Art). The National Museum of Wales, in Cardiff, has a branch at
St Fagan’s Castle where the Welsh Folk Museum is housed, an Industrial
and Maritime Museum in Cardiff’s dockland, the Museum of the Woollen
Industry at Drefach Felindre, and the North Wales Quarrying Museum at
Llanberis. In Northern Ireland there are two national museums: the Ulster
Museum in Belfast and the Ulster Folk and Transport Museum, County
Down.
Most of the national collections are administered by trustees, but the
Victoria and Albert and Science Museums are the responsibility of the
Office of Arts and Libraries in the Department of Education and Science,
and the Royal Scottish Museum, the Scottish Education Department.
The Government has decided that these three museums, also, should be
administered by independent trustees. A new Museum of Scotland, to
record the country’s cultural heritage, is planned.
Other important collections in London include the Armouries in the
Tower of London, the Public Record Office, the Museum of London and
Sir John Soane’s Museum. In Buckingham Palace the Queen’s Gallery has
exhibitions of pictures from the extensive royal collections.
Most cities and towns have museums devoted to art, archaeology and
natural history, usually administered by the local authorities, but some¬
times by local learned societies or by individuals or trustees. Both Oxford
and Cambridge are rich in museums, many of them associated with the
universities (for example, the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford, founded in
1683, the oldest in the country, and the Fitzwilliam Museum in Cambridge).
There are important museums and art galleries in Aberdeen, Belfast,
Birmingham, Bristol, Cardiff, Dundee, Glasgow, Leeds, Leicester, Liver¬
pool, Manchester, Norwich, Reading, Sheffield, Southampton and York.
Many private art collections in historic family mansions, including those
owned by the National Trust, are open to the public. An increasing number
of open air museums depict the regional life of an area or preserve early
industrial remains (for example, the Weald and Downland Museum in
Sussex, the North of England Open Air Museum in Durham, and the
Ironbridge Gorge Museum in Shropshire).
All national collections are financed chiefly from government funds.
Besides meeting administrative and maintenance costs, the Government
provides annual purchase grants and may also provide special purchase
grants. An independent National Heritage Memorial Fund financed by the
Finance
374
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Policy and
Co-ordination
Exhibitions
Training in Art
and Design
Crafts
Government provides assistance to organisations wishing to acquire land,
buildings, works of art and other objects associated with the national
heritage. Pre-eminent works of art accepted by the Government in place of
capital transfer tax are allocated to public galleries.
Museums and art galleries, maintained by local authorities, universities
and private benefactions, receive help in building up their collections
through the annual government grants administered by the Victoria and
Albert, Science and Royal Scottish Museums. Financial and practical
assistance is also given by the Arts Council and by trusts and voluntary
bodies, including the Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation, the National Art-
Collections Fund, the Contemporary Art Society and the Association for
Business Sponsorship of the Arts.
The Government is advised on policy matters by the Museums and
Galleries Commission which also promotes co-operation between national
and provincial institutions. Nine area museum councils, grant-aided by the
Government, provide technical services and advice on conservation,
display, documentation and publicity.
The independent Museums Association, to which museums and art
galleries and their staffs belong and which also has many overseas members,
is a focus for the collection of information and discussion of matters relating
to museum administration, and as a training and examining body for
professional qualifications.
In addition to temporary exhibitions provided by the Arts Council, the
national museums and galleries and the area museums, there are many
commercial exhibitions held in the galleries of dealers. There are also a
number of national art exhibiting societies, some of which, notably the
Royal Academy at Burlington House, have their own galleries in London.
The Royal Scottish Academy holds annual exhibitions in Edinburgh.
There are also children’s exhibitions, including the National Exhibition of
Children’s Art.
Art and design education is provided in colleges of art, further education
colleges and polytechnics, maintained by local education authorities. Other
institutions offering courses include universities, the Royal Academy
Schools and private art schools. At postgraduate level there is the Royal
College of Art which awards its own degrees. Art is also taught at an
advanced level at the four Scottish Central (Art) Institutions administered
by the Scottish Education Department.
The leading academic institutions for the study of the history of art are
the Courtauld and Warburg Institutes of the University of London, and
the Department of Classical Art and Archaeology in University College,
London.
Art has a place in all school curricula, and the Society for Education
through Art encourages, among other activities, the purchase by schools
of original works of art by organising an annual Pictures for Schools
exhibition.
Government grants for the crafts, amounting to some £16 million in
1982-83, are administered in England and Wales by the Crafts Council.
The Council holds regular exhibitions at its London gallery, which also
houses a craft resource centre, including a colour slide library, and pub¬
lishes Crafts magazine, books on craft subjects, and slides. It runs a number
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
375
LITERATURE
AND
LIBRARIES
Authors’
Copyright
Literary and
Philological
Societies
Books
of grant and loan schemes to help craftsmen and women at different stages
in their careers. The Council runs activities in education and conservation
and manages a craft shop at the Victoria and Albert Museum, which sells
work by British craftsmen. The British Craft Centre in London, which
receives an annual grant from the Crafts Council, holds some ten exhibi¬
tions a year. Scotland receives a separate government grant which is
similarly administered by the Crafts Consultative Committee of the
Scottish Development Agency. The Welsh Arts Council acts as the agent
of the Crafts Council in supporting the crafts in Wales.
The study of literature is included in the curricula of all schools, colleges
and universities. There are free public libraries throughout the country,
private libraries and many private literary societies. Book reviews are
featured in the press and on television and radio and there are numerous
periodicals concerned with literature. Recognition of outstanding literary
merit is provided by a number of awards, including the Booker, W. H.
Smith & Son, and Whitbread prizes. Awards to encourage young writers
include those by the Somerset Maugham Trust Fund and the E. C.
Gregory Trust Fund. Many British writers are internationally recognised.
Some of the best known living writers are Graham Greene, Anthony
Burgess, William Golding, Margaret Drabble and Iris Murdoch.
A scheme to give authors the right to receive payment from government
funds for the use of their books borrowed from public libraries began in
1982. The title Poet Laureate is conferred on a poet who receives a stipend
as an officer of the Royal Household; the holder of the title is Sir John
Betjeman.
The author of any original literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work is
automatically protected by the Copyright Act 1956 and its related inter¬
national conventions1 from the unauthorised reproduction of the work
both before and after publication. The author of the work is the first owner
of the copyright, and the normal term of copyright in published original
works is the life of the author and a period of 50 years after his or her death.
Societies to promote literature include the English Association and the
Royal Society of Literature. The British Academy for the Promotion of
Historical, Philosophical and Philological Studies (the British Academy) is
the leading society of humanistic studies and receives a government grant.
Other specialist societies include the Early English Text Society, the
Bibliographical Society, the Harleian Society, the Saltire Society, and
several societies devoted to particular authors, the largest of which is
the Dickens Fellowship. A number of societies, for example, the Poetry
Society, sponsor poetry readings and recitals. There are also a number of
clubs and societies, such as the Poetry Book Society, which distribute
selected new books to their members.
In 1981 British publishers issued over 43,000 separate titles: more than
32,400 new ones, and nearly 10,600 reprints, new editions and translations.
There has been an increase in the number of book clubs, where books may
be bought by mail order.
‘A copyright work first published in Britain has automatic copyright in all countries which are members of
the Berne Copyright Convention and the Universal Copyright Convention. The law on copyright is under
review.
376
Libraries
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Leading organisations representing book production and distribution
interests are the Publishers’ Association and the Booksellers’ Association.
The British Council also publicises British books and periodicals through
its libraries in over 60 countries, its programme of book exhibitions (272
exhibitions were mounted in 1981-82) and its publications including the
monthly British Book News. The Book Development Council promotes
British books overseas. (For sales and exports, see p 232.) The National
Book League, with a membership including authors, publishers, book¬
sellers, librarians and readers, encourages interest in books and arranges
exhibitions in Britain and overseas.
The British Library, the national library for the United Kingdom, is
organised in three divisions. The Reference Division, which receives a
copy of each new book, pamphlet or newspaper published in Britain and
acquires significant literature from other countries, includes the Depart¬
ment of Printed Books, holding about 10 million titles; the Department of
Manuscripts; the Department of Oriental Manuscripts and Printed Books;
the Science Reference Library, which holds collections in modern science,
technology, patents, trade marks and designs; and the India Office Library
and Records. The Lending Division at Boston Spa, West Yorkshire, has
nearly 4 5 million volumes including some 56,000 current periodicals
available on loan to other libraries. It also has access to many millions of
books in other libraries and is the national centre for inter-library lending
within Britain and between Britain and countries overseas. The Biblio¬
graphic Services Division processes the material deposited with the British
Library for inclusion in its catalogues and publishes the British National
Bibliography which lists all new books and new editions published in
Britain, The British Education Index, Serials in the British Library, the
British Catalogue of Music and other bibliographic records. It also provides
automated information services of bibliographic data for libraries and their
users throughout Britain. The Research and Development Department is a
major source of funding for the support of research and development in
library and information services. Construction of a new building for the
British Library’s London services began in 1982. Under copyright legis¬
lation, the National Libraries of Scotland and of Wales, the Bodleian
Library of Oxford University and the Cambridge University Library can
claim copies of all new British publications.
Some of the national museums also have large libraries, and many
government departments have important libraries. The Public Record
Office contains the records of the superior courts of law and of most
government departments, as well as such famous historical documents as
Domesday Book. In Scotland the Scottish Record Office serves the same
purpose. The National Register of Archives (maintained by the Historical
Manuscripts Commission) contains particulars of local and private
records.
Besides the few great private collections, such as that of the London
Library, there are the rich resources of the learned societies and institu¬
tions (for scientific societies and institutions, see p 359). Examples are
the libraries of the Royal Institute of International Affairs, the Royal
Commonwealth Society, the Royal Geographical Society, the British
Theatre Association, the Royal Academy of Music, the National Library
for the Blind and the National Book League.
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
377
University
Libraries
Special Libraries
Public Libraries
Library
Association
The university libraries of Oxford and Cambridge are unmatched by those
of the more recent foundations, although the combined library resources of
the colleges and institutions of the University of London total some 5-5
million volumes, the John Rylands University Library in Manchester
contains some 3 million volumes, and the university libraries of Edinburgh,
Birmingham, Glasgow and Leeds each have over 1 million volumes. Many
universities have important research collections in special subjects; for
example, the Barnes Medical Library at Birmingham, and the British
Library of Political and Economic Science at the London School of
Economics.
Many associations, commercial and industrial organisations, as well as
government departments and other national institutions, operate library
and information services. Although most of these are primarily intended
for use within the organisation, many special libraries can by arrangement
be used by people interested in the special area covered, and the specialist
publications held are often available for inter-library lending.
Britain’s network of public libraries, administered by local public library
authorities, has a total stock of some 131 million books.
Qualified and specialist staff are available for consultation in all but the
smallest service points. About one-third of the total population are mem¬
bers of public libraries. Public library authorities in England and Wales
have a duty to provide (with some limitations) a free lending and reference
library service of books and periodicals. In Scotland local authorities must
provide library facilities. In Northern Ireland the public library service is
the responsibility of the education and library boards which also have a
duty to make library services available to schools. There are some 5,500
public library service points in Britain; some areas are served by mobile
libraries of which about 700 are in service, and domiciliary services cater for
people who are unable to visit a library.
Many libraries have collections of records, cassettes and musical scores
for loan to the public. Notable examples are the City of Westminster
Central Music Library and the Henry Watson Music Library at Manchester
Central Library. A number of libraries also lend from collections of works
of art, either originals or reproductions. Nearly all provide children’s
departments, while reference and information sections and art, music,
commercial and technical departments meet the growing and more specific
demands in these fields. Most libraries hold documents on local history.
Under a voluntary system of library co-operation in England and Wales
eight regional library bureaux (consisting mainly of public libraries in each
area) aim to be largely self-sufficient in the interlending of current British
books, achieved in some regions by a system of co-operative subject
specialisation.
The National Libraries of Scotland and of Wales carry out functions
similar to those of the regional bureaux and the Lending Division of the
British Library. In Northern Ireland access to the stocks of all co-operating
libraries is available to the libraries controlled by the five education and
library boards and to the libraries of Queen’s University and the New
University of Ulster.
The principal professional organisation is the Library Association. It
maintains a Register of Chartered Librarians, publishes books, pamphlets
and official journals, and holds regular conferences.
22 The Press
Ownership
More daily newspapers, national and regional, are sold per person in
Britain than in most other developed countries. On an average day nearly
three out of four adults over the age of 15 read a national morning
newspaper and about one in two reads an evening newspaper. National
papers have a total circulation of nearly 15 million on weekdays and 17-2
million on Sundays though the total readership is considerably greater.
The press caters for a variety of political views, interests and levels of
education. There is no state control or censorship of the press, but it is
subject to the general laws on publication (see p 385). Newspapers are
almost always financially independent of any political party and are not
obliged to follow any specific line. Where they express pronounced views
and have obvious political leanings, these derive from traditional, pro¬
prietorial and other non-party influences. In order to preserve their
character and traditions, a few newspapers and periodicals are governed by
various trustee-type arrangements. Others have management arrange¬
ments to ensure editors’ authority and independence.
Against this background of press freedom, Britain’s position within
UNESCO discussions on a ‘new world information order’ and other
communications questions has been to oppose measures which could have
the effect of sanctioning the use of the media as an instrument of govern¬
ment policy and limiting the free flow of information. At the same time, it
has reaffirmed its willingness to support, through existing aid channels,
efforts to improve communications systems in the developing world.
Unlike most of its European counterparts the British press receives no
subsidies and relatively few tax and postal concessions. Newspaper and
magazine sales and advertising receipts are zero-rated for value added tax.
Registered newspapers receive a concession on postal rates, and there are
concessions on ‘per-word’ rates for international press telegrams and
photo-telegrams. Like all postal customers, publishers can obtain reduc¬
tions in charges for regular bulk postings.
There are over 120 daily (Monday to Saturday) and Sunday newspapers
and about 1,000 weekly newspapers. These figures include certain special¬
ised papers with circulations limited not by region but by interest; for
instance, business, sporting and religious newspapers, and newspapers in
foreign languages. Newsprint, some 90 per cent of which is imported,
forms roughly a third of average national newspaper costs while labour
represents about 45 per cent. Revenue from sales accounts for varying
proportions of income with relatively small proportions in the case of some
high circulation newspapers and periodicals which derive considerable
earnings from their advertising. The financial problems which have led to
the closure of some newspapers in recent years have resulted from rising
costs of raw materials and labour in a highly competitive market. At the
same time some new titles have been launched.
Ownership of the national, London-evening and regional daily newspapers
is concentrated in the hands of a number of large press publishing groups
(the groups controlling the national press are listed in Table 35), but there
THE PRESS
379
Table 35: National Newspapers
Title and foundation date Controlled by
Circulation0
average
Jan.-June
1982
NATIONAL DAILIES
Daily Express (1900)
Daily Mail (1896)
Daily Mirror (1903)
Daily Star (1978)
The Daily Telegraph (1855)
Financial 77mes(i888)
The Guardian (1821)
Morning Star (1966)
The Sun (1969)
The Times (1785)
NATIONAL SUNDAYS
The Mail on Sunday (1982)
News of the World (1843)
The Observer (1791)
Sunday Express (1918)
Sunday Mirror (1963)
Sunday People (1881)
Sunday Telegraph (1961)
The Sunday Times {1822)
Fleet Holdings 2,034,396
Associated Newspapers Group 1,894,460
Reed International BjBSSjbSS
Fleet Holdings 1,390,628
Telegraph Newspaper Trust 13305,575
Pearson Longman 202,545
The Guardian and Manchester
Evening News 420,271
The People’s Press Printing
Society 30,345
News International 4,077,891
News International 300,700
Associated Newspapers Group n.a.
News International 4,314,008
George Outram & Co, a
subsidiary of Lonrho 845,431
Fleet Holdings 2,929,757
Reed International 3,666,250
Reed International 3,483,183
Telegraph Newspaper Trust 850,326
News International 1,314,713
“Circulation figures are those of the Audit Bureau of Circulations (founded in 1931 and consisting of
publishers, advertisers and advertising bureaux) and are certified average daily or weekly net sales for the
period. The circulation figure of the Morning Star is otherwise audited,
n.a. = not available; the paper was first published in May 1982.
are, in addition, some 200 independent regional and local newspaper
publishers.
Although most enterprises are organised as limited liability companies,
individual and partner proprietorship survives. The large national news¬
paper and periodical publishers are major corporations with interests
ranging over the whole field of publishing and communications; some have
shares in independent television and radio contracting companies while
others are involved in industrial and commercial activities.
The law provides safeguards against the risks inherent in undue con¬
centration of the means of communication. For instance, if it appears that
newspaper shareholdings in television programme companies have led or
are leading to results contrary to the public interest, the Independent
Broadcasting Authority may, with the consent of the Home Secretary,
notify the companies that their programmes may cease to be transmitted.
There is a similar stipulation for independent local radio; if a local news¬
paper has a monopoly in the area, it is not allowed to have a controlling
380
The ‘National’
Press
English
Regional
Newspapers
London Papers
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
interest in the local radio station. In addition, it is unlawful to transfer a
newspaper or newspaper assets to a proprietor whose newspapers have an
average daily circulation amounting, with that of the newspaper to be taken
over, to 500,000 or more without the written consent of the Secretary of
State for Trade. Except in certain limited cases, as, for example, in the
change of ownership of The Times and The Sunday Times, this may be given
only after the Secretary of State has referred the matter to the Monopolies
and Mergers Commission and received its report.
Ten morning daily papers and eight Sunday papers (see Table 35) circulate
throughout the country, and are known as national newspapers. They are
produced in London (where Fleet Street is the traditional centre for the
press), but six of the dailies and five of the Sundays also print northern
editions in Manchester (accounting for about a quarter of the total
production of the national press). An edition of the Financial Times is also
printed in Frankfurt in the Federal Republic of Germany.
The leading Scottish papers, The Scotsman and the Glasgow Herald, have
a considerable circulation outside Scotland.
National newspapers are often thought of as either ‘quality’ or ‘popular’
papers on the basis of differences in style, content and format (broadsheet
or tabloid, though this is not a rigid distinction). Four dailies and three
Sundays are usually described as quality newspapers. The three Sunday
qualities and three populars produce colour supplements as part of the
paper.
The slow decline in newspaper circulations as a whole (from 36 million
in 1972 to 32 million in 1982) conceals the fact that the circulation of
some newspapers has remained generally steady, while that of others has
increased.
The regional newspapers of England (outside London, over 70 morning or
evening dailies and Sundays and some 650 newspapers appearing once or
twice a week) provide mainly regional and local news. The daily news¬
papers also give coverage of national and international affairs. Generally,
regional evening newspapers are non-political, while the morning news¬
papers adopt a more positive political stance and tend to be independent or
conservative in outlook.
The total circulation of these papers is estimated at over 7 million. Of the
morning papers the Yorkshire Post (Leeds) and the Northern Echo
(Darlington) have circulations of some 95,000 and two provincial Sunday
papers—the Sunday Sun (Newcastle upon Tyne) and the Sunday Mercury
(Birmingham)—have circulations of over 123,000 and 171,000 respectively.
Circulation figures of evening papers start at about 15,000; most are in
the 20,000-90,000 range, although the Manchester Evening News and
the Birmingham Evening Mail have circulations of over 308,000 and the
Liverpool Echo of over 219,000. Weekly papers are mainly of local appeal;
they are also a valuable medium for local advertising. Most have circulations
in the 5,000-30,000 range.
There are also many free distribution newspapers (mostly weekly), some
published by orthodox newspaper publishers.
The one London evening newspaper, The Standard, formed in 1980 from a
merger of the Evening Standard (1827) and the Evening News (1881), has
sales of some 569,000. The local weeklies (about 115) include papers for
every district in Greater London. They circulate in as many as six to eight
Wales
Scotland
Northern
Ireland
New
Technology
THE PRESS 381
local editions of individual papers, affiliated in some cases to larger groups.
As elsewhere, there is a range of free distribution newspapers.
A number of evening newspapers, using the latest production tech¬
nology, are published in the outer metropolitan area.
Wales has one daily morning newspaper, the Western Mail, published in
Cardiff; its circulation of just under 81,000 is mainly in south Wales. In
north Wales the Daily Post, published in Liverpool, gives wide coverage to
events in the area. Evening papers published in Wales are the South Wales
Echo, Cardiff; the South Wales Argus, Newport; the South Wales Evening
Post, Swansea; and the Evening Leader, Wrexham. Their circulation range
is between 27,600 and 103,000. North Wales is also served by the Liverpool
Echo, while the Shropshire Star covers parts of mid- and north Wales, and
there is coverage to a smaller extent by the Manchester Evening News.
Sulyn, the first Sunday newspaper in Welsh was launched in October 1982.
The weekly press (some 60) includes English language papers, some of
which carry articles in Welsh, bilingual papers, and Welsh language
papers. Of the £1-75 million allocated by the Government for the support
of the Welsh language, £15,750 is to help Welsh community newspapers.
Scotland has six morning, six evening and four Sunday newspapers. The
morning papers, with circulations of between about 92,000 and over
738,000, are The Scotsman published in Edinburgh; the Glasgow Herald',
the Daily Record (sister paper to the Daily Mirror); the Dundee Courier and
Advertiser; the Aberdeen Press and Journal; and the Scottish Daily Express
(printed in Manchester). The evening papers have circulations in the range
of 13,000 to 188,000 and are the Evening News of Edinburgh, Glasgow’s
Evening Times, Dundee’s Evening Telegraph and Post, Aberdeen’s Evening
Express, the Paisley Daily Express and the Greenock Telegraph. The Sunday
papers are the Sunday Mail, the Sunday Post, the Scottish Sunday Express
(printed in Manchester), and the Sunday Standard, first published in 1981.
Weekly and local newspapers number about 130, with the Hamilton
Advertiser and the Falkirk Herald having the largest circulations.
Northern Ireland has two morning newspapers, one evening and one
Sunday paper, all published in Belfast with circulations ranging from
42,000 to 151,000. They are the News-Letter (Unionist) and the Irish News
(Nationalist), the evening Belfast Telegraph and the Sunday News. There
are 41 weekly newspapers.
The large labour costs of newspapers continue to encourage publishers to
look for ways of increasing productivity, often by use of the new composing
technology which dispenses with traditional ‘hot metal’ typesetting, with
type set in molten lead, and uses photographic methods to reproduce an
image. It can combine photo-composition with computer storage and
handling of data, and substitutes electronic for manual methods. It
presents possibilities for reorganisation which can have effects throughout
a newspaper office and may raise difficult problems of manning levels,
health and safety; the introduction of the ‘on-line’ system, for example,
under which text can be fed at electronic speeds to the computer store (and
recalled for checking on visual display units) and can be passed between the
store and the photosetters, can affect all the traditional departments of a
newspaper up to the printing stage. The provincial press has generally led
the way in adopting the new techniques.
382
The Periodical
Press
News Agencies
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The 6,000 periodical publications (including local free-sheets) are classi¬
fied as ‘general’, ‘specialised’, ‘trade’, ‘technical’ and ‘professional’. There
are also about 800 ‘house magazines’ produced by industrial undertakings,
business houses or public services for their employees and/or clients. The
‘alternative’ press probably includes several hundred further titles, most of
them devoted to radical politics, community matters, religion, the occult,
science or ecology.
General and specialised periodicals include magazines of general
interest; women’s magazines; publications for children; religious periodi¬
cals ; fiction magazines; magazines dealing with sport, gardening, hobbies
and humour; journals specialising in a wide range of subjects; and the
publications of learned societies, trade unions, regiments, universities and
other organisations.
The weekly periodicals with the highest sales are: Radio Times and TV
Times Magazine which have circulations of about 3 3 million and Woman’s
Weekly, Woman’s Own, Woman, Weekly News (which sells mainly in
Scotland) and My Weekly with circulations in the 820,000 to 1-4 million
range. The leading journals of opinion are The Economist, a politically
independent publication covering a wider range of topics than its title
implies; the New Statesman, which reviews politics, literature and the arts
from an independent socialist point of view; the Spectator, which covers
much the same subjects from an independent conservative standpoint;
Tribune, which represents the views of the left-wing of the Labour Party;
New Society, covering the sociological aspects of current affairs; and New
Scientist, which reports on science and technology in terms which the
non-specialist can understand. Punch, traditionally the leading humorous
periodical, and Private Eye, a satirical fortnightly, also cover public affairs.
A more recent publication is Financial Weekly, a periodical for people with
business and investment interests.
Literary and political journals and those specialising in international and
Commonwealth affairs, published monthly or quarterly, generally appeal
to the more serious reader.
Trade, technical, business, scientific and professional journals are an
important aspect of British publishing. Many have a considerable circula¬
tion overseas. Their publication ranges in frequency from twice weekly to
quarterly.
Periodicals published in England circulate throughout Britain. In Wales
there are also several monthly and quarterly journals published in both
Welsh and English; in Scotland there are three monthly illustrated
periodicals, a weekly paper devoted to farming interests, a number of
literary journals and numerous popular magazines; and Northern Ireland
has weekly, monthly and quarterly publications covering farming, the linen
industry, building, motoring, politics and social work.
The three principal British news agencies are: Reuters Ltd, The Press
Association Ltd and The Exchange Telegraph Company Ltd.
Reuters Ltd, a world news organisation, is owned jointly by the News¬
paper Publishers Association, The Press Association, the Australian Asso¬
ciated Press and the New Zealand Press Association; each is party to a trust
deed which safeguards the independence and integrity of the news service.
Reuters employs some 540 journalists and correspondents in 70 countries
and territories, and has links with about 120 national or private news
agencies, which give it access to coverage by many hundreds of local
THE PRESS
383
Training for
Journalism
reporters. Some 700,000 words of general news, sports, and economic
reports are received in London every day and are retransmitted worldwide
over a network of leased teleprinter lines, satellite links and cable and radio
circuits. These news services are specially tailored to the needs of recipients
and are distributed either direct or through national news agencies. Reuters
Economic Services, one of the world’s largest financial and business news
services, supplies information to banks, brokers and other commercial
undertakings throughout the world by means of computer-based video
display units, teleprinters and bulletins.
The Press Association Ltd, the British national news agency, is co¬
operatively owned by the principal newspapers of the United Kingdom
outside London, and of the Irish Republic. It provides a complete service of
home news, including general and parliamentary news, legal reports, and
all branches of financial, commercial and sports news; and includes in its
services to regional papers the world news of Reuters and the Associated
Press. News is teleprinted from London, certain items being available in
teletypesetting form. Its photographic department serves London and
regional newspapers with a daily service of pictures from home and over¬
seas; these are wired to the regional press. Its Special Reporting Service
supplies reports of local or special interest. Press Association Features
provides exclusive rights to syndicated articles and visual features.
The Exchange Telegraph Company Ltd (Extel), an independent news
agency, supplies financial and sporting news and, in conjunction with The
Press Association Ltd, transmits racing services by telephone and video
terminals from offices throughout Britain.
The British press and broadcasting organisations are also served by
Associated Plfess Ltd, and by United Press International, which are British
subsidiaries of United States news agencies.
A number of other British, Commonwealth and foreign agencies and
news services have offices in London, and there are minor agencies in other
cities, mostly specialising in various aspects of newspaper and periodical
requirements. Syndication of features is not as common in Britain as in
some countries, but a few agencies specialise in this type of work.
The National Council for the Training of Journalists (NCTJ), which
represents the principal press organisations, sets and conducts examina¬
tions, and organises short training courses for journalists.
The two methods of entry into newspaper journalism are selection for a
one-year NCTJ pre-entry course at a college of further education or direct
recruitment by a regional or local newspaper. Both categories of entrant
take part in an apprenticeship scheme consisting of ‘on-the-job’ training,
and block release courses for those who have not attended a pre-entry
course. There is also a centre providing courses of a similar pattern for press
photographers. Other training facilities include postgraduate courses in
journalism at University College, Cardiff, and at the City University
(London), and courses provided by the Newspaper Society Training
Service for regional newspapers in such subjects as circulation, advertising,
industrial relations and management. The NCTJ co-operates closely with
other bodies responsible for training in printing, publishing and pro¬
fessional photography.
Under the Commonwealth Press Union Harry Brittain Memorial
Fellowship Scheme, several young Commonwealth journalists each year
spend three months working and studying in Britain. The Thomson
384
Press
Institutions
The Press
Council
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Foundation holds training courses for journalists from all parts of the
world and provides consultants and tutors for courses in journalism held
overseas.
Training for work with periodicals was traditionally done ‘on the job’ but
formal courses of instruction are becoming more widely available. The
London College of Printing offers a one-year pre-entry course in periodical
journalism as well as block- and day-release courses for those who have
already started work as trainees. In addition, several of the larger pub¬
lishing houses provide in-company training which includes periods in the
classroom to supplement work experience. For publishers who do not offer
training independently, a training group has been established.
The most important employers’ organisations are the Newspaper
Publishers Association, whose members publish national newspapers in
London and Manchester; the Newspaper Society, which represents the
regional, local and London suburban press; the Scottish Daily Newspaper
Society, which represents the interests of daily and Sunday newspapers in
Scotland; the Scottish Newspaper Proprietors Association, which repre¬
sents the owners of weekly newspapers in Scotland; Associated Northern
Ireland Newspapers, whose members are the proprietors of weekly news¬
papers in Northern Ireland; and the Periodical Publishers Association,
whose membership embraces the majority of independent publishers of
business and professional periodicals and consumer magazines.
Organisations representing journalists are the Institute of Journalists,
with about 2,400 members, and the National Union of Journalists, with
more than 32,000 members. All practising journalists (including those
engaged in radio, television, public relations, freelance journalism and
book publishing editorial work) are eligible for membership of either, but
not both. Two main printing unions are concerned with the press.
The Guild of British Newspaper Editors with about 500 members aims
to maintain the professional status and independence of editors, defend the
freedom of the press, and improve the education and training of journalists.
The British Association of Industrial Editors is the professional organi¬
sation to which most editors of house journals belong.
The Press Council comprises equal numbers of press and non-press
members, with an independent chairman. Its aims are: to preserve the
established freedom of the press; to maintain the character of the press in
accordance with the highest professional and commercial standards; to
keep under review any developments likely to restrict the supply of in¬
formation of public interest and importance; to deal with complaints about
the conduct of the press or the conduct of persons and organisations
towards the press (the Council’s complaints committees comprise equal
numbers of press and non-press members); to report on developments in
the press which may tend towards greater concentration or monopoly; to
make representation on appropriate occasions to the Government, the
United Nations and press organisations abroad; to publish its adjudi¬
cations and periodic reports recording its work; and to review from time
to time developments in the press and the factors affecting them. The
Council’s annual reports include press statistics and articles on the
structure of leading press groups.
THE PRESS
Advertising
Practice
The Press and
the Law
385
Advertising practice in the press is regulated and controlled by the
Advertising Standards Authority, an independent body which aims to
promote and enforce the highest standards of advertising in the interests of
the public and the industry, in particular through the British Code of
Advertising Practice. The aims of this code are to ensure that advertise¬
ments are legal, decent, honest and truthful; that they are prepared with a
sense of responsibility to the consumer; that they conform to the principles
of fair competition as generally accepted in business; and that no advertise¬
ment brings advertising into disrepute or reduces confidence in advertising
as a service to industry and the public.
The press has generally the same freedom as the individual to comment on
matters of public interest.
Apart from legal requirements to register newspapers and periodicals,
there are no specific press laws but certain statutes include sections which
apply to the press.1 These relate to such matters as the extent of newspaper
ownership in television and radio companies; the transfer of newspaper
assets; restrictions on the reporting of certain types of court proceedings;
the right of press representatives to be admitted to meetings of local
authorities; restrictions on the publication of (a) advertisement and invest¬
ment circulars, which are governed by Acts dealing with the publication of
false or misleading descriptions of goods and services and with fraud, and
(b) advertisements of remedies for certain diseases, which are covered by
public health legislation; agreements between British Telecom and news¬
paper proprietors on telegraphic communications, which must comply
with telegraphs legislation; restrictions on certain types of prize competi¬
tion; and copyrights, which come under copyright laws. In certain cir¬
cumstances, where the defence authorities and press representatives in the
Defence, Press and Broadcasting Committee agree that publication of
information on particular topics would be detrimental to the national
interest, defence notices (‘D’ notices) are circulated to the news media
requesting that such information should not be published. Compliance
with these requests is expected, but they have no legal force; the final
responsibility for the decision whether or not to publish lies solely with the
editor or publisher concerned.
Of particular relevance to the press are such laws as those on contempt of
court, official secrets, libel and defamation. A newspaper may not publish
comments on the conduct of judicial proceedings which are likely to
prejudice their reputation for fairness before or during the actual proceed¬
ings, nor may it publish before or during a trial anything which might tend
to influence the result. The obtaining and publication of information from
state and official sources of a confidential or security nature is affected by
the official secrets legislation. Newspapers are also liable to proceedings
for seditious libel and incitement to disaffection. The majority of legal
proceedings against the press are libel actions brought by private indi¬
viduals. In such cases, the editor, proprietor, publishers, printer and distri¬
butor of the newspaper, as well as the author, may all be held responsible.
1A code of conduct on trade union closed shops has been issued under the Employment Act 1980 (see p 315).
In relation to the press the code considers the position of editors and journalists and the essential freedom to
collect and publish information and to publish comment and criticism.
23 Television
and Radio
All British broadcasting is based on the tradition that it is a public service
accountable to the people through Parliament. Two public bodies—the
British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) and the Independent Broadcasting
Authority (IBA)—provide television and radio services; they work to
broad requirements and objectives placed on them by Parliament, but are
otherwise independent in the day-to-day conduct of business. This in¬
dependence carries with it certain obligations over programmes and pro¬
gramme content. Programmes must display, as far as possible, a proper
balance and wide range of subject matter, impartiality in matters of con¬
troversy and accuracy in news coverage, and must not offend against good
taste. Codes of guidance on violence in television programmes, particularly
during hours when large numbers of children are likely to be viewing, are
operated by both authorities. A code of advertising standards and practice
is also operated by the IBA. A complaints commission has been established
to deal with complaints of unfair treatment or infringement of privacy
against both the BBC and the IBA.
The Home Secretary regulates broadcasting generally, is answerable to
Parliament on broad policy questions, and may issue directions on a
number of technical and other matters.
Television viewing is by far the most popular leisure pastime in Britain,
average viewing time per person being nearly 24 hours a week. Virtually
everyone has access to television. Over 20 per cent of households have two
or more receivers. Practically every home also has a radio set, and car radios
and portable sets have made radio a major day-time diversion.
Households with television must buy an annual licence costing £15 for
black and white or £46 for colour. Of over 18 -5 million licences current in
April 1982 about 14 2 million were for colour.
The British The constitution and finances of the BBC are governed by the Royal
Broadcasting Charter and by a Licence and Agreement. The Corporation of 12 governors
Corporation (each appointed by the Queen on the advice of the Government and
including separate governors for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland) is
responsible for all aspects of broadcasting. Committees advise them on a
wide range of matters including the social effects of television, religious
broadcasting, music, agriculture, schools broadcasting, further education,
programmes for ethnic minorities, science and engineering, and charitable
appeals. The governors appoint the Director General who is chairman of
the BBC’s board of management.
The National Broadcasting Councils for Scotland, Wales and Northern
Ireland control the policy and content of television and radio programmes
intended primarily for reception in their respective areas. Local radio
councils, representative of the local community, advise on the development
and operation of the BBC’s local radio stations.
The domestic services of the BBC are financed principally from the sale
of television licences. This is supplemented by profits from trading
TELEVISION AND RADIO
387
activities, including television programme exports, the sale of records and
publications connected with BBC programmes, the hire and sale of edu¬
cational films, film library sales, and exhibitions based on programmes.
Nearly three-quarters of expenditure on domestic services relates to tele¬
vision. The BBC meets the cost of local radio stations but some local
education authorities help to make educational programmes. The BBC’s
External Services are financed by a grant determined each year by the
Government.
The
Independent
Broadcasting
Authority
The Programme
Companies
The IBA’s constitution and finances are governed by statute. Its members
(three of whom have responsibility for Scotland, Wales and Northern
Ireland) are appointed by the Home Secretary. The IBA does not produce
radio or television programmes; these are provided by commercial pro¬
gramme companies. Its main functions are to appoint the companies,
supervise programme arrangements, control advertising and build, own
and operate transmitting stations. The chief executive officer of the IBA,
the Director General, is supported by a headquarters and regional office
staff covering all technical and administrative services.
The IBA is advised by a General Advisory Council, by Scottish,
Northern Ireland and Welsh committees, and by committees on educa¬
tional broadcasting, religious broadcasting, charitable appeals and advertis¬
ing. A specialist panel advises on advertisements of a medical nature. Local
committees advise on local radio services.
The IBA’s finance comes from annual rental payments made by the
television and radio programme companies. The television and some in¬
dependent local radio programme companies also pay to the IBA, for
transfer to the Government, a levy related to their profits.
Fifteen television programme companies hold contracts to provide tele¬
vision programmes in the 14 independent television regions (two com¬
panies share the contract for London, one providing programmes during
the week and the other at the weekend). A contract to provide early morning
television from the beginning of 1983 has been awarded to another new
company. The companies operate on a commercial basis, deriving their
revenue from the sale of advertising time. The financial resources,
advertising revenue and programme production of the companies vary
considerably, depending largely on the size of population in the areas in
which they operate. Although newspapers can acquire an interest in
programme companies, there are safeguards to protect the public interest.
In consultation with the IBA, each company plans the content of the pro¬
grammes to be broadcast in its area. These are produced by the company
itself and by other programme companies or purchased from elsewhere.
The five largest companies serving London, North-West England, East
and West Midlands, and Yorkshire provide more programmes for broadcast
elsewhere on the national network than do the smaller ones. A common
news service is provided by Independent Television News Ltd, a non-
profit-making company in which all the programme companies are share¬
holders. Negotiations for the supply, exchange and purchase of programmes
and their co-ordinated transmission through the independent television
network take place largely on the Network Planning Committee which
consists of representatives of all the programme companies and of the IBA.
Similar principles apply in the case of independent local radio. The
programme companies are under contract to the IBA, operate under its
388
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Television
Radio
control and are financed by advertising revenue. News coverage is supplied
as a common service by Independent Radio News.
Three television channels are in operation: BBC-i and ITV broadcast on
both 405 lines very high frequency (vhf) and 625 lines ultra high frequency
(uhf); BBC-2 broadcasts on 625 lines uhf only. A fourth, Channel Four, will
begin broadcasting in November 1982 and will form part of the independent
television network. About 99 per cent of the population live within range of
the uhf transmission. The 405-line (vhf) transmissions are being phased out
between 1982 and 1986.
Apart from a break during the war years the BBC has been providing
regular television broadcasts since 1936. All BBC-2 programmes and the vast
majority of those on BBC-i are broadcast on the national network. Of the
BBC’s 1981-82 television output over 69 per cent was produced in London
and 31 per cent elsewhere in Britain.
Through co-ordinated planning on its two services the BBC caters simul¬
taneously for people of differing interests. While both services cover the
whole range of television output, BBC-i presents more programmes of
general interest, such as light entertainment, sport, current affairs, children’s
programmes and outside broadcasts, while BBC-2 places greater emphasis
on minority interests, providing a larger element of documentaries, travel
programmes, serious drama, music, programmes on pastimes and inter¬
national films. An early morning television service providing about 2^ hours
of news and information will start early in 1983. Initially the service will run
from Monday to Friday but may later be extended into the weekend.
The first regular independent television programmes began in London
in 1955. On average each of the 14 ITV areas transmitted over 100 hours
of television programmes a week in 1981-82, nearly two-fifths of which
comprised informative programmes—including news, documentaries,
current affairs, education and religion. Three-quarters of the programmes
are produced by the programme companies.
Channel Four, beginning in November 1982, will, except in Wales, be
the responsibility of the IBA, operating through a subsidiary company.
The IBA will be expected to ensure that the channel caters for tastes and
interests not normally provided for by the existing independent service. It
must provide a suitable proportion of educational programmes, encourage
innovation and experiment, and include a substantial proportion of pro¬
grammes from independent producers. The programme companies will,
however, finance the new service and in return will have the right to sell
advertising time in fourth channel programmes broadcast in their region.
In Wales programmes on the fourth channel will be provided by a Welsh
Fourth Channel Authority appointed by the Home Secretary. The
Authority will be required to ensure that a substantial proportion of the
programmes are in Welsh and that programmes broadcast between 18.30
and 22.00 hours are mainly in Welsh.
British television programmes have won many international awards, and
Britain is one of the world’s foremost exporters of television productions.
BBC Radio has four national channels. Radio 1 provides a programme of
pop music, while Radio 2 provides light entertainment and music as well as
being the principal channel for the coverage of sport. Radio 3 provides
mainly classical music and in the evening also offers adult education
programmes and works of artistic and intellectual interest. Radio 4 is the
Cable Services
External
Services
TELEVISION AND RADIO 389
main speech programme, providing the principal news and information
service and a wide range of drama, music, talks and schools broadcasts.
Local radio is provided by 25 BBC stations in England and two in the
Channel Islands and by 37 independent stations distributed throughout
Britain. Another 32 independent stations are being established and 11 more
for the BBC have been proposed. Broadcasts provide a comprehensive
service of local news and information, music and other entertainment,
education, consumer advice and coverage of local events, and offer listeners
a chance to air their views, often by using the phone-in technique.
Nearly 14 per cent of households with television rely on cable systems for
the reception of programmes. The systems are usually used to improve
reception quality, to avoid ‘screening’ by buildings or the local topography,
or because external aerials are not allowed on some residential buildings.
Commercial relay operators are represented by the Cable Television
Association of Great Britain. All operators of cable systems are licensed by
the Home Secretary and the Post Office.
One local community cable television and six local community cable
sound-only stations are in operation. These enable people both to see and
hear programmes about local topics and issues and to take part in making
the programmes. Six cable operators have been licensed to provide sub¬
scription television (‘Pay-TV’) services in a number of areas for an experi¬
mental period of two years.
The Government is considering the proposals of the Hunt inquiry into a
possible expansion of cable television1 examined in the official report.2 The
inquiry recommends developing cable television so as to provide the
maximum variety and choice for the viewer, with the minimum constraints
necessary to safeguard public service broadcasting and the wider public
interest.
The BBC External Services broadcast by radio to most countries overseas,
using English and many other languages. The main objectives are to give
unbiased news, reflect British opinion and project British life, culture and
developments in science and industry. News bulletins, current affairs
programmes, political commentaries and topical magazine programmes
form the main part of the output. A full sports service, music, drama and
general entertainment are also included.
The languages in which the External Services broadcast and the length of
time each is on the air are prescribed by the Government. Apart from this
the BBC has full responsibility and is completely independent in determin¬
ing the content of news and other programmes. A plan to improve audi¬
bility has been announced, with some of the costs being met from current
operations. As a result of cuts in government expenditure the number of
language services has been reduced to 36 with a weekly broadcast total of
nearly 477 hours.
The BBC World Service broadcasts for 24 hours a day in English and is
supplemented at peak listening times by programmes of special interest to
Africa.
BBC news bulletins and other programmes are re-broadcast by the radio
services of many countries. Re-broadcasting involves direct relays from
1 Report of the Inquiry into Cable Expansion and Broadcasting Policy. (Chairman: Lord Hunt) Cmnd 8670
HMSO. £4-40. ISBN o 10 186790 5.
2Cable Systems: A Report by the Information Technology Advisory Panel. HMSO, £360, ISBN on 630821 4.
390
Advertising
Parliamentary
and Political
Broadcasting
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
BBC transmissions and the use of recorded programmes supplied through
the BBC tape and disc transcription service. There are some 3,000 re¬
broadcasts weekly of World Service programmes in about 150 countries.
The Transcription Service, which the Government hopes will become self-
supporting, offers programmes to about 100 countries.
The BBC’s English by Radio and Television Service is the most exten¬
sive language teaching undertaking in the world. English lessons are
broadcast weekly by radio with explanations in 30 other languages, and
recorded lessons are supplied to 300 stations in 90 countries. English by
Television programmes are shown in more than 60 countries.
Another part of the External Services, the Monitoring Service, listens to
and reports on foreign broadcasts, supplying a daily flow of significant news
and comment from overseas to the BBC, the press, and the Government.
Radio for overseas is also produced by the radio services of the Central
Oflice of Information (COI). A wide range of recorded material is sent to
radio stations in over 91 countries. COI television services provide material
such as documentary and magazine programmes for distribution to over¬
seas television stations.
The BBC does not give publicity to any firm or organised interest except
when it is necessary to provide effective and informative programmes.
It must not broadcast any commercial advertisement or any sponsored
programme.
Advertisements are broadcast on independent television but there is no
sponsoring of programmes by advertisers. Advertisements must be clearly
distinguishable and separate from programmes, and the amount of time
given to them must not be so great as to detract from the value of the
programmes as a medium of information, education or entertainment.
Advertising is normally limited to seven minutes in any one hour of
broadcasting time and averaged over the day’s programmes must not
exceed six minutes per hour. The independent local radio stations are
normally limited to a maximum of nine minutes of advertising each hour.
The IB A has a code governing standards and practice in advertising on
television and radio and giving guidance about the types and methods
of advertisement which are prohibited; this includes advertising with a
political or religious object or on behalf of cigarettes or betting. Advertise¬
ments may not be inserted in certain types of programme, such as broad¬
casts to schools.
Government publicity material to support non-political campaigns may
be broadcast on independent radio and television. It is prepared through
the COI and broadcast and paid for on a normal commercial basis. Short
public service items, mainly about health, safety and welfare, are also
produced by the COI for free transmission by the BBC and independent
television and radio. The Government has no general privileged access to
radio or television.
Parliamentary reporting includes a daily factual and impartial account of
proceedings in Parliament. Proceedings, including those of committees,
are broadcast on radio, some live and others in recorded form in radio and
television news and current affairs programmes.
Ministerial and party political broadcasts are transmitted periodically on
radio and television under rules agreed between the major political parties,
the BBC and the IBA.
TELEVISION AND RADIO
391
Technical
Developments
International
Relations
Research into technical problems is carried out by scientific and engineer¬
ing staff's of the BBC, the IBA, the Home Office, other government depart¬
ments and the radio industry. One of the most important recent develop¬
ments has been the introduction of smaller, lighter cameras and video
recorders for use on location. Electronic news-gathering equipment,
whereby pictures can be transmitted directly to a studio or recorded on
videotape on location, reduces significantly the time before an item can be
broadcast. Other developments include the use of new types of videotape
recorders, the increasing use of computers to generate graphical shapes
such as captions and credits, and the improvement of the quality of
videotape pictures.
Advances by the BBC have included the electronic conversion of mono¬
chrome and colour television pictures between the European and the
American systems, and the development of a sound-and-vision system,
known as ‘sound-in-sync’, which enables the television sound and picture
to be carried over a single 625-line vision circuit, eliminating the operational
complexity and expense of a separate circuit for sound. IBA engineers were
the first in the world to introduce a fully digital field rate standards
converter to improve the interchange of programmes between areas using
the 525-line system and those using the 625-line system. Current IBA
research projects include the further development of the first digital video¬
tape recorder with economical use of tape, and a study of the future use of
space satellites for broadcasting which has included the development of a
new Multiplexed Analogue Component (MAC) transmission system for
use on future direct broadcast satellites.
The Government has decided in principle that Britain should make an
early start with direct broadcasting by satellite, and the BBC has been
authorised to go ahead with its proposals for starting two satellite channels
by 1986. Plans have also been announced for the formation of a privately
financed satellite system, to be designed and manufactured in Britain.
Both the BBC and the IBA have produced ‘teletext’ systems, known re¬
spectively as CEEFAX and ORACLE, which allow the broadcasting of
simple graphical information to television receivers fitted with special
adaptors. Both systems enable viewers to select a display of ‘pages’ of
written information on the television screen; the system also allows sub¬
titles to appear in conjunction with programmes, which is of great benefit to
the deaf and hard of hearing. British Telecom’s public viewdata service,
Prestel, offers a wide range of information which is transmitted via the
telephone and viewed on the screen of a television receiver (see p 301).
The BBC and the IBA are active members of the European Broadcasting
Union which manages Eurovision, and is responsible for the technical and
administrative arrangements for co-ordinating the exchange of programmes
over the Eurovision network and intercontinental satellite links, as well as
maintaining a technical monitoring station where frequency measurements
and other observations on broadcasting stations are carried out. The Union
also provides a forum linking the major public services and national
broadcasters of Western Europe and other parts of the world and co¬
ordinates co-operation in radio and television.
The BBC is a partner in Visnews, which supplies world newsfilm to 269
television stations in 88 countries and is the most widely used newsfilm
agency in the world. The BBC is also a member of the International
Television Federation (Intertel), which produces information programmes
392
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
which are exchanged overseas. United Press International, Paramount
Pictures and Independent Television News jointly provide an international
newsfilm service to more than 100 overseas television organisations via the
Eurovision network and by satellite.
The BBC is an associated member of the Asian Pacific Broadcasting
Union, and belongs to the Commonwealth Broadcasting Association
whose members extend to each other such facilities as the use of studios,
recording channels, and programme contributions. The BBC also pro¬
vides technical aid, particularly in training the staff of other broadcasting
organisations throughout the world; members of the BBC’s staff are
seconded for service overseas.
The Government finances a number of overseas students on the broad¬
casting training courses at the British Council (see p 70), the BBC and the
Thomson Television College which is based in Glasgow.
The BBC and the IBA participate in the work of the International
Telecommunications Union, the United Nations agency responsible for
regulating and controlling all international telecommunications services
(including radio and television), for allocating and registering all radio
frequencies and for promoting and co-ordinating the international study of
technical problems in broadcasting. The BBC is also represented on the
United Kingdom Committee of the International Special Committee on
Radio Interference.
24 Sport 
and Recreation
Britain invented and developed many of the sports and games which are
now played all over the world, and there is widespread interest and
participation in almost every kind of sport throughout the country. Large
crowds attend occasions such as the association football Cup Final at
Wembley Stadium, the international rugby matches at Twickenham,
Murrayfield and Cardiff Arms Park, the Wimbledon lawn tennis champion¬
ships, the classic horse races, Grand Prix motor racing and the cricket Test
matches. Many people take part in sports such as association and rugby
football, cricket, golf, tennis, hockey and athletics; other forms of recrea¬
tion such as climbing, rambling, horse-riding, boating, angling and other
water-based sports, keep-fit, movement and dance activities are also popu¬
lar, while in the last few years there has been an upsurge of interest in
jogging and marathon running. Extensive coverage of sport on television
has helped to generate interest in a wide variety of sports including rugby
league, darts, snooker and skiing.
A Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State in the Department of the
Environment co-ordinates government policy on sport and active recrea¬
tion. The Secretaries of State for Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland
have similar responsibilities in their areas.
The Government provides financial and other assistance through a
number of official bodies. Some of these, such as the Sports Councils (see
below) and the Countryside Commissions, have specific responsibilities
for sport and recreation, and help other public and private bodies to pro¬
vide facilities. Others, for example, the Forestry Commission, the British
Waterways Board, the Nature Conservancy Council and the regional water
authorities, provide recreational amenities in addition to their main
functions.
Sports Government assistance to the development of sport in Great Britain is
Councils channelled through three independent bodies—the Sports Council (for
England and for general matters affecting Britain as a whole), the Sports
Council for Wales and the Scottish Sports Council. The Councils allocate
government funds (in 1982-83 amounting to some £30 million) subject
only to general ministerial directives. They award grants for sports de¬
velopment, coaching and administration to the governing bodies of sport
and other national organisations, and administer the national sports
centres. Grants and loans are made to voluntary organisations and local
authorities to assist the provision of sports facilities. In some circumstances
grants are also given to commercial organisations. The Councils also assist
British representatives at international sports meetings and encourage links
with international and overseas organisations. The Sports Council consults
with the Central Council of Physical Recreation, comprising members of
the national governing and representative bodies of sport and physical
recreation in England. There are nine regional councils for sport and
ORGANISATION
AND
PROMOTION
394
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Organisations
The British
Olympic Association
The National
Playing Fields
Association
Sport for the
Disabled
recreation in England, on each of which sporting, countryside and local
authority interests are represented. The Scottish Sports Council consults
with the Scottish Standing Conference of Sport which comprises repre¬
sentatives of the national governing bodies of sport in Scotland; and in
Wales the governing bodies of sport come together in the Welsh Sports
Association and form a committee of the Sports Council for Wales. In
Northern Ireland the Department of Education finances the Sports
Council for Northern Ireland, and gives financial help to local authorities
and voluntary sports bodies for the provision of facilities. Apart from grant
aiding facilities the Sports Council for Northern Ireland has the same range
of functions as the other Sports Councils, and works closely with the
governing bodies of sport both directly and through the Northern Ireland
Council of Physical Recreation.
A bibliographic service about sport is provided by the National Docu¬
mentation Centre, set up by the Sports Council and based at the University
of Birmingham. The Council also has an information centre providing data
on a wide range of sports topics; similar services are provided by the Sports
Council for Wales, the Scottish Sports Council and the Sports Council for
Northern Ireland. The Sports Council’s Technical Unit for Sport gives
advice on the design and layout of sports halls and playing areas and carries
out research.
Individual sports are run by independent governing bodies whose func¬
tions usually include drawing up rules, holding events, regulating member¬
ship, selecting and training national teams and promoting international
links.
There are also organisations representing people who take part in more
informal physical recreation, such as walking, or cycling; others, for
example the National Trusts (see p 173), are involved in leisure interests as
part of a wider concern.
The British Olympic Association, founded in 1905, organises the partici¬
pation of British teams in the Olympic Games. The Association’s commit¬
tee consists of representatives of the 26 sports in the programme of the
Olympic Games (summer and winter). It determines the size of the British
team, raises funds, makes all the arrangements and provides a headquarters
staff for the management of the team.
The National Playing Fields Association encourages the provision of
playing fields, playgrounds and recreational facilities, specialising in the
play and recreational needs of children and young people, including the
young handicapped. The Association maintains a Technical Advisory
Service and an Information Centre in London, runs the Midlands
Resource Centre in Birmingham, and publishes the magazine Play Times.
Regional officers in England and Wales promote and advise on the pro¬
vision of play opportunities. The Association is a national charity estab¬
lished by Royal Charter and depends mainly on voluntary contributions.
There are affiliated associations in Scotland, Northern Ireland and in the
counties of England and Wales.
The British Sports Association for the Disabled, founded in 1961,
encourages greater sporting and recreational opportunities for disabled
people. The Association, which receives an annual Sports Council grant,
SPORT AND RECREATION
395
Private
Sponsorship
PROVISION OF
FACILITIES
provides advice on physical recreation for the disabled, arranges sports
meetings and encourages the provision of facilities throughout the country.
It co-ordinates the activities of its 31 member associations representing all
categories of handicap—physical, mental and sensory. The first sports
stadium in the world designed for the disabled was opened at Stoke
Mandeville, Buckinghamshire, in 1969, and is owned and maintained by
the British Paraplegic Sports Society.
Annual national games organised by several of the associations for the
disabled take place at Stoke Mandeville, Crystal Palace in London and at
other locations, while British teams participate at international events.
Increasing numbers of sports receive financial sponsorship from com¬
mercial organisations. Sponsorship may take the form of financing specific
events, or it may be granted to individual sports organisations.
A Sports Aid Foundation raises and distributes funds from industry,
commerce and private sponsors in order to assist the training of talented
individual sportsmen and sportswomen. The Foundation makes grants on
the recommendation of the governing bodies of sport. In Wales the Welsh
Sports Trust fulfils a similar function and in Northern Ireland this is done
by the Ulster Sports and Recreation Trust. The Sports Council also runs a
sponsorship advisory service.
Local authorities are the main providers of land and large-scale facilities
for community recreation; their total expenditure on sport and outdoor
recreation in England amounted to some £528 million in 1981-82, in Wales
£43 million, in Scotland about £130 million and in Northern Ireland £5-5
million. The facilities provided include parks, playing fields, sports halls,
tennis courts, golf courses, lakes, swimming baths and sports centres
catering for a wide range of indoor and outdoor activities.
Increased emphasis is being laid on the need to improve facilities for
sport in areas of urban stress. Many schemes are grant-aided under the
Government’s Urban Programme. In recognition of the special problems
of Merseyside the Government has offered to match pound for pound up to
£1 million the money raised by the private sector. In addition, the Sports
Council is concentrating resources on the improvement of facilities and on
ways of encouraging people, particularly the young, to take part in sport.
Publicly maintained schools must provide for the physical education of
their pupils. All (except those solely for infants) must have a playing field,
or the use of one, and most secondary schools have a gymnasium. Some
have other amenities such as swimming pools, sports halls and halls
designed for dance and movement. In many areas, schools’ facilities are
available to the community outside school hours. Sport and recreation
facilities are likewise provided at universities (some of which have depart¬
ments of physical education), and there are ‘centres of sporting excellence’
at universities and other colleges enabling selected young athletes to
develop their talents and also providing for their educational needs.
Opportunities for outdoor recreation in national parks, nature reserves,
forest parks and country parks are provided by public bodies (see p 174).
Water-based activities on canals, rivers, lakes and reservoirs are increasingly
popular.
In addition to the recreational facilities provided by public authorities,
many facilities are made available by local voluntary clubs. Some cater for
indoor recreation, but more common are those providing sports grounds,
396
Sports Centres
POPULAR
SPORTS
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
particularly for games such as cricket, association and rugby football,
hockey, tennis and golf. Clubs linked to business firms often cater for a wide
range of activities, and in many cases make their facilities available to
members of the public. Commercial facilities include tenpin bowling
centres, ice- and roller-skating rinks, squash courts, golf courses and
driving ranges, curling rinks and riding stables.
National sports centres, some of which were initially financed by funds
from voluntary sources, are run by the Sports Council, and provide a range
of competition and training facilities. As well as offering residential courses
for national teams, coaches and enthusiasts from all over Britain, the
centres are used extensively by local sports clubs and the local community.
There are six national centres in England and Wales, financed mainly by
the Sports Council. Combined facilities for a range of sports are provided at
three centres: Crystal Palace in south-east London, Bisham Abbey in
Buckinghamshire and Lilleshall in Shropshire. Crystal Palace provides
major competition venues for athletics and swimming and a variety of
indoor sports, and Lilleshall is also the training headquarters of the
Football Association. The other three are specialist centres: the National
Sailing Centre, Cowes, Isle of Wight; the National Water Sports Centre at
Holme Pierrepont, Nottinghamshire, which caters for rowing, canoeing
and water-skiing; and the Plas-y-Brenin National Centre for Mountain
Activities in north Wales. Crystal Palace and Holme Pierrepont also receive
financial support from the Greater London Council and the Nottingham¬
shire County Council. The Sports Council for Wales operates the National
Sports Centre for Wales in Cardiff, and is constructing the National
Outdoor Pursuits Centre at Plas-y-Deri in north Wales which is expected
to be completed by the end of 1982.
The Scottish Sports Council operates three national sports training
centres: Glenmore Lodge near Aviemore for outdoor sports, Inverclyde at
Largs for general sports, and a national water sports training centre in
Cumbrae Isle on the Firth of Clyde. The Sports Council for Northern
Ireland operates one national facility, the Northern Ireland Mountain
Centre at Tollymore in Co. Down.
Other centres (such as the Meadowbank Sports Centre administered by
Edinburgh District Council) cater for a wide range of recreational activities
and often attract more than purely local interest. About 950 indoor sports
centres serve local rather than national needs; they range from purpose-
built centres to school sports facilities available for public use outside
school hours. Several centres cater for specialised interests, for example,
the National Equestrian Centre, run by the British Equestrian Federation,
and the Ludwig Guttmann Sports Centre for the Disabled, Stoke Mande-
ville, run by the British Paraplegic Sports Society (see p 395).
Northern Ireland has 18 major indoor sports centres, all of which include
swimming pools. In addition, there are 18 public swimming centres. Five
recreation halls are planned either as extensions of these locations or at
separate sites.
Some of the major sports in Britain are mentioned below. Sportsmen may
be professionals (paid players) or amateurs. Some sports, such as rugby
union, hockey and rowing, are amateur but in others the distinction
between amateur and professional status is less strictly defined, or does not
exist.
SPORT AND RECREATION
397
Association
Football
Athletics
Probably the most popular spectator sport is association football, which
was first developed and codified in England during the nineteenth century,
and is controlled by separate football associations in England, Wales,
Scotland and Northern Ireland. In England over 350 clubs are affiliated to
the English Football Association (FA) and some 40,000 clubs to regional or
district associations. The principal clubs in England and Wales belong to
the Football League (92 clubs) and in Scotland to the Scottish Football
League (38 clubs); the clubs play in four divisions in England and Wales
and three in Scotland. During the season, which lasts from August until
May, attendances at Football League matches total about 20 million. The
Football Association, formed in 1863, and the Football League, formed in
1888, were both the first of their kind.
The annual competitions for the FA Challenge Cup, the Milk Cup
(formerly the League Cup), the Scottish FA Cup, the Scottish League
Cup, the Irish Cup and the Welsh FA Cup are organised on a knock-out
basis, and the finals are played at Wembley Stadium, London, at Hampden
Park, Glasgow, at Windsor Park, Belfast, and on a two-leg home and away
basis in Wales.
National teams representing England, Wales, Scotland and Northern
Ireland compete against one another annually and take part in European
competitions, the World Cup competition and other international matches.
England won the World Cup in 1966 and England, Scotland and Northern
Ireland qualified to play in the final stages of the World Cup competition
which was held in Spain in 1982. English clubs have been European club
champions for the past six years (1977-82); another club won the Union of
European Football Associations cup competition in 1981.
Attempts have been made to give football clubs closer links with the
community in order to overcome problems of hooliganism. The Sports
Council, using specially allocated funds, has made grants to a number of
clubs to enable them to modernise or expand football and other sporting
facilities which will attract young people.
In England amateur athletics (including track, road and cross-country
running, relay racing, jumping, vaulting, hurdling, steeplechasing, throw¬
ing and race walking) are governed by the Amateur Athletic Association
(which, formed in 1880, was the first national governing body for athletics)
and by the Women’s Amateur Athletic Association. Scotland, Wales and
Northern Ireland have their own associations. The various organisations
encourage the development of the sport, establish uniform rules and
regulations and promote regional and national championships. Hundreds
of clubs are affiliated to the various national associations.
International athletics and the selection of British teams are the concern
of the British Amateur Athletic Board which is composed of representa¬
tives of the national associations. For the Olympic Games one team
represents the United Kingdom but England, Wales, Scotland, Northern
Ireland, Jersey, Guernsey and the Isle of Man compete separately in the
Commonwealth Games and also organise their own international meetings.
The Board also administers coaching schemes. Many British athletes have
enjoyed distinguished reputations; for example, in 1954 Dr Roger Bannister
became the first man to run a mile in under four minutes. More recently
four athletes won gold medals in the 1980 Olympic Games, and in 1982 six
world records were held by Britons: the 800 and 1,000 metres and the mile
by Sebastian Coe; the 1,500 metres by Steve Ovett; the 5,000 metres by
398
The Highland
Games
Boxing
Cricket
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
David Moorcroft and the decathlon by Daley Thompson.
The Scottish Highland Games, at which sports (including tossing the
caber, putting the weight and throwing the hammer) and dancing and
piping competitions take place, attract large numbers of spectators from all
over the world. Among better-known Highland Games are the annual
Braemar Gathering (traditionally attended by the Royal Family), the
Argyllshire and Cowal Gatherings and the meeting at Aboyne.
Boxing as a British sport is one of the oldest, probably originating in Saxon
times. Its modern form, also adopted in many overseas countries, dates
from 1865 when the Marquess of Queensberry drew up a set of rules
eliminating much of the brutality that had characterised prize-fighting and
making skill the basis of the sport. Boxing is both amateur and professional,
and in both, strict medical regulations are observed.
The Amateur Boxing Association controls all amateur boxing in England
including schoolboy, club and association boxing, and boxing in the armed
services. There are separate associations in Scotland and Wales. Northern
Ireland forms part of the Irish Boxing Association. The associations
organise various amateur boxing competitions, and teams from England,
Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland take part in international competi¬
tions such as the European and world championships and the Olympic and
Commonwealth Games.
Professional boxing is controlled by the British Boxing Board of Control,
founded in 1929. The Board appoints inspectors, medical officers and
representatives to ensure that regulations are observed and to guard against
over-matching and exploitation. At various times British boxers have held
European and world championship titles. Some of the best known include
Henry Cooper, John Conteh, Maurice Hope and Alan Minter.
Cricket is among the most popular of summer sports and is sometimes
called the English national game. It is known to have been played as early
as the 1550s. Among the many clubs founded in the eighteenth century is
the Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC) which was founded in London and
which reframed the laws of the game. Cricket in Britain is now governed
by the Cricket Council which consists of representatives of the MCC, the
Test and County Cricket Board (representing first-class cricket) and the
National Cricket Association (representing club and junior cricket).
The game is played in schools, colleges and universities, and in most
towns and villages there are amateur teams which play weekly games from
late April to the end of September. In England there is a network of league
cricket contested by teams of Saturday afternoon players; in the Midlands
and the north of England these teams include a full-time professional.
Cricket is also played to a lesser extent in Scotland and Wales.
Some of the best supported games are the annual series of five-day
sponsored Test matches played between England and a touring team from
Australia, New Zealand, India, Pakistan or the West Indies. A team
representing England usually tours one or more of these countries in the
British winter. One-day international games also attract large crowds. A
World Cup is played every four years, with some of the smaller cricketing
nations as well as the major countries competing. There is also a sponsored
First Class County Championship of three-day games played by 17 pro¬
fessional county teams who also take part in three one-day sponsored
competitions—two knock-out competitions and the Sunday League.
SPORT AND RECREATION
399
Field Sports
Golf
Cricket is also played by women and girls, the governing body being the
Women’s Cricket Association, founded in 1926. Women’s cricket clubs
have regular week-end fixtures, and junior sides play both eleven and six-a¬
side competitions. Test match series are played against Australia, India,
New Zealand and the West Indies and other international matches take
place. The women’s World Cup, in which England competes, is held every
four years.
The British Field Sports Society looks after the interests of all field sports
(including hunting, fishing, stalking, game shooting, falconry and hare
coursing). The Society is a member of the British Shooting Sports Council
which is the representative body for the recreational use of firearms.
Fox hunting on horseback with a pack of hounds is the most popular
British hunting sport but there is also stag hunting, hunting the hare and
the fast-developing sport of hunting mink and coypu. The fox hunting
season lasts from early November to April; there are over 400 packs of
hounds of all kinds in Britain. The sport is not without its critics, but a large
number of people take a keen interest in it.
Game shooting as an organised sport probably originated in the early
part of the nineteenth century. Game consists of grouse, black-grouse,
partridge, pheasant and ptarmigan, species which are protected by law
during a close season when they are allowed to breed on numerous estates
supervised by game-keepers. It is necessary to have a licence to kill game,
and a certificate must be obtained from the local police by anyone who
possesses a shot-gun. The Game Conservancy, formed by landowners,
farmers and others interested in game conservation, collects information
and studies factors controlling game population.
The most popular country sport is fishing, and there are about 3 • 5 million
anglers in Britain. Many fish for salmon and trout particularly in the rivers
and lochs of Scotland and in Wales, but in England and Wales the most
widely practised form of fishing is for coarse fish such as pike, perch, carp,
roach, dace, tench, chub and bream. Angling clubs affiliate to the National
Federation of Anglers and many clubs organise angling competitions.
National championships are organised by the Federation which also enters
a team in the World Angling Championship. Freshwater fishing usually has
to be paid for; most coarse fishing is let to angling clubs by private owners,
while trout and salmon fishermen either rent a stretch of river, join a club,
or pay for the right to fish by the day, week or month. Coastal and deep sea
fishing are free to all (apart from salmon and sea trout fishing which is by
licence only). In Northern Ireland the Ulster Provincial Council of the
Irish Federation of Sea Anglers, the Ulster Coarse Angling Federation and
the Ulster Angling Federation look after the interests of the sport. In Wales
all angling is the responsibility of the Welsh Anglers Council.
Golf originated in Scotland where it has for centuries borne the title of the
Royal and Ancient Game, the headquarters of the Royal and Ancient Golf
Club being situated at St Andrews on the east coast. The Club is the
international governing body of the sport. Golf is played throughout
Britain and there are golf courses in the vicinity of most towns, some of
them owned by local authorities. The main event of the golfing year is the
Open Golf Championship; other important events include the Walker Cup
match for amateurs and the Ryder Cup match for professionals, both of
which are played between Britain and the United States and Europe and
400
Lawn Tennis
Motor Sports
Racing
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the United States respectively. One of Britain’s best known golfers is
Tony Jacklin who in 1969 won the British Open Championship and in 1970
the United States Open Championship. Among the leading players in
European tournaments are Nick Faldo, Sandy Lyle, Mark James, Brian
Barnes and Bernard Gallagher.
The modern game of lawn tennis was first played in England in 1872 and
the first championships at Wimbledon in 1877. The controlling body in
Great Britain, the Lawn Tennis Association, was founded in 1888. The
main event of the season is the annual Wimbledon fortnight, widely
regarded as the most important tennis event in the world; this draws large
crowds, with the grounds at the All-England Club accommodating over
30,000 spectators. There are also county championships and national
competitions for boys’ and girls’ schools. International events include the
Davis Cup and Kings Cup for men and the Federation Cup for women.
Women from Britain and the United States compete for the Wightman
Cup. In Northern Ireland the Ulster Council of the Irish Lawn Tennis
Association controls the game.
Among the most popular spectator sports are motor racing and motor
rallying. The governing body, RAC (Royal Automobile Club) Motor
Sports Association, issues competition licences for a variety of motoring
competitions and organises the RAC Rally, an event in the contest for the
World Rally Championship. It also organises the British Grand Prix which
counts towards the Formula One World Motor Racing Championship.
Motorcycle racing is governed by the Auto-Cycle Union and the most
important events of the year are the Isle of Man Tourist Trophy races, the
British Grand Prix, and the TT Formula World Championships. Speed¬
way racing is governed by the Speedway Control Board.
Britain has had six world champion motor racing drivers, the most recent
being Jackie Stewart (1969, 1971 and 1973) and James Hunt (1976); and
three world champion motorcycle riders at 500 cc: Mike Hailwood
(1962-65), Phil Read (1973-74) and Barry Sheene (1976-77).
Horse racing takes two forms—flat racing (from late March to early
November) and steeplechasing and hurdle racing (from August to June).
The Derby, run at Epsom, is the outstanding event in the flat racing
calendar. Other classic races are: the Two Thousand Guineas and the One
Thousand Guineas, both run at Newmarket; the Oaks, run at Epsom; and
the St Leger, run at Doncaster. The most important steeplechase and
hurdle race meeting is the National Hunt Festival Meeting at Cheltenham.
The Grand National, run at Aintree near Liverpool, is the best known
steeplechase and dates from 1837.
The Jockey Club administers all horse racing in Britain. Its rules are the
basis of turf procedure and it also licenses racecourses. Racing takes place
on most weekdays throughout the year and about 11,500 horses are in
training. British thoroughbreds continue to be a source of the world’s best
bloodstock.
The racing of greyhounds after a mechanical hare (considered to be
among Britain’s most popular spectator sports) takes place at 105 tracks
licensed by local authorities. Meetings are usually held two or three times a
week at each track, up to a maximum of 130 days a year. The rules for the
sport are drawn up by the National Greyhound Racing Club, which is the
SPORT AND RECREATION
401
Riding
Rugby
Football
sport’s judiciary body. The Stewards of the Club are also responsible for
overall administration and organisation. The representative body for the
sport is the British Greyhound Racing Board.
The authority responsible for equestrian activities (other than racing) at
international level is the British Equestrian Federation which co-ordinates
the work of the British Horse Society and the British Show Jumping
Association.
At national level the British Horse Society promotes the welfare of horses
and ponies, the interests of horse and pony breeding and the art of riding.
It provides information, publications, a film library, courses and examina¬
tions and, together with riding schools approved by it, helps to promote
horsemanship. It also runs the British Equestrian Centre at Kenilworth,
Warwickshire, where activities take place throughout the year. With some
32,000 members the Society is the parent body of the Pony Club and the
Riding Club movement. These hold rallies, meetings and competitions, cul¬
minating in their annual national championships at the British Equestrian
Centre.
Horse trials are held during the spring and summer under the auspices of
the Society. The three-day events held each year are at Badminton (Avon)
in April, Windsor (Berkshire) in May, Bramham (Yorkshire) in June,
Burghley House (Lincolnshire) in September, and Wylye (Wiltshire) in
October, and include dressage, cross-country riding and show jumping.
Show jumping is promoted by the British Show Jumping Association
which draws up competition rules and prescribes the general standards and
height of obstacles. The Association keeps a register of horses and ponies
taking part in shows and seeks to improve the standard of jumping and to
provide for British representation in international competitions. It has over
15,000 members and 1,293 shows are affiliated to it. The major show
jumping events each year include the Royal International Horse Show, the
Horse of the Year Show, and the Birmingham International Showjumping
Championships. British equestrian teams won gold medals at both the 1968
and 1972 Olympic Games, the riders including Captain Mark Phillips and
Lucinda Prior-Palmer. Another member, Richard Meade, also won an
individual gold medal in 1972. The best known show jumpers include
David Broome, Marion Mould, Harvey Smith and Nick Skelton.
Rugby football is played according to two different codes: Rugby Union (a
15-a-side game) is played by amateurs while Rugby League (a 13-a-side
game) is played by professionals as well as amateurs.
Rugby Union is played throughout Britain under the auspices of the
Rugby Football Union (in England), the Welsh Rugby Union, the Scottish
Rugby Union and the Irish Rugby Football Union. International matches
between England, Scotland, Wales, Ireland and France are played each
year and there are tours by international teams.
Rugby League is played mostly in the north of England. The governing
body of the professional game is the Rugby Football League which sends
touring teams to Australia and New Zealand. Annual matches are also
played against France. The Challenge Cup Final, the major match of the
season, is played at Wembley Stadium in London. The amateur game is
governed by the British Amateur Rugby League Association. Annual
matches are played between England and France.
402
Sailing
Swimming
GAMBLING
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Sailing has always been popular in Britain. The Royal Yachting Association
has over 1,500 affiliated clubs and 46,000 personal members; some 640
practical and shore-based teaching centres in the country, including the
National Sailing Centre at Cowes in the Isle of Wight, offer Royal Yachting
Association courses in all branches of the sport. One of the world’s
principal regattas takes place each year at Cowes, and major events are held
at other British sailing centres. British yachtsmen and women have under¬
taken many notable voyages. Sir Francis Chichester was the winner of the
first single-handed transatlantic race in i960 and made a solo circum¬
navigation of the world in 1966—67. The first non-stop solo circumnaviga¬
tion was achieved by Robin Knox-Johnstone in 1968. In 1976 Clare
Francis held the record for the fastest single-handed crossing of the
Atlantic, as did Naomi James in 1980. Rodney Pattison won gold medals in
the ‘Flying Dutchman’ class at the Olympic regattas of 1968 and 1972 with
his crews Ian McDonald-Smith and Christopher Davies.
Swimming is enjoyed by millions of people in Britain, many of whom learn
to swim at public baths, schools or swimming clubs. Instruction and
coaching is provided by qualified teachers who hold certificates awarded
by the Amateur Swimming Association, to which over 1,700 clubs are
affiliated. The Association also draws up and enforces regulations for
amateur swimming, diving, synchronised swimming and water polo cham¬
pionships and competitions in England. Separate associations control the
sport in Scotland and Wales. Northern Ireland forms part of the Irish
Amateur Swimming Association. A number of British swimmers have had
great success and Anita Lonsborough, David Wilkie and Duncan Goodhew
won gold medals at the i960, 1976 and 1980 Olympic Games respectively.
Underwater swimming (sub-aqua) is governed nationally by the British
Sub-Aqua Club which promotes underwater exploration, science and
sport. Formed in I953j the club has become the largest in the world with
some 30,000 members and more than 11,000 branches in Britain and
overseas.
Various forms of betting and commercial gaming are permitted under strict
regulations and the total money staked in Great Britain in 1981 was about
£5,924 million. It is estimated that some 94 per cent of adults gamble at
some time or another, 39 per cent regularly.
Gaming includes the playing of casino and card games, gaming machines
and licensed bingo, thought to be played by about 5 to 6 million people on a
fairly regular basis. Betting takes place mainly on horse and greyhound
racing, and on football matches (usually through football pools). Racing
bets may be made at racecourses and greyhound tracks, or through some
12,000 licensed off-course betting offices which take nearly 90 per cent of
the money staked. A form of pool betting (totalisator betting) is organised
on, and off, course by the Horserace Totalisator Board (HTB). Bookmakers
and the HTB contribute a ‘betting levy’ to the Horserace Betting Levy
Board which promotes the improvement of horse racing and horse breed¬
ing and the advancement of veterinary science.
In addition, legislation allows local authorities and certain other bodies
to hold lotteries.
Appendix i
Length
Area
Capacity
Weight
(Avoirdupois)
Double
Conversion
Tables for
Measures and
Weights
Metric Equivalents for British Weights and Measures
12 inches
3 feet
1,760 yards
1 inch
1 foot
1 yard
1 mile
254 centimetres
30 48 centimetres
0-914 metre
1-609 kilometres
144 square inches
9 square feet
4,840 square yards
640 acres
1 square inch
1 square foot
1 square yard
1 acre
1 square mile
6-451 square centimetres
929 03 square centimetres
0-836 square metre
0-405 hectare
2-59 square kilometres
2 pints
4 quarts
8 gallons
8 bushels
1 pint =
1 quart =
1 gallon =
1 bushel =
1 quarter =
0 568 litre
1- 136 litres
4-546 litres
36-37 litres
2- 909 hectolitres
16 oz.
14 lb.
112 lb.
20 cwt.
2,000 lb.
(2,240 lb.)
1 ounce (oz.)
1 pound (ilb.)
1 stone (st.)
1 hundredweight (cwt.)
1 long ton
1 short ton
28-35 grammes
0-454 kilogramme
6 35 kilogrammes
50-8 kilogrammes
1016 tonnes
0-907 tonne
(Note: the central figures represent either of the two columns beside them, as the case may
be, for example, 1 centimetre = 0-394 inch, and 1 inch = 2-540 centimetres.)
Centi- Kilo- Hec-
metres inches Metres Yards metres Miles tares Acres
2-540 1 0-394
5080 2 0-787
7-620 3 1181
10160 4 1-575
12700 5 1-969
15-240 6 2-362
17-780 7 2-756
20-320 8 3-150
22-860 9 3-543
25400 10 3937
0-914 1 1094
1-829 2 2187
2743 3 3-281
3658 4 4-374
4- 572 5 5-468
5- 486 6 6-562
6- 401 7 7-655
7- 315 8 8749
8- 230 9 9-843
9- 144 10 10936
1-609 1 0-621
3- 219 2 1-243
4- 828 3 1-864
6-437 4 2-485
8047 5 3107
9-656 6 3728
11- 266 7 4350
12- 875 8 4-971
14-484 9 5-592
16094 10 6-214
0-405 1 2-471
0-809 2 4942
1214 3 74I3
1- 619 4 9884
2023 5 12-355
2- 428 6 14-826
2- 833 7 17-298
3 237 8 19769
3- 642 9 22-240
4 047 10 24711
Kilo- Av.
grammes Pounds
Litres
Pints
Litres Gallons
Metric Hun-
Quintals dred-
per weight
Hectare per Acre
0-454 1 2-205
0-907 2 4409
1-361 3 6614
1- 814 4 8-8i8
2- 268 5 11023
2722 6 13-228
3175 7 15-432
3- 629 8 17637
4082 9 19-842
4- 536 10 22 046
0-568 1 1760
1136 2 3520
1705 3 5-279
2273 4 7-039
2- 841 5 8799
3- 409 6 10-559
3978 7 12-319
4- 546 8 14078
5114 9 15838
5- 682 10 17-598
4546
9092
13-638
18184
22-730
27-276
31-822
35 368
40-914
45-460
0-220
O44O
o-66o
o-88o
1-too
1-320
1-540
1760
1- 980
2- 200
1- 255 i 0797
2- 511 2 1-593
3766 3 2-390
5021 4 3186
6- 277 5 3-983
7- 532 6 4780
8787 7 5-576
10043 8 6-373
11- 298 9 7169
12- 553 10 7-966
APPENDIX
Currency
The unit of currency is the pound sterling divided into too new pence (p). There are seven
denominations: 5op; 2op; top; 5p; 2p; ip; and ip. A £i coin is to be issued in 1983.
Bank of England notes are issued for sums of £1, £5, £10, £20 and £50.
Thermometrical Table
o° Centigrade = 320 Fahrenheit.
too0 Centigrade = 212° Fahrenheit.
To convert °Fahrenheit into “Centigrade: subtract 32, then multiply by “Centigrade into
“Fahrenheit: multiply by f; then add 32.
Bank and Public Holidays in Britain, 1983
Extra day because New Year’s Day falls on a Saturday
Extra day because 2 January falls on a Sunday
(Scotland only)
St Patrick’s Day (Northern Ireland only)
Good Friday
Easter Monday (England, Wales and Northern Ireland only)
Early May Bank Holiday
Spring Bank Holiday
Orangeman’s Day (Northern Ireland only)
Bank Holiday (Scotland only)
Summer Bank Holiday (England, Wales and Northern Ireland
only)
Christmas Day
Boxing Day
Extra day because Christmas Day falls on a Sunday
Monday 3 January
Tuesday 4 January
Thursday 17 March
Friday 1 April
Monday 4 April
Monday 2 May
Monday 30 May
Tuesday 12 July
Monday 1 August
Monday 29 August
Sunday 25 December
Monday 26 December
Tuesday 27 December
Appendix 2
Guide to Sources
The principal official periodical sources used in the preparation of this edition are given
below:
Chapter i
Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
Chapter 6
Chapter 7
Chapter 8
Chapter 10
Chapter 11
Chapter 12
Chapter 13
Chapter 14
Chapter 15
Chapter 16
Chapter 17
Land and People
Social Trends, Population Trends, Regional Trends, Employment Gazette, Census 1981:
Preliminary Report-England and Wales, Census 1981: Scotland Preliminary Report
Overseas Relations
British Aid Statistics
Defence
Statement on the Defence Estimates
Justice and the Law
Criminal Statistics, England and Wales, Criminal Statistics, Scotland
Social Welfare
Health and Personal Social Services Statistics for England, with summary tables for Great
Britain
Education
Statistics of Education
VOLUME 1 Schools, VOLUME 2 School Leavers, CSE and GCE, VOLUME 3 Further Education,
VOLUME 4 Teachers, VOLUME 5 Finance and Awards. University Statistical Record'. VOLUME 1
Students and staff
The Environment
General Household Survey, National Dwelling and Household Survey, Housing and
Construction Statistics, Northern Ireland Housing Statistics, Digest of Environmental
Pollution and Water Statistics
National Economy
National Income and Expenditure (the ‘Blue Book’)
Framework of Industry
National Income and Expenditure (the ‘Blue Book’), British business
Manufacturing and Service Industries
Report on the Census of Production, Monthly Digest of Statistics, Business Monitor MQ10 :
Overseas Trade Analysed in Terms of Industries, Employment Gazette, British business
Energy and Natural Resources
Digest of United Kingdom Energy Statistics, Development of the Oil and Gas Resources of the
United Kingdom (the ‘Brown Book’), United Kingdom Mineral Statistics
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
Annual Review of Agriculture
Transport and Communications
Transport Statistics, Great Britain
Employment
Employment Gazette, New Earnings Survey
Public Finance
Financial Statement and Budget Report, The Government’s Expenditure Plans
Chapter 19
Chapter 20
Overseas Trade and Payments
Monthly Review of External Trade Statistics, United Kingdom Balance of Payments (the
‘Pink Book’), British business
Promotion of Science and Technology
Economic Trends, British business
Full purchasing details of these and other British Government publications can be obtained
from the annual list Government Publications issued by Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
(HMSO), which has agents overseas. The list includes all Bills and Acts of Parliament and
the official parliamentary report Hansard, White Papers, annual reports, reports of official
committees and most publications of government departments including the Central
Statistical Office, which publishes a Guide to Official Statistics. HMSO also sells in Britain
many titles published by international organisations such as the United Nations and the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
A Catalogue of British Official Publications not published by HMSO, published by
Chadwyck-Healey, lists the more specialised departmental publications. Details of this and
other commercial publications are available from bookshops or, overseas, from the British
Council.
Index
Dems are indexed under England, Northern Ireland, Scotland or Wales only
where they are matters peculiar to these countries; otherwise they are indexed
under the relevant subject headings.
Bold type in a sequence of figures indicates main references.
A 
Aberdeen 12, 13, 15, 153, 288, 292,
299, 300, 373
Abingdon 251
Abortion 128
Academic Awards, Council for
National 154
Accepting houses 335
Accession Council 32
Accidents:
Industrial 135, 138, 139
road users 283, 284
Royal Society for the Prevention of
(RoSPA) 283
Administrative:
Staff College 200
tribunals 119-20
Adoption see Children
Adult Education see Education
Advertising 174, 240, 308, 378, 385,
386
Association 240
broadcasting 386, 387, 388, 390
press 385
Standards Authority 385
Advisory Committees and Councils
see relevant subject matter
Advocates 106, 122
Faculty of (Scotland) 122
Aerodromes 297, 298, 299, 300
Aero-engines see Aircraft
Aeronautical Research 224, 363
After-care:
prisoners m, 113, 114
young offenders 114-15, 116
Age-concern 143
Age distribution see Population
Agricultural:
and Horticulture Co-operation,
Central Council for 273
Agricultural—contd.
colleges and institutes 276, 280
Common Policy (CAP) 72, 75, 272,
273, 274, 349
Development and Advisory Service
(ADAS) 275, 277
Engineering, National Institute of 277,
358
Export Council 272
Guidance and Guarantee Fund,
European (FEOGA) 76, 273
industry 6, 8, 268, 269, 272
Inspectorate 274
International Show 272
Intervention Board for, Produce 273
Land Tribunal 274
Machinery
Exhibition 218
industry 7-8, 218, 222, 268-9
Mortgage Corporation Ltd 338
Research Council (ARC) 276, 354,
355,357-8
Scientific Services Station 275, 358
Training Board 276
wages boards 319
workers:
earnings 319
health and safety 274, 320
numbers 187, 268
protective legislation 273, 274, 320
Agriculture 12, 62, 72, 187, 191,
268-80
advisory services 275, 277
animal:
Disease Control 270, 275, 357
Welfare 275
artificial insemination (AI) 269
chemicals, toxic 8, 14, 178, 276
crops 14, 226, 268, 269, 270-1, 357
dairying 269-70
Dairy Trade Federation 228
40 8
BRITAIN 1983 I AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Agriculture—contd.
education and training 276
employment in 268, 277, 280
exports 268, 271, 272, 273
farms, number, size and types 8, 268
feedingstuffs 270, 271, 272
Fisheries and Food, Ministry of 52, 56,
131, 190, 266, 273, 275, 276, 277, 279,
358
Food From Britain 273
food supplies, home grown 187, 269,
270, 271, 272
grassland 8, 14, 268, 270
hill farming 8, 12, 268, 269, 274
horticulture 8, 271-2, 273
infestation control 275-6, 357
Investment 268
levies 273
livestock 8, 12, 269-70, 272, 273, 275,
276
imports 275
marketing boards and schemes 272-3,
274
mechanisation 218, 268-9
milk production and distribution 228, 269
pest clearance 226, 276
plants 276
policy of Government 273-5
see u/so European Community, The
Agricultural price guarantees 76,
273>274
production 187, 191, 268-9
research see Research, scientific
smallholdings 274
subsidies and grants 274
veterinary services 276
Aid for the Commonwealth
Teaching of Science Scheme 79
Aid to overseas countries 54, 86-7,
88-91
Air:
Force see Defence and Royal Air
Force
freight traffic 296, 299-300
Operator’s Certificate 298
pollution, prevention of 131, 177,
179-80,320,357
safety 297-8
traffic:
control of 298-9
Services, National 298-9
Transport see Civil Aviation
Aircraft:
and aero-engines industry 222, 223, 224
aerospace industry 222-4, 363
British Aerospace (BAe) 222, 223, 224
Society of British Aerospace
Companies 224
Aircraft—contd.
civil 295-300, 363
military 97-8, 222, 223, 224, 298
research 224, 363
Airmail services see Civil Aviation
Airports see Civil Aviation
Airways, British 202, 295, 296, 297
Albert Hall, Royal 367
Alcohol Education and Research
Council 128
Alcoholics:
drink
consumption 26
duties on 327, 330
treatment for 128
Aldeburgh (festival) 366
Allied Command Europe Mobile
Forces 95-6
Ambulance services 129
Amersham International 226
Amlwch 251
Ancient Monuments 172, 364
Society 172
Angle Bay 251
Anglesea 19
Anglican:
Communion 183
Consultative Council 183
Roman Catholic Commission 186
See also Church: of England
Angling 393, 399
Animals 30, 269-70, 275, 357
Animal:
Breeding Research Organisation 357
control of diseases 270, 275
Diseases, Institute for Research on 357
Physiology, Institute of 357
Appellate courts 107, 108, 109, 117,118
Appleton Laboratory 355
Archbishops 36, 48, 182, 183
Architects 172
Institute of British, Royal (RIBA) 172
Architectural Heritage Fund 172
Architecture 151, 154, 172-3
Archives, National Register of 376
Area Boards:
electricity 257, 261
gas 251
Argyll 2
Armed Forces see Defence
Armenian Church 185
Arms control and disarmament
82-3, 92, 94
Army 94, 95, 96, 97
arms and services 95, 96
equipment 97
Museum 373
Reserve Forces 95
INDEX
409
Army—contd.
Staff College 95
See also Defence
Arson 110
Art:
collections 372-3
and exhibitions 374
Fund 373-4
colleges and schools 152, 154, 364, 374
Commissions, Royal Fine 172
galleries and museums 10, 53, 63, 372,
373
market 372
National Exhibition of Children’s 374
Royal College of 371, 374
Society for Education through 374
Pictures for Schools Exhibition 374
Artists 10', 12
Arts 364-77
Business Sponsorship 365, 374
centres 366
Council of Great Britain 364-5, 366,
367,368,371,372,374, 375
festivals 365, 366
Government support for the 364, 365,
367, 368, 370, 371, 372, 373, 374, 376
regional associations 366
Royal Academy of 374
Royal Society of 360
Ashridge College of Management
200
Asian Pacific Broadcasting Union
392
Associated
British Ports 291
Press Ltd 383
Associations see relevant subjects
Astronomy 356
Athletics 397
Atomic:
Energy Authority, United Kingdom
(UKAEA) 53, 259, 260, 261, 262
Energy Community, European
(EURATOM) 71, 72, 262
see also Nuclear energy
Attendance centre (young
offenders) 115
Attorney-General 48, 54, 106, 108,
121
Auction Houses 241
Automation 199, 217, 218, 219, 220,
229,303
Automobile Club, Royal (RAC) 400
Automobiles see Motor
Avebury r
Aviemore 14, 396
Avonmouth 216
Ayr 15
B 
Bacon-curing industry 228
Bail 105, 106
Bakery products 227-8
Balance of Payments 187, 188, 190,
3435 3443 3 49-52
Ballet and ballet companies 368, 369
schools 10, 369
Baltic exchange 293
Bank
of England 190, 322, 332-3
credit cards 334, 335
holidays 404
rates 332
Banking 9, 332-6
corporations 338
currency reserves 350, 351
loan guarantee scheme 208, 334
Minimum Lending Rate 333
See also Financial Institutions
Baptist Church 11, 184
Barbican Centre 241, 366, 367, 368
Barristers 106, 121, 122
Bath 153, 366
Bedford and Bedfordshire 358, 361
Belfast 15, 17, 23, 153, 168, 170, 171,
223, 224, 282, 286, 299, 300, 366, 372,
373
Ben Nevis 12
Berkeley Laboratories 261
Berkshire 401
Betting and Gambling 53, 116, 327,
33°,402
Beverage industries 228-9
Bicycle industry see Cycle industry
Billingsgate Market 240
Bills, parliamentary see
Parliament
Biochemistry 357, 361
Biogas 199
Biology 357, 360
Biotechnology 199
Birmingham 23, 153, 221, 241, 260,
299, 302, 341, 368, 369, 373, 377, 394
Birth Rate 20-1
Births, registration of 20, 24
Biscuit and cake industry 228
Bisham Abbey Sports Centre 396
Bishops 36, 182, 183
Blackpool 286
Black Rod 37
Blind:
National Library for the 376
Royal National Institute for the 143
Blood transfusion service 129
Board of Customs and Excise see
Customs and Excise
4io
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Board of Inland Revenue see Inland
Revenue
Boating 396, 402
Boilers and boilerhouse plant 217
Book:
Development Council 376
exhibitions 376
League, National 376
Books 233, 375-6
See also Libraries and Publishing
Booksellers’ Association 376
Borough Councils see Local
Government, councils
Borstal institutions and training
115, 116
Boston Spa 376
Botanic Gardens, Royal 361
Botany 361
Bothamsall 250
Boundary Commissions 38, 62
Bournemouth 368
Boxing 398
Boys’ Clubs, National Association
of 159
Bracknell 95
Bradford 23, 153
Bread and flour confectionery
industry 227, 228
Brewing industry 229
Brickmaking industry 231
Bridges and tunnels 217, 235, 287, 290
Brighton 241, 366
Bristol 23, 153, 288, 291, 361, 367,
373
Britain:
area and definition of 4, 19-20
climate 19-20
historical outline 1-2
physical background 19-20
population 20-4, 168, 304, 343, 358
seas 19
social framework 20-30
soil 268
see also England, Scotland, Wales
and Northern Ireland
Britannia Royal Naval College 95
British:
Airports Authority (BAA) 299
Airways 202, 295, 296, 297
see also Civil Aviation
Army of the Rhine (BAOR) 95, 97
Association for the Advancement of
Science 360
Association of Industrial Editors 384
Board of Censors 370
Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) 48,
150, 156, 159, 242, 302, 365, 386-7,
388, 389, 390, 391, 392
British—contd.
Broadcasting Corporation (BBC)—contd.
Ceefax, 391
English Services 389, 390
External Services 387, 389—90
Monitoring Service 390
orchestras 365
radio services 388-9
Transcription Service 390
World Service 389
Caledonian Airways 297
Council 38, 70-1, 157, 158, 362, 365,
370, 376, 392
scholarships and fellowships 89, 158
Dental Association 130
Equestrian Federation 396, 401
Film
Authority 370
Catalogue 371
Fund Agency 371
Institute 371
General Council of Shipbuilders 293
Industrial and Scientific Film
Association 242, 370
Insurance Association 340
Insurance Brokers Association 340
Isles, historical outline 1-4
Library 376
Medical Association 130
Museum 361, 372, 373
National Oil Corporation (BNOC) 53,
202,249
Natural History Museum 354, 361
Nuclear Fuels 259, 261
Olympic Association 394
Overseas Trade Board 70, 349
Paraplegic Sports Society 395, 396
Petroleum Ltd 196, 249
Postal Consultancy Service 303
Railways Board 287, 288, 290
Rail Engineering Ltd (BREL) 288, 290
Red Cross Society 143
Robots Association 199
Sports Association for the Disabled 394-5
Standards Institution (BSI) 201
Steel Corporation (BSC) 197, 202, 214
Technical Assistance Programmes 362,
363
Technical Volunteer Programme 88
Technology Group 204
Telecoms 300-5
Theatre Association 367, 376
Transport Docks Board 291
Transport Hotels Ltd 290
Waterways Board 290, 291, 393
Wool Marketing Board 274
Broadcasting: television and radio
150, 153, 156, 159, 242, 365, 386-92
INDEX
411
Broadcasting: television and radio
—contd.
advertising on 242, 386, 387, 388, 390
advisory councils and committees 386,
387
authorities 386, 387
channels 388, 391
colour transmission 386, 391
Councils, National 386
educational 150, 153, 156, 159, 242,
386, 387, 388, 390
Eurovision 391, 392
films 242, 364
frequencies 388, 391, 392
international relations 391-2
licences 386
local stations 386, 387, 389, 390
political 41, 390
press and 379-80, 383, 385, 387
programme companies 379, 387-8
publications 387
regional 387
religious 386, 387, 388
research 391
services:
cable television 389
domestic television atid radio 30, 156,
386, 387, 388, 389, 390
external 389-90, 391-2
independent radio 379-80, 387, 389, 390
local radio 379-80, 386, 387, 389, 390
television 30, 150, 153, 156
transcription 389-90
technical developments 391
‘Teletext’ 220, 302
Training in 392
viewing 30, 386
See also British: Broadcasting
Corporation and Independent:
Television
Brush industry 234
Buckingham 153
Palace 34, 373
art gallery 373
Buckinghamshire 267, 395, 396
Buddhists 185
Buddhist Society 185
Budget 322, 325-6, 327, 328
Community 75
Building:
Agrement Board 235
Centres, Association of 235
and civil engineering 235
contractors’ plant 235-6
design and construction 53, 151, 164,
165,234,235
employment in 234
industrial 203
Building—contd.
industrialised 234, 235
by local authorities 164, 165, 167
new towns 168
overseas 235
private 164, 234, 235
Property Services Agency 53, 235
Regulations 164
research 235
Establishment (BRE) 68, 89, 235
school 151
societies 164, 334, 339
standards 164
National House Building Council
(NHBC) 164
safety regulations 320
See also Construction and
Engineering, Civil
Bus and coach services 285-6
National Company 202, 285
Business services 242-3
By-elections 38
Byker 178
By-laws 53, too
c 
COI see Information, Central
Office of
Cabinet 31, 39, 45, 49, 50, 51, 52, 191
Office 49-50, 70
Central Policy Review Staff 50
Central Statistical Office 50
Historical Section 50
Secretariat 50, 204
Cable:
Television Association of Great Britain
389
Cables see Post Office
Cables and wires (insulated)
industry 219, 230
Caenarfon Castle 10
Calder Hall 9, 260
Calibration Service, British 201
Camborne 262
Cambridge 47, 101, 153, 357, 358,
373,376,377
Cambridgeshire 270
Canals 174, 290, 395
Canning industry, see Food,
processing
Canterbury, Province of 182
Canvey Island 253
Capenhurst (research centre) 261
Capital gains tax see Taxation
Caravan:
and camping sites 175
412
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Caravan—contd.
manufacturing industry 221
Cardiff 10, 11, 23, 200, 291, 295, 367,
368, 372, 373, 381, 383, 393, 396
Careers Service 308
Carnegie United Kingdom Trust 368
Carpets industry 8, 231
Cars see Motor vehicles
Car tax 330
Catering trades 9, 12, 218, 242-3
education 154
Catholic see Church, Roman
Ceefax 391
Cell Biology and Disorders Board
357 .
Celtic language 11
Cement industry 232
Census of:
Population 52, 182
Production 213
Central:
Arbitration Committee 318
Bureau for Educational Visits and
Exchanges 157
Computer and Telecommunications
300
Council of Physical Recreation 393
Criminal Court 106, 121
Directorate on Environmental
Pollution 177
Electricity Generating Board 257, 259,
261, 266
Policy Review Staff 50
Statistical Office (CSO) 50
Centres:
Arts 366
Conference 241
Cereals:
crops 8, 269, 271
preparations 228
Chambers of Commerce 197
Association of British 197
Chancellor see Lord Chancellor
Chancellor of the:
Duchy of Lancaster 34, 48
Exchequer 325
See also Exchequer
Chancery Division (High Court) 117
Channel Islands:
area 19
legislature 31, 35, 47
relationship with UK and Crown 4, 23,
3Is 35? 47
See also Guernsey arzaf Jersey
Chapel Cross 260
Charity Commission 143
Charter services (aircraft) 296, 297
Cheltenham 366
Chemical:
industries 197, 199, 212, 213, 225-6
plants 217
See also Engineering
Cheque cards 334, 335
Cheshire 250, 251, 261, 355
Chichester 366
Child:
benefit 135, 137
special allowance 137
Children:
adoption 116, 117, 135
art, drama, films and music 367, 369,
370, 37L 374
care 114, 115, 133-5
child guidance 128
cinema attendance and clubs 371
employment 311
foster homes 114, 134, 135
handicapped 132, 143
National Society for Mentally
Handicapped 143
health centres and clinics 126, 128
homes for 134-5
in care 114-15
in trouble no, 114-16, 134
National Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to 135, 143
nurseries 133
orphans 134,137
school transport 151
voluntary child care organisations 135,
143-4
Children’s Film Foundation 371
Chilton 356, 357
China:
clay industry 8, 232, 263
manufacture 8, 232, 263
Chiropodists 126, 130
Chocolate and confectionery 228
Christian Scientists 184
Church:
Anglican Communion 183
Anglican Consultative Council 183
Commissioners 183
in Ireland (Presbyterian) 184
in Scotland, Episcopal (Anglican) 183
in Wales (Anglican) 11, 183
of England 32, 36, 38, 182-3
appointment of senior clergy 48, 182
archbishops 36, 48, 182, 183
bishops 36, 48, 182, 183
Children's Society 144
clergy 38, 182
colleges 183
ecclesiastical courts 183
finance 183
General Synod 182
INDEX
413
Church—contd.
of England—contd.
Laity 182, 183
Lambeth Conference 183
parishes 182, 183
parochial councils 182
provinces and dioceses 182, 183
relations with Monarch 32, 182
relations with state 182, 183
schools 147, 149-50, 182
of Ireland (Anglican) 15, 38, 182
of Scotland (Presbyterian) 13, 38, 183,
184
General Assembly 183
relations with Monarch 183
social and welfare work 143-4
of Wales (Presbyterian) 11, 184
Roman Catholic 13, 15, 182, 185
archbishops 185
parishes and dioceses 185
schools 147, 149-50, 185
social and welfare work 143-4, I85
Churches 182-6
British Council of 186
co-operation among 185-6
Council of Christians and Jews 186
Free (non-conformist) 183-4
Free Church Federal Council 185
social and welfare work 143-4
World Council of 186
Churchill Scholarships 158
Cinemas 30, 369, 370, 371
Citizens Advice Bureau 122, 144, 210
Citizenship 23-4, 53
Civic Trust 172
Civil:
Courts 116-20
Defence 98
college 98
see also Defence
engineering see Engineering
Justice 116-20
law too, 116-17
science 353, 354, 355
Service 48, 51, 54, 57-61
Arbitration Tribunal 319
categories and classes 57-61
College 59
Commission 59
conditions of service 59-60
earnings 60, 312
Management and Personnel Office 54
manual workers 58, 59
political and private activities 60
recruitment and training 59
security 60-1
staff associations 60
structure 58
Civil Aviation 9, 54, 295-300
aircraft 222, 296, 297, 298
aircrew qualifications 298
air freight 296, 299
airports 162, 296, 299
ownership and control 299
air services 296, 297, 299
Authority (CAA) 296, 297, 298, 299
Airworthiness Division 297, 298
Bristow helicopters 297
British Airports Authority (BAA) 299
British Airways 295, 296, 297
Divisions:
European 297
Overseas 297
Travel 297
British Caledonian Airways 297
charter operations 296, 297
Development 299-300
earnings 296
government responsibility 296, 297
helicopter service 295, 297
independent airline companies 297
licensing 296, 297
ministerial responsibility for 55-6, 296,
298
National Air Traffic Services 296,
298-9
navigational aids 220, 223
noise control 180, 296
safety measures 297-8, 299
traffic control 296, 297-8
training 297, 298
See also Aircraft and Research
Clean air 179-80
Alkali and, Inspectorate 179, 320
Clerk:
of the House of Commons 37-8
of the Parliaments 37
Clerks to the Justice 107
Cleveland 260
Climate 19-20
Climbing 393
Clinical Research Centre 357
Clinics 128
Clock and watch industry 212,221
Cloth industry 7, 13, 14, 229, 230,
231
Clothing:
industry 7, 8, 17, 229, 230, 231
shops 237,238
Clubs:
social 26, 133
youth 159
Clyde and Clydeside 22, 171, 257, 29
Coal:
and Steel Community, European
(ECSC) 71, 76
414
BRITAIN 1983 I AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Coal—contd.
Board, National (NCB) 202, 244, 254,
256,257
non-mining activities 254
capital investment 244, 256, 257
coalfields and mines 7, 9, 244, 254,
255-6
consumption 187, 245, 256
exports and imports 256
financial structure 254
industry 7, 187, 244, 254-7, 288
co-operation with European
Community 245, 246
production and manpower 7, 72, 244,
254, 256
research 257
associations and establishments 257
resources 244
Coastal preservation 173-4
Coastguard Service 179, 295
Coinage 332, 403
Coke 244, 256, 288
Coleraine 153
Colleges 145, 146, 151, 153, 154, 155,
157
agricultural 276
arts 364, 369, 374
correspondence 151
Instructor Training 309
of education 145, 146, 152, 154, 155,
158, 374
residential (adult education) 155
Secretarial 151
Services 95
technical 155, 237, 354, 356, 358, 359
theological 183
World, United 158
See also Education
Combine harvesters 268, 271
Commercial:
Banking Systems 333-5
policy 346-8
premises, health and welfare in 319,
320, 321
Commissions for Racial Equalitv
29-30
Commissioners:
of Irish lights 295
of Police 101, 103
Commissions for Local
Administration 67
Committee: 1
on Disarmament 82
on Human Rights 84 1
of the Whole House 44 j
Commodity: 1
composition 343-4, 345 ;
Markets 342 1
Common:
Agricultural Policy (CAP) 72, 75, 272,
273, 274, 349
fisheries policy 278-9
Market see European Community
Services Agency (Scotland) 129
Commons and village greens 175,
176
Commonwealth, The 69, 76-80
Action Programme of Industrial Co¬
operation 78
AGP countries 75
Aid 78,86-7
Arts Association 79
Broadcasting Associations 79, 392
citizens 29, 38
consultation 77-8
co-operation:
and developing countries 76, 77, 78,
86-91,348
education 78, 79, 157-8
financial and trade 86-8, 348
Development Corporation (CDC) 79,
88, 338
Development Finance Company
Limited (CDFC) 338
Education :
Conferences 77
Liaison Committee 158-9
and training 78, 79
Forestry Institute 280
Foundation 79
Fund for Technical Co-operation 78, 79
Games 79, 397
immigration 24, 29, 53
Institute 79
journalists 383
Medical Conferences 77
member states 31, 76-7
Parliamentary Association 79
Press Union 79, 383
Queen as Head of 31, 77
Royal, Society 79, 376
Scholarship and Fellowship Plan 79,
89,158
Secretariat 78
Statute of Westminster 77
Technical Co-operation 88
Trade with 188
Universities, Association of 157, 158
Youth Exchange Council 79
Communications see Post Office,
Research and Telecommunications
Community:
relations councils 29
homes for children 114, 134-5
Service Volunteers 143, 160
Company law 210-11
INDEX
415
Comprehensive education 148
Comptroller and Auditor General
324, 325
Computer:
Aided Design Centre 200, 204
services 241
Computers 150, 199, 203, 219, 220,
281, 300, 301, 302, 356, 381
See also Data and Post Office
Concert Halls 365, 367
Confectionery industry 228
Confederation of British Industry
I96, 317, 318, 320
Conference Centres 241
Helsinki 74, 81
Conservation 171-7
areas 171-2, 173
Council, Nature 174
councils and societies 26, 174
unit 361
Conservative Party 4, 6, 39
Consolidated Fund 322, 324, 330
Constabulary, Inspectors of 101,
103
Construction:
employment in 6, 234
equipment 218
industries 53, 191, 196, 234-6
research 53, 235
materials 263, 265
work overseas 235-6
Consumer:
advice and information 210
Council, National 210
councils 210
expenditure see Expenditure
goods industries 225, 226, 227, 228,
229, 230, 231, 232
see also individual industries
Groups, National Federation of 210
Minister for Consumer Affairs 208
organisations 210
protection 209-10
Fair Trading, Director 0/209, 2I0
Consumers’ Association (CA) 210
Convalescent homes 126
Conversion tables 403-4
Co-operative:
Bank 237, 334
marketing (agricultural) 273-4
societies 237
Wholesale Society (CWS) 237, 240
Copyright, authors’ 375, 376
Cornwall 1, 4, 216, 232, 263, 301
Coronation 32
Coroners’ Courts 110
Corporation tax see Taxation
Cotswolds 4
Cotton:
industry 230
textiles 229-30
Council:
for Environmental Conservation 171
for Rural England 175
of Engineering Institutions 360
of Institutes of Science and
Technology 360
of Nurses and Midwives 130
of World Churches 186
Councils of counties, districts, etc.
see Local Government
Counsel, see Law, legal profession
Counsellors of State 34
Country Parks 173, 174, 175
Countryside:
access to 174, 175
Commissions 174, 175, 393
County:
Courts 117, 118
Music Committees 368
Court of:
Appeal 107, 108, 117, 120
Justice (European Community) too
Session (Scotland) 118, 119, 120
Courts of Law see Law
Covent Garden:
Market New 240
Opera 368
Coventry 22, 284
Crafts 374-5
Council and Centres 374
Cranwell 95
Credit:
Cards 237, 239
Bank 334, 335
Retailers 237, 239
Unions 339
Cricket 393, 396, 398-9
Criminal:
Central, Court 106, 121
Courts 106-7
Injuries Compensation 102
Investigation departments 104-5
law 53, 54, too, 106
Law Revision Committee 123
records 101
Criminals, treatment of 53, 104-5,
110-16
Criminological Research and
Studies 101
Crofters’ Commission 274
Crown:
Agents for Oversea Governments and
Administrations 70
Courts 105, 107, 108, 117, 118, 120
Dependencies 31, 79
416
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Crown—contd.
mineral rights 244
Office, Edinburgh 56, 106
Crown, The see Monarchy and
Royal Family
Cruden Bay 251
Crystal Palace National Sports
Centre 395
Culham Laboratory 261, 262
Cultural and social life 9-10, 12,
14-15,18-19
Cumbernauld 12
Cumbria 9, 260, 261, 263
Currency 189, 190, 341, 403
See also Finance
Customs and Excise:
Board of 51, 52, 326, 329
duties see Taxation
Cutlery and flatware industry 219
Cycle and motor cycle industry 222
D 
Dairy Trade Federation 228
Dance and Mime Companies 369
Dancing 364, 365, 367, 368, 369
Royal Ballet and School 369
Daresbury (nuclear physics) 355,
356
Darlington 287, 380
Dartmouth 95
Data:
Datapost 303
Processing 220, 295, 302, 356
See also Computers and Post Office
Deaf 143
Deans 182
Death:
causes of 21, 110, 283
duty see Taxation, estate duty
grant and allowances 140
rate 21
registration of a 21
Deeside 11
Defence 51, 52, 92-9, 191
Armed Forces 52, 95-8, 305
officers in 95
Civil see Civil Defence
colleges 95
combat forces 96-8
deployment 93-4, 95
engagements 95
expenditure 92, 93, 96, 98, 99, 322
fire services 67
Forces vote 38
international projects 99
manpower 95-6
Defence—contd.
Ministry of and Secretary of State for
51, 52, 70, 95, 98, 99, 295, 296, 298,
354, 363
Mobile Force (UK) 94
National Defence Industries Council 99
national projects 99
NATO strategy 92-3, 94, 96, 98
See also North Atlantic Treaty
Organisation
nuclear power 93
disarmament 82-3, 92, 94
Strategic Force 93, 96
Ordnance Factories, Royal 58, 99
overseas commitments 92, 93-5
Helsinki Conference 74, 81
Five-Power, Agreement 80
personnel 95
policy and commitments 52, 92, 93-5
Procurement 98-9
production 99
ranks 95
research and development 98-9, 354,
363
European Programme Group 99
reserve and auxiliary force 95-6
Sales Organisation 99
Staff colleges 95
strategic force 93, 96
Studies, Royal College of 95
training 95
warning systems 97, 98
weapons and equipment 96-8, 222
collaborative projects 99
export controls 348
women’s services 95
See also Army, Royal Air Force,
Royal Navy and Research
Dental services 126, 130, 131
British Dental Association 130
dentists 126, 130
for school children 128
General Dental Council 130
Dependencies and Associated
States 75,79-80
population 79, 80
Deposit banks see Banks
Derby and Derbyshire 256, 290
Design:
awards for 201
Centres 200
Computer Aided Centre 200, 204
Council 200, 372
education in 154, 374
Registry 211
Detention centres 115, 116
Detergents 225, 226
Devaluation see Sterling
INDEX
41?
Development:
Agencies 206
areas and districts 205, 206, 207
Boards, Regional 206
see also Economic and Research
grants and loans 205, 206, 207, 208
organisation see Industry
plans 161-2
Research and 200, 376
Devon 4, 232
Dinorwic 12, 235, 260
Dioceses see Church of England,
provinces and
Diplomatic Service 59, 349
Director of Public Prosecutions
102, 106, 121
Disabled:
British Sports Association for the 394
education 148-9, 157
employment of 307-8
housewives 139
mentally handicapped 126, 127, 133,
148, 395
physically handicapped 127, 133, 148,
395
rehabilitation of 127, 133, 307, 308
sports stadium 395, 396
welfare services for 124, 132-3, 139
Disablement:
benefit 139
mobility allowance 25, 139
Mot ability 139
pensions (war) 141-2
Resettlement Service 307
Disarmament 82-3
Committee on 82
Arms control and 82-3
Helsinki conference 74, 81
Discount market and houses 333,
336
Diseases, control of 132
Distributive trades 191, 236-40
District courts (Scotland) see Law
and Local Government
District Nurses 126, 130
Divorce 24, 117, 118, 122
rate 20, 21, 22
Docks see Ports
Dockyards, naval 99
Doctors:
British Medical Association 130
Family practitioner services 126
in industry 320
in National Health Service 126, 130, 131
Documentation Centre, National
394
Domestic:
electrical appliances industry 219
Domestic—contd.
help 133
pets 30
product gross 92, 146, 187, 188, 190,
191, 192, 195, 196, 198, 212, 234, 236,
353
Doncaster 178, 290
Dorset 250, 260
Dounreay 260, 261
Dover 291, 292, 294, 295
Strait 295
Drama 364, 366, 367
Conference, National 367
schools and colleges 366, 367
See also Theatres
Dramatic Art, Royal Academy of 367
Drinks industries 212, 227, 228-9
Drugs 53, 128, 129, 199, 226
Advisory Council on Misuse of 128
Committee on Safety of Medicines 129
dependence 127-8
Dry Cleaning 243
Dublin 341
Duchy of Lancaster 34, 48
Duchy of Cornwall 35
Dudley 361
Duke of Edinburgh 34
Duke of Edinburgh’s Award
Scheme 160
Dumbarton 257
Dumfries 260
Dundee 12, 15, 153, 231, 292, 373, 381
Dungeness 260
Dunstable 361
Durham 153
Dyestuffs 217
E 
Earnings 6, 188-9, 192, 311-12
See also Wages
East Anglia 1,7, 153
East Kilbride 14
East and West Relations 80-3
Economic:
and Social Affairs 84-5
and Social Pattern 24-30
Co-operation and Development,
Organisation for (OECD) 85, 88, 245,
347? 362
Development 188-91
Development Council, National
(NEDC) 190, 196, 314, 317, 318
growth 7-9, 188-90
Integration with Europe see European
Community
Management 190-1
4i8
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Community—contd.
planning, regional 205, 207
policy 190
Economy, national 187-94
economic development 188-90
external position 193-4
gross domestic product 6, 92, 146, 187,
188, 190, 191, 192, 195, 196,198,212,
234,236,353
gross national product 6, 69, 86, 87
incomes and prices 188, 191-2
investment 188, 189, 194
measures against inflation 188-9, 332
personal incomes and expenditure
26-7, 191-2, 311-12
policy 190, 201, 202, 208
See also Balance of Payments,
Public Finance, Industry and
Trade
Edinburgh 13, 14, 15, 23, 55, 108,
118, 153, 288, 299, 303, 355, 356, 361,
362, 366, 367, 372, 374, 377, 396
International Festival 14, 366
Education 18-19, 56, 65, 145-60, 200
administration 146
adult 152, 155-6, 388
Advisory Council for, and Continuing 156
Literacy and Basic Skills Unit 156
National Institute of 156
agricultural 7-9, 276
and Science, Department of and
Secretary of State for 146, 150, 152,
353,354, 363,364,373
architectural 154
art and design 150, 364, 372, 374, 386,
390
broadcasting to schools 150, 386, 389
building programme 151
Business, Council 155
colleges see Colleges
commercial and management 154, 155
curricula and courses 149, 152, 154,
155, 156, 157, 158, 200, 276, 364
correspondence 151, 154, 155
day release 59, 152, 384
sandwich 152, 153, 276
secretarial 151, 155
development 145
evening classes 155
examinations 150-1, 153, 155
finance of 146, 147, 152, 155, 156, 157,
158, 159, 160
forestry 280
‘further’ 146, 151, 152, 155, 156, 158,
364, 374
advanced courses 154-5
General Certificate of see examinations,
above
Education—contd.
National
Advisory Body for Local Authority
Higher Education 152
Certificates and Diplomas 154-5
higher 145,146,151, 152-5, 158
inspectorate 149
local education authorities 63, 145,
146, 147, 148, 149, 151, 152,155,156, 159
Microelectronics 146, 150
music 12, 369
physical and games 113, 116, 151,395
polytechnics 145, 146, 151, 154, 155,
156, 200,354,364,371,374
priority areas 145-6
prisoners 113, 116
religious 147, 149-50, 182, 185
research on 149, 156, 354
scholarships and awards 148, 152
schools 145, 146-9
community 155, 157
comprehensive 148
Council 156
Council for Curriculum and
Examinations 149
county 147, 149
denominational 147, 150, 185
fees 147, 148
‘first’ 147
health and welfare 128, 151
independent (public) 145, 147, 148
leaving age 145
management 147
meals service 140, 151
‘middle’ 147
nursery 133, 147
preparatory 148
primary 145, 147
pupil numbers 145, 146
secondary 147, 148, 149
voluntary 147, 149
special educational treatment 148-9
teachers 113, 145, 146, 149, 150, 156,
157,159
exchange schemes 157
training 146, 154, 158, 159, 160
Teaching Council for Scotland,
General 154
Teaching Methods 156
technical and technological 151, 154-5,
354
Technician Education Council 155
see also Industry, education and
training for
trade unions and 315
visual aids in 150, 156
vocational 113, 116, 145, 155, 156, 308
See also Universities
INDEX
419
Educational:
Aids 150,156
Assistance programme 71, 157-8
Research, National Foundation for 156
Scientific and Cultural Organisation
(UNESCO) 362
Visits and Exchanges, Central Bureau
for 157
Eggs 270
Egmanton 250
Eisteddfod 366
Elderly people:
Age Concern 143
homes for 133
housing for 133, 166, 167
proportion in population 22, 23, 24
welfare 124, 126, 132, 133
See also Pensions
Elections:
to the European Parliament 73
local government 62-3
parliamentary 35, 38
Electrical:
appliances industries 187, 219, 220
engineering 219-20
industry 202, 219-20
Electricity 191,219, 244, 257-60
alternative sources of 262-3
area boards and councils 257, 261
Board, South of Scotland (SSEB) 257,
261
consumption 245, 258-9
Council 257, 261
Dinorwic 12, 235, 260
Generating Board, Central (CEGB)
257, 259, 261, 266
generation 217, 219, 244, 259-60
manpower 257
North of Scotland Hydro-Electric
Board (NSHEB) 257, 261
power stations 234, 259-60
hydro-electric 245, 259, 260
nuclear 244, 260-1
production 202
research 261, 262
Service (NI) 257, 261
structure of industry 257
transmission lines 257
Electronic:
British Telecom 220, 301, 302
equipment:
industry 199, 219, 220-1
microelectronics 195, 212, 220, 221,
281, 301, 302
post office 303
X-ray scanner systems 221
Ellesmere Port 251
Emigration 23
Employers’ organisations 196, 316-7
Employment 6, 27-8, 58, 195, 198,
202, 205, 212, 213,s?22, 223, 224, 226,
228, 235, 245, 249, 251, 257, 286, 288,
304-21
Advisory, Conciliation and Abitration
Service (ACAS) 315, 317, 318-19
arbitration and conciliation 315, 317,
318
average weekly earnings 6
Careers Service 308
Central Arbitration Committee 318
community enterprise programme 306
Department of and Secretary of State
for 51, 53, 190, 307, 310, 311, 313, 318,
319. 320
Disablement Resettlement Service
127,307
additional benefits 312-13
health in 313, 319-21
holidays 9, 30, 312
industrial relations 317-19
Statutory Joint Industrial Council 319
Instructor Training Colleges 309
International Labour Office 317
Job:
introduction scheme 306
release scheme 306
search scheme 308
Jobcentres 307
Law 310-11, 315-16
manpower:
deployment 6, 305, 308
mobility of 72, 205, 307
Services Commission (MSC) 53, 55,
127, 196, 307, 308, 309, 317, 320
Medical Advisory Service (EMAS)
320,321
offices 307
of immigrants 310-11
permits 310
Professional and Executive
Recruitment 308, 310
protective legislation 304, 310, 311,
312,313,314,315,316,320
redundancy 310, 312
safety in 319-21
regulations 319
sex discrimination 27-8, 117,311,318
sheltered 308
Skillcentres 309
Training Opportunities Scheme
(TOPS) 309
training services 308-9
colleges 309
‘Open Tech’ 309
Transfer Scheme 308
trends in 304-6
420
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Employment—contd.
women 27-8, 305, 310, 311, 318
work, hours of 312
Work Research Unit 313
working conditions 310, 311,312
See also individual industries.
Manpower, Trade Unions,
Unemployment, Wages and Work:
hours of
Youth Opportunities Programme 306
Energy:
conservation 246-7
advisory council on 246
measures 246-7
consumption 245-6, 250, 254, 256
Department of and Secretary of State
for 53, 179, 190, 245, 246, 247, 251,
262,321
Government’s policy 245
industries 244, 247, 249, 250, 251, 253,
254, 256, 257, 259, 260, 261
employment in 245, 246, 249, 251, 254,
256,257, 263
European Community co-operation 245
international relations 245, 250, 257
and Natural Resources 187, 244-67
production and distribution 199, 247,
248, 249, 250, 251, 253, 254, 256
renewable sources of 262-3
research and development 251, 254,
257, 261, 267
advisory council 246
Offshore Energy Technology Board 251
sources of 199, 244, 247, 251, 254, 257,
260, 262, 265
technology support unit 246
See also Coal, Electricity, Gas,
Hydro-electric, Nuclear energy
and Petroleum
Engineering:
aeronautical 220, 222-3, 224
chemical 7, 8, 360
civil 235
Council 200
electrical 219-20
electronic 219, 220, 356
Fellowship of 361
Institutions, Council of 360
Instrument 219, 221
Laboratory, National 203
mechanical 214, 217, 360
Engines, industrial 217
England: 1-2, 4-10
area 19-20
cultural and social life 9-10
economy 7-9
Government 4-7
historical background 1
England—contd.
population, figures 6, 20-2
English:
Association 375
Channel 2, 4
language 29, 72, 149, 151,158-9, 389, 390
National Opera 368
Tourist Board 206, 243
Entertainment:
cinemas 370, 371
museums and galleries 10, 12, 14, 53,
56, 372-5
music 10, 12, 365, 367-8
recreation centres 10, 173, 174
sport 393-402
television and radio 386-92
theatres 364, 365, 366, 367
Enterprise:
Board, National 204-5
Neptune 173
Zones 171, 307
Environment, The 161-81
architecture 172-3
coast 173-4
Countryside Commission 173, 174, 393
Department of the and Secretary of
State for 51, 53, 64, 68, 161, 162, 164,
166, 171, 172, 174, 175, 176, 177, 178,
179, 190, 235, 265, 266, 283, 354
green belts 173
land:
reclamation 176-7
registers 177
Nature conservation 176
outdoor advertising 174
Property Services Agency 235
Research Council, Natural (NERC)
355,357
tree preservation 173
Environmental:
Amenity Societies 175
Conservation, Council for 171
control of pollution 177-80
Administration 177-8
clean air 179-80
land 177, 178
marine 178-9, 357
noise 180
radioactivity 180-1
recycling 178
Royal Commission on 177
water 131, 174, 177, 178, 266, 267
protection 173-7
Equal opportunities 28, 311
commission 28
complaints 28
Equipment Leasing Association
338
INDEX
Equity Capital for Industry Ltd
338
Essex 153, 260
Estate Duty see Taxation
Ethnic minorities 28-30, 364
Europe:
Council of 86
trade with 71, 209, 216, 217, 224, 225,
227, 228, 250
European:
Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee
Fund (FEOGA) 76, 273
Atomic Energy Community
(EURATOM) 71, 72, 262
Broadcasting Union (EBU) 391
Coal and Steel Community (ECSC)
71, 72, 76, 208, 214
Communities 35, 45, 46, 317
Act 72
Communications Satellite 223, 301
Convention on Human Rights 86
Co-operation in Science and
Technology (COST) 362
Council 72, 73, 74
Court of Justice 73, too
Currency Units (ECUs) 273, 333
Economic Community (EEC) 71, 72,
73-4
Exchange Risk Guarantee Scheme
208
Free Trade Association (EFTA) 348
Investment Bank 75, 76, 207
Molecular Biology Laboratory 362
Monetary:
Co-operation Fund 76
Fund 76
System 76
Organisation for Nuclear Research
(CERN) 355, 356, 362
Parliament 35, 73
Patent Convention 211
Programme Group 99
Regional Development Fund 76, 207
Science:
Exchange Programme 360
Foundation (ESF) 359
Social Fund 76, 205
Space:
Agency (ESA) 223, 224, 355, 362, 363
programme 363
Trade Union Confederation 315
See also subject headings
European Community, The 35, 45,
46, 69, 71-6, 89, 131, 142, 157, 188,
190, 202, 207, 209, 211, 227, 228, 234,
245, 272, 273, 274, 278, 281, 285, 341,
344, 346, 347, 348, 349, 350, 352
Accession, Treaty of 72
421
European Community, The—contd.
Agricultural 72, 75
Guidance and Guarantee Fund
(FEOGA) 76, 273
policy 72, 75, 272, 273, 349
Budget 75, 346
coal and steel 71, 72, 76
Commission 73, 74, 209
President of 72, 73
Common Customs Tariff 72, 330, 347
Community law 73, too
Court of Auditors 73
Court of Justice 73, too
courts of appeal 73
Company law 21 o-11
Competition Department 209
Council of Ministers 72, 73, 74
currency 76
Economic and Social Committee 72
educational co-operation 157
external relations 74-5
finance:
aid to Commonwealth and developing
countries 74-5
capital movement 86
grants and loans 86, 207, 208, 273,
274
insurance 341
fisheries policy 278, 279
institutions 71, 73-4
internal policies 75-6
legislation 35, 44, 45, 211, 285
Lome Convention 75, 89, 91, 271, 348
manpower:
mobility 0/71,310, 311
training 76, 311
Membership 71-6, 343
monetary system 76
nuclear energy activities 71, 363
Parliament, European 35, 73
policies 281
reciprocal agreements, health and
social security 142
regional development 76, 207
Fund 76, 207
Representatives, Committee of
Permanent (COREPER) 73
revenue:
budget 75, 346
sources of 75
Scientific and Technical Research
Committee (CREST) 362
schools and colleges 157
tariff^, 91,347, 348
trade:
agreements 71,91, 278, 348
controls 348, 349
development 71, 234
422
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
European Community, The—contd.
trade—contd.
generalised scheme of preferences 74, 91
restrictive practices, control of 209
transport policy 281
treaties 72, 209
Exchange:
control 185, 194, 350
Equalisation Account 333
rates 188, 190, 346
reserves 188
risk guarantee scheme 208
Telegraph Company Ltd (Extel) 382,
383
Exchequer see Finance
Excise duties see Taxation
Exeter 153
Exhibition Centre, National 221, 241
Expenditure:
committees 45, 324
consumer 191, 192, 237, 238, 240
estimates 323-4
pattern of 24
public 55, 92, 145, 146, 190, 192, 322-5
public authorities 124, 192
royal income and 34-5
Surveys, Public 324
Taxes on 329-30
See also Defences, Finance,
Research, Agriculture: subsidies,
and Housing: subsidies
Export 187, 188, 190, 193, 194, 212,
214, 216, 217, 222, 224, 227, 228, 229,
230, 231, 232, 233, 234, 245, 291, 343,
344, 345, 348-9, 387, 388
controls 348-9, 372
Credits Guarantee Department
(ECGD) 53, 76, 349
insurance 53, 349
licence for works of art 372
Overseas Trade Board, British 70, 349
See also Trade and individual
industries
F 
Factories:
building 205
Inspectorate 321
legislative provisions 319, 320, 321
See also Employment and individual
industries
Fair Trading, Office of 208, 209
Falkirk (newspaper) 381
Families 25-6
welfare services for 124, 126, 132, 133,
140-1
Family:
Division (High Court) 117
Income Supplement 140-1
planning 128, 129
Practitioner Services 126
Royal see Monarchy
Welfare Association 143
Farming see Agriculture
Farnborough 224
Fauna 175-6
Fawley 250
Felixstowe 291, 292
Fellowship of Civil Engineering
361
Fen district 270
Fertilisers 225, 226
Festival Hall, Royal 367
Field Sports 399
Fife 254
Film:
Archive, National 371
Association, British Industrial and
Scientific 242, 370
Authority, British 370
Catalogue of British 371
Censors, British Board of 370
children’s foundation 370, 371
Eady Levy 370
Festivals 369, 370
National Panel for 370
Finance Corporation, National 370
Fund Agency, British 371
industry 242, 370
Institute, British 371
library 371
production 242, 369, 370, 371
quota system 370
School, National 370
and television indistry 242
Theatre, National 371
Films 369-71
children’s 242, 371
documentary 370-1
educational 242
feature 370
licensing 370, 371
Finance:
corporations 338
for Industry Ltd 338
local government 65-7, 192, 324
See also Public Finance
Financial Institutions:
Bank of England 190, 322, 332-3
Building Societies 339
Commodity Markets 342
Credit Unions 339
Deposit Banks 333-4, 336
Discount Market 336
INDEX
423
Financial Institutions—contd.
Factoring Companies 338
Finance Corporation 338
Finance Houses 337
Financial Futures 342
Foreign Exchange Market 341
Insurance Market 339
Investment and Unit Trusts 338
Leasing Companies 337-8
London Gold Market, The 342
National Girobank 303, 334-5
National Savings Bank 303, 336
Overseas Banks 332, 335
Pension Funds 338
Stock Exchange 341
Trustee Savings Banks 335
See also Banking
Finnart 251
Fire:
Central, Brigades Advisory Councils
67, 68
equipment 67
Joint, Prevention Committee 68
personnel 68
prevention research 320
Research, Joint Committee on 68
Research Station 68
Services 56, 67-8
Fishery limits 278
Fishing:
European Community:
Common Fisheries Policy 278, 279
Limits 278
fleets 278
freshwater 278, 279, 357, 399
grounds 4, 8, 19, 278
Herring Industry Board 278
industry 14, 277
employment in
government aid 278
imports and exports 278
landings 277, 278
licences 279, 399
marketing 279
ports 291
research 279, 357
rights 278
Sea Fish Industry Authority 278
sport 399
Float glass 232
Floor coverings 230, 231
Flour milling 227, 271
and Baking Research Association 227
Folkestone 291
Food:
and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) 85
biscuits 228
bread 228
Food—contd.
chocolate and confectionery 228
consumption 7, 26, 192
exports 227, 228, 229, 272, 273
from Britain 273
frozen 26, 227, 228, 278
home grown supplies 229, 268, 269,
270, 271, 272
imports 273, 343, 344, 345, 346, 348
industries 227, 228, 229
poisoning, control of 131-2
processing 26, 218, 227, 228
purity 131-2
safety of 131-2
sales 7, 227, 228, 237, 238, 239, 240
Football 30, 393, 395, 396, 397
Rugby 393, 396, 401
Footpaths and bridleways 175-6
Footwear:
industry 218, 231, 233
shops and repairers 243
Foreign:
and Commonwealth Office 59, 69, 70, 349
Diplomatic Service 59, 69-70
Exchange Market 341
Policy 80-3
See also Overseas
Foreigners:
employment of 310-11
naturalisation of 53
Forensic science 104
Forest:
area 8, 12, 14, 175, 176, 268, 279, 280
parks 175,395
Forestry 6, 8, 12, 175, 176, 279-80
Commission 175, 176, 280, 393
education, training and research 280
Princes Risborough Laboratory 280
Training Council 280
employment in 280
policy 280
Forth 291, 292
Firth of 292
Forties Field 247
Fowl pest 275
Fox hunting 399
Fraud Squad 104
Freezing (food) 218, 227
Freight:
Consortium, National 202, 285
services 281, 284, 288, 290, 291, 292,
293-4
Freshwater Biological Association
357
Friendly Societies, Registrar of 339
Frigg (gasfield) 253
Fruit and vegetable products and
preserves 228,271
424
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Fruit, production and distribution
237, 240, 271
Fuel and Power see Energy, Coal,
Electricity, Gas, Hydro-electric,
Nuclear energy, North Sea,
Petroleum and Research
Furniture and Timber
Industry Training Board 280
Furniture Industry 234
G 
GATT see General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade
Gaelic 14, 149
Gainsborough 250
Gambling see Betting and
Gambling
Games equipment industry 234
Game shooting 399
Gardens, Royal Botanic 361
Gardening 30
Gas 9, 13, 14, 187, 190, 191, 197, 244,
251-4
British 202, 251, 253, 254
consumption 254
employment 6, 251
natural 8, 9, 13, 187, 244, 245, 251,
253,254,292
development and production 6, 9, 251-4
indigenous supplies 251, 253
location 253
operations 244, 253-4
pipeline system 253
production and distribution 187, 190,
253-4
research and development 254
structure 251, 253
terminals 253, 292
turbines 259, 260
turnover 251
transmission and storage 253-4
Gateshead 239, 287
Gatwick (airport) 9, 297, 299
General:
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(GATT) 85, 230, 347, 348
Council of the Bar 122
Dental Council 130
Electric Company 197, 213, 220
Medical Council 130
Nursing Council 130
Optical Council 130
Register Offices 56
Registrar 56
Geographical Society, Royal 376
Geological:
Museums and Surveys 362, 373
Sciences, Institute of 89, 263, 267, 357,
362
Geology 19-20, 54, 176, 357, 361-2
Geophysics 355
Georgian Group 172
Gin industry 228
Girl Guides 143
Girobank, National 303, 334
Glasgow 12, 14, 15, 23, 170, 180, 185,
200, 284, 286, 297, 299, 367, 369, 373,
377
Glass industry 8, 232-3
Gleneagles 14
Glencoe 14
Glenrothes 14
Glenshee 14
Gloucester and Gloucestershire
291, 366
Glyndebourne(opera) 369
Godaiming 257
Gold and convertible currency
reserves 194,350, 351
Gold and silver ware industry 219
Gold Market (London) 321
Golf 395, 399-400
Goonhilly 301
Government 4-7, 11, 13, 15-16,
31-68
Administration 4-7, 11, 13, 15-16
Advisory bodies 52
Chemist, Laboratory of 203
composition of 48
departments of 51-7
economic management 190-1
employment services 304-9, 322, 324,
331
National Loans Fund 66, 322, 324, 331
organs of 31
relations with industry 53, 195, 201-7,
304-9
relations with overseas countries 53,
54, 301, 355, 362, 363
Statistical Service 50
See also Civil Service, Expenditure,
Finance, Local Government,
Ministers, Monarchy, Parliament,
Privy Council and Research
Grampians 12
Grangemouth 251
Grants see Education, Housing,
Local Government and Industry
Great Britain:
area 1, 19-20
definition 1, 19-20
historical outline 1-4
population 6, 20-3
INDEX
425
Great Britain—contd.
statistics, general 6
See also England, Wales and
Scotland
Greater London Council see
London
Green Belts 173
Greenwich 95, 355, 356
Greyhound racing 400-1, 402
Grimsby 291
Grocery trade 237, 238, 239, 240
Guardian’s allowance 137
Guernsey see Channel Islands
Guild of British Newspaper
Editors 384
Guided weapons 96, 222, 223
Gymnastics 151, 395
Gymnasts, remedial 127, 130
Gwynedd 251, 260
H 
HMSO see Stationery Office
Habeas Corpus 106
Hadrian’s Wall 1, 2
Hairdressing establishments 243
Hamilton (newspaper) 381
Hampshire 224
Handicapped persons see Disabled
and Welfare
Hand tools industry 218
‘Hansard’ 41
Harbours see Ports
Harpenden 358
Harrogate 366
Hartlepool 260, 291
Harwell 261
Harwich 288, 291
Hayward Gallery 372
Health 26, 124-32
advisory councils and other
committees 125, 128, 129, 130, 319-21,
357
and Safety:
at work 319, 320, 321
Commission 320, 321
Executive 179, 180, 274, 320-1
and Social Security, Department of 53,
114, 121, 125, 129, 130, 131, 136, 140,
141, 142, 151
and social services 124-44
authorities and boards 124, 125, 129,
130,132
area 124, 125
centres 126, 128
community services 124, 126-9, 13I3 132
control of infectious diseases 132
Health—contd.
education 126, 129
Employment Medical Advisory
Service 320, 321
environmental 131
home nursing 126, 127
laboratories 132, 320
primary, care 126
private medical treatment 125, 131
professions 130-1
public 53, 61, 124, 132
research 129, 132
and Safety Executive 312, 320-1
safety of medicines 129
School:
children 128, 151
service 128
Service Commissioners 125
Service, National 12, 53, 56, 124-35
administration 124-5
agreements with other countries 131
authorities 124-5
charges 125-6
commissioners 125
community physicians 132
finance 125-6
general practitioner services 126
group practices and health centres 126
help to families 133
hospital and specialist services 126-9
mental services 133
Northern Ireland 124, 125, 126, 128
specialist services 126—9
Social Security Advisory Committee 136
Heathrow (airport) 9, 235, 297, 299
Heating appliances 217, 220
Hebrides 19
Helicopters 96, 97, 222, 295, 297
air-sea rescue 295
Henley-on-Thames 200
Herbaria 361
Herbicides 226
Hereford 260, 269
Heritage Coasts 173, 174
Herring Industry Board 278
Hewett 253
Heysham 260
High Court of Justice 105, 106, 107,
108, 110, 117, 118, 120
High Court of Justice (Northern
Ireland) 118
High Court of Justiciary
(Scotland) 106, 108, no, 118, 121, 122
Highland Games 398
Highlands and Islands (Scotland)
12, 15, 206, 274, 299
aerodromes and airways 299
Development Board 55, 206
426
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Highway Code 283
Highway construction 234, 283, 284
See also Roads
Hindus 185
Hire purchase finance companies 337
Historical Manuscripts
Commission 376
Historic buildings and monu¬
ments 53,172,364
building preservation notices 171, 172
Council 172
Monuments, Royal Commission on 172
Hockey 396
Holidays 30, 312, 404
Hollow-ware industry 219
Holyhead 291
Home help 132
Homeless people 166
Home:
Office and Home Secretary 53, 63, 67,
101, 103, 112, 115, 120, 121, 123, 379,
386, 387, 388, 389, 391
Office Voluntary Service Unit 143
Homeloan Scheme 165
Honours 32, 48
Horse:
racing 393, 400, 402
riding 401
show jumping 401
trials 401
Horsemanship 401
British Equestrian Federation 396, 401
Horserace:
Betting Levy Board 402
courses 400
Totalisator Board (HTB) 402
Horticulture see Agriculture
Hosiery and knitwear industry 231
Hospices 127
Hospital:
Friends, Leagues of 143
laboratories 129, 132
Hospitals:
and specialist services 126-9
construction 127
maternity services 126
nucleus of 127
ophthalmic services 126
private 131
psychiatric 113
teaching 130-1
voluntary help in 143, 144
Hotels and Catering 242-3
Households 25, 163
House of Commons 4, 13, 32, 35,
37-8, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 121,
182
broadcasting proceedings 41, 390
House of Commons—contd.
committees 44, 46
election to 37, 38
financial control 40, 46
officers 37, 38, 44
party composition 39-40
privileges 46
See also Parliament and Speaker
House of Lords 32, 35, 36-7, 38, 39,
40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 48, 50, 107,
108, 109, 118, 120, 121, 123, 182
Appellate Committee of 45
as Court of Appeal 107, 108, 118, 123
committees 42-5
eligibility to 36-7
officers 36-7, 40
privileges 46
Record Office 41
Housing 25-6, 63, 65, 163-8
action areas 167-8
administration 164
advisory centres 144
associations and societies 164, 167
assured tenancies 166
authorities, local 161, 163, 165-6, 168
construction and design 25, 53, 163,
165, 167, 168, 235
Co-ownership 165
Corporation 167
enterprise zones 171
finance 53,65,164-5, l68, 170
Homeloan Scheme 165
home ownership 25, 163, 164-5
improvement 25, 167-8
ministerial responsibility for 53, 164
mortgages 164-5, 334, 339
National Mobility Scheme 166
new towns 168
number of dwellings 163, 164, 166, 167
Option Mortgage Scheme 165
partnership programme 170
policy 25-6, 163, 164, 165, 166
privately rented 163, 166
public authorities 163, 165-6
renovation grants 167-8
rent allowances 166, 167
rent restrictions 166
research and development 164
shared ownership 167
sheltered 165-6
‘shorthold’ letting 166
slum clearance 168, 170, 171
standards 164
subsidies 66, 165, 170, 171
town development schemes 168
urban programme 170
Hovercraft 222, 294
British Rail Hovercraft Ltd 294
INDEX
42?
Hovercraft—contd.
Hoverlloyd Ltd 294
Hoverspeed 294
Hull 153, 284, 291
Human Rights 84
Commission on 84
Humber and Humberside 6, 216
bridge 235
Hunterston 260
Hunting 399
Hydraulics Research Station
(HRS) 89, 235
Hydro-electric:
Board, North of Scotland (NSHEB)
14, 257, 259, 261
power 245, 257, 259
See also Electricity
Hydrological research 235, 267,
357
L 
Ice skating 396
Immigrants:
Commission for Racial Equality 29
Community Relations 29
Culture 28-9
Race Relations 29, 53, 311
Immigration 4, 24, 28-9, 53
Immingham 291
Immunisation 132
Imperial Chemical Industries Ltd
197,213, 225
Imperial War Museum 373
Imports 187, 188, 193-4, 2223 225)
230, 245, 273, 275, 278, 291, 343, 344,
345
licensing and restrictions 52, 275, 348
See also individual industries and
Trade
Improvement grants, housing 165,
167-8
Income:
and expenditure, national 191-3
local government 61, 65-7
personal 26-7, 191-2, 311,312
sources of 192, 311,312
Incomes and prices 188, 191, 192,
3iL 3i2
Income Tax see Taxation
Indefatigable (gasfield) 253
Independent:
airline companies 297-8
Broadcasting Authority (IBA) 150,
302, 365, 379, 386, 387-8, 390, 391, 392
Television 156, 243, 387, 388
advertising 242, 386, 387, 390
Independent—contd.
T elevision—contd.
local radio 379, 387, 388, 389
News Ltd 387, 392
Oracle 391
programme companies 387-8
Radio News 388
Industrial:
Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration
Service (ACAS) 196, 318-19
Arbitration Committees 318
Artists and Designers, Society of 201
association 196-7
automation 199, 217, 218
building 205, 217, 234, 235
design 201, 372
Councils 201, 372
Development 201-2, 203, 204, 205,
206, 207
Advisory Agencies 206, 207
Advisory Boards 206
Boards, Regional 206
Fimd, European Regional 207
disputes 318
Estates Corporation 205
films 370
injuries benefits 135, 139
minerals 263, 265
negotiating machinery 317, 318-19, 320
organisation 195-201
plant and steelworks manufacture 212,
214, 217
policy 53, 190, 195, 201-5, 20?
property 211
relations 196-7, 317-19
councils and committees 317, 318, 319,
320
research establishments 203-4, 224?
251, 254, 257, 261, 267, 353, 354, 358
Safety regulations 319-21
‘Support for Innovation’ 204
Industry 53, 54, 55, 187, 189, 191,
195-211, 212-43
advisory councils and committees 190
association 196-7
Confederation of British (CBI) 196,
317,318,320
Department of and Secretary of State
for 53, 190, 200, 202, 203, 205, 207,
212, 300, 355
development areas and districts 7-9,
205-6
development organisations 200, 202,
203,204
education and training for 145, 154-5,
200, 308-9
Enterprise Board, National 204-5
Films and Television 242, 369, 370, 371
428
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Industry—contd.
finance corporations 7, 9, 338
grants and loans to 202, 203, 204, 205,
206, 207, 338
health and welfare services 319-21
investment in see Investment
location 161, 205, 206, 207
management 200, 201, 202
British Institute of (BIM) 200
Consultancy 241
Institute of Directors 196
training for 200
manufacturing 53, 187, 189, 195, 196,
198,199, 212-43
employment in 195, 196, 198, 300-2
mergers and re-grouping 208
microelectronics 199, 217, 301
organisation 195-201
regional 205, 206, 207
ownership 195, 201-2
plant and machinery 7, 8
production and productivity in 189,
195, 198-9, 212, 213, 214, 216, 217,
218, 219, 220, 221, 222, 223
public enterprise 202-3
relations with Government 53, 195,
201-2
restrictive trade practices 208, 209
Fair Trading 208, 209
safety in 319-21
small firms 207, 334
standards in 201
structure 195-7
Teaching Company Scheme 356
technological advance 199
training 200, 308, 309
boards 309
in industry 308, 309
Instructor, Colleges and Units 309
Manpower Services Commission
(MSC) 53, 127, 196, 307, 308, 309,
3i7,320
Opportutiities Scheme ( TOPS) 309
Skillcentres 309
See also Employment, Exports
individual industries, Public
corporations, Research and Trade
Infectious diseases, control of 21, 132
Inflation see Public Finance
Information:
and advice to exporters 349
Central Office of 51, 53, 371, 390
Inland Revenue:
Board of 53, 326
sources of see Taxation
Inland transport 54, 281-90
Inland waterways 281, 290
British Waterways Board 290
Inland waterways—contd.
development 290
recreation 393, 399
Inns of Court 122
Inquests 110
Insecticides 226, 357
Insects 357
Inspectorates:
Alkali and Clean Air 179
constabulary 103
factory 320, 321
fire service 320
mines and quarries 319
Nuclear Installations 180, 320
railway employment 319,321
wages 319
Institutes and Institutions see
relevant subjects
Insurance 9, 188, 191, 332, 339-41
Association:
British 340
British Brokers 188, 340
Life Officers 340
companies 164, 340
export credit 53, 349
international services 340-1
marine 340
market 332, 339-40
underwriters 188, 340
See also National Insurance
Instrument engineering 219
Inter-Governmental Maritime
Consultative Organisation
(IMCO) 178
International:
Agency for Research on Cancer
(IARCO) 362
agricultural research centres 277
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) 82,
261, 362
Bank for Reconstruction and
Development 89
Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) 180
Confederation of Free Trade
Organisations 315
Convention for the Protection of
Industrial Property 211
Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU)
359
Criminal Police Organisation
(Interpol) 104
data communications 302
Development:
Association 88, 89
Issues ( Brandt Report) 90
Economic Co-operation 90
Energy Agency (IEA) 245, 250, 257,
362
INDEX
429
International—contd.
Fellowship Scheme 360
Labour:
Conference 315
Office 317
Organisation 53, 85
London International Financial
Futures Exchange 342
Machine Tools Exhibition 217
Maritime:
Organisation 178
Satellite Organisation
(INMARSA T) 223, 301
Monetary:
agreements 331
Fund (IMF) 85, 90, 331, 346, 351
Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) 333,
351
North South Dialogue 90-1
peace and security 80-3
Royal:
Agricultural Show 218
Institute of Affairs 376
Sugar Organisation 90
Telecommunications:
Satellite Organisation (INTELSAT)
223,301
Union (ITU) 392
telegrams 302
telephone services 300-1
Television Federation (Intertel) 391
Telex Exchange, London 301
Voluntary Service 160
Inter-University Council for
Higher Education Overseas 69
Investment 188, 189, 193, 196-7, 204,
206,212-3, 2I4> 2I6
Bank, European 207
in fuel and power industries 244, 256,
257
grants and loans 203, 204, 205, 206, 207
in industry 203, 207, 208, 212-13, 2I4>
216,244
National Enterprise Board 204-5
overseas 188, 189, 345, 346, 349, 350-2
private sector 195, 196, 351-2
trust companies 338-9
See also individual industries and
Savings
Invisible transactions see Trade
Ipswich 288
Irish Republic 15-17, 18-19, 62, 102,
253,294, 383
citizens’ status in UK 15-17, 24
citizens’ voting rights in UK 15, 38, 62
population 6
stock exchanges 341
trade with UK 253, 346
Iron:
and steel:
exports 214, 216
industry 8, 214-6, 217
castings 8, 216
See also Steel
Ironbridge Gorge Museum 373
Irvine 14
Isaac Newton optical telescope 356
Islamic Centres 185
Isle of Man:
area 19
citizenship 24
legislature 31, 35, 47
races (TT) 397, 400
relationship with UK Government and
Crown 4, 24,31,35
Tynwald Court 35
Isle of Wight 19, 20 127, 294, 396, 402
Isles of Scilly 19, 297
I 
Jams and marmalades industry
228
Jersey see Channel Islands
Jewellery industry 219
Jewish:
schools 185
Welfare Board 144
Jewry 185
Job:
introduction scheme 306
release scheme 306
search scheme 308
‘Jobcentres’ 307
Jockey Club 400
Jodrell Laboratory 361
Jogging 393
Joint:
Committee on Fire Research 68
European Torus (JET) 262
Fire Prevention Committee 68
Journalists:
Institute of (IOJ) 384
National Council for the Training of
(NCTJ) 384
National Union of (NUJ) 384
See also Press
Judges 32, too, 105, 107, 108, 109,
in, 117, 118, 121-2
Judicial Committee of the Privy
Council 47
Judicial procedure 109-10, 117, 118,
121
Judiciary see Law
Jury see Law
430
BRITAIN 1983 ! AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Justice:
administration of 54, 116-20
and the Law 100-23
Criminal 100-16
Civil 116-20
Court of (European Community) 73,
too
See also Law
Justices of the Peace 107, 108, 122
Jute industry 231
Juvenile Courts 107, 108, 114, 115,
122
informal children’s hearings (Scotland)
108, 115
K  
Keele University 153
Kent 4, 153,251,270,369
Opera 369
Kew:
Observatory 180
Royal Botanic Gardens 361
Kielder Reservoir 9, 235, 267
Kimmeridge 250
King George’s Jubilee Trust 160
Kingsnorth 259
Knighthoods 32
Knitwear industry 14, 231
L  
Labour see Employment
Labour Party 39, 45, 314
Lagan 15
Lake District 9
Lakes 9, 15, 395
Lancashire 260, 270
Lancaster:
Duchy of 34, 48
University 153
Land:
drainage 290
and people 1-30
Reclamation 176-7
Registers 177
Resources Development Centre 89
use 161, 168, 173, 174, 175-6, 268-9,
270, 271, 272, 273
Lands Tribunals 274
Language 10, n, 14, 18, 70, 72, 149,
157, 159
Laundries and launderettes 243
Law 31, 32, 48, 100-23
administration of the 48, 54, 56, 120-3
arrest, law of 104-6
Law—contd.
civil justice 13, 116-20
Commissions 56, 116, 123
common 31, 32, 35, too
Community too
Court of Justice 73, too
courts (criminal and civil) 54, 106-10,
in, 116-19, 123
district (Scotland) 13, 108, 121, 123
Restrictive Practices 119
criminal appeals 107-8
Criminal Injuries Compensation
Scheme 102
criminal justice 100-16
divorce 117, 118, 122
employment 27, 315-16
equity 7
evidence, rules of 109, 118-19
expenditure on 122-3
Family Division 116, 117
General Council of the Bar 122
Habeas Corpus 7, 106
Judges’ Rules 7, 105
judiciary 31, 32, 47, 48, 107, 108, 109,
112, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122
jury 107, 108, 109, no, 119
legal:
aid and advice 13, 54, 109, 120, 122,
123
profession 122
system i?,
legislation see Parliament
Officers’ Department 54
Officers of the Crown 48, 54, 56, 121, 122
Official Solicitor 47, 54
penalties 110-16
press (legal requirements) 379, 385
prosecutions 106-7, 109, no
Reform Committees 123
Society 123
Society of Northern Ireland,
Incorporated 123
Society of Scotland 123
sources 100
trials and verdicts see prosecutions,
above
Lawn Tennis 393, 395, 400
Lawyers 106, 122, 123
League of Hospital Friends 143
Learned societies 359-60, 374, 376
Leatherhead (laboratories) 261
Leather industry 229, 231
Leeds 23, 153, 366, 369, 373, 377
Leicester and Leicestershire 153,
373
Leisure trends 30
Leith 292
Leman Bank 253
INDEX
431
Lerwick 19, 292
Letcombe Laboratory 357
Liberal Party 6, 39
Libraries 53, 55, 56, 57, 70, 361, 364,
3753376-7
Arts and, Office of 364
Aslib 377
mobile 377
private collections 376, 377
public 64, 365, 376, 377
university 376, 377
Library:
Association 377
Boards 146, 147, 377
British 376
co-operation 377
Film 371
National:
of Scotland 377
of Wales 55, in
Licences:
aircrews, aircraft and aerodromes 297,
298,299
animals 275, 276, 303
betting 53, 116, 400, 402
broadcasting 303, 386
cinemas and films 53, 370
clubs 53, 116
driving 283, 284
drugs 53,128
firearms 53
fishing 279, 399
game and gun 53, 399
gaming and lotteries 53, 402
import 52, 273
issue of, by Post Office 303
motor vehicles 283, 285, 286
oil and gas prospecting 247
public houses 53, 116
race courses 400
works of art 372
Life:
expectation of 23
peerages 36-7
Lifeboats 295
Royal National Life-boat Institution
295
Life Officers Association 340
Lighthouses 295
Lilleshall National Sports Centre
396
Limestone 263, 265
Lincolnshire 250, 270
Linen industry 17, 230
Literary societies and prizes 375
Literature 375-6
associations and societies 375, 377
awards 375
Literature—contd.
Royal Society of 375
Litter 178
Liverpool 23, 153, 171, 286, 291, 292,
34L373
Livestock see Agriculture
Living Standards 26-7
Livingstone 14
Llandarcy 251
Llangollen 366
Llantrisant 11
Lloyd’s, Society of 340
Local Administration,
Commissions for 67
Local Government 6, 11, 13, 31, 53,
61-7
authorities, types of 10, 12, 15, 19,
61-7, 124, 125, 131, 132
Boundary Commissions 38, 62
complaints system 67
councillors 62, 63, 64, 65
councils:
borough 62, 63, 165
community 61, 64
county and metropolitan county 61, 63,
161,162,175
district 61, 62, 63, 67, 161, 162, 165
London see London
parish and rural areas 61, 63
regional authorities and islands 61, 62,
125
election 61-3
employment in 64-5, 319
environmental health 62, 131
finance 65-6, 192, 324
functions and services 63-4, 125
grants 65-6
internal:
committees 64-5
organisation 64
labour relations 319
loans 66
officers and employees 64-5
rates 66
relationswith central Government 67, 1
responsibility for:
amenities 63-4
arts, encouragement of 63, 364, 365,
366,367,370,371,377
childcare 114-15, 133-5
education see Education
fire services 67-8
handicapped 132-3
health 61, 63, 64, 65, 124, 131, 132
housing and planning 63, 64, 65, 131,
161-71, 176-7
licensing of films 370, 371
mentally ill 133
432
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Local Government—contd.
responsibility for—contd.
pollution control 177-80
public libraries 63, 365, 377
roads 63, 65, 283
social services 63, 64, 132
sport 395
traffic control 63
youth services 159, 160
Locomotives:
industry 222, 290
types in use 290
Lome Convention 75, 89, 91, 271,
348
London:
airports 297, 299
art, drama, music 366, 367, 368, 369,
37i, 372, 373, 374, 375, 376, 377
schools and colleges 367, 368, 369, 371,
374
Bankers’ Clearing House 344
bishop of 36, 182
borough councils 62, 165
Business Studies, Graduate School of 153
Central Mosque 185
City of 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 61, 66, 102,
104, 121, 161, 165, 188, 302, 332, 334,
336,337, 342
Corporation of the 63
police 102, 104
Commodity Exchanges 342
design centre 200
Discount Market 336
Docklands Development Corporation
170
food markets 227, 239, 240
Gold Market 342
Greater London 61, 63, 66
area 23
Greater London Council (GLC) 61,
63, 161, 165, 178
housing and planning 63, 64, 165
International Financial Futures
Exchange 342
libraries 376, 377
Lord Mayor 32, 62
museums and art galleries 372, 373
newspapers 378, 379, 380-1
police 63, 101, 102, 103, 104
population 8, 22-3
port of and docks 291, 292
religious centres 185
Sports Centre 396
Stock Exchange 332, 341
taxicabs 286
Telegram Transmission Centre 302
telephone information service 302
television companies 387
London—contd.
theatres 366, 367
traffic 284, 286
Transport 286, 288
Underground rail services 286-7
Universities 153, 374, 377, 383
libraries 377
Zoo 361
Longannet 260
Lord:
Advocate 48,56, 105, 106, 115, 120,
121, 123
Chancellor 37, 48, 49, 54, 107, 117,
118, 120, 121, 122, 123
as Speaker of the House of Lords 37, 48
Chancellor’s Departments 48
Chief Justice (England) 48, 117
High Commissioner 48, 183
Justice Clerk 108, 118
Justice General (Scotland) 108, 118
Lieutenants of Counties 48
President of the Council 48
President of the Court of Session 118, 120
Privy Seal 48
Lords:
Commissioners (Treasury) 40, 49
House of see House of Lords
Justices of Appeal 48, 117
of Appeal 48, 117
Spiritual 32, 36
Temporal 32, 36
Lothian 13, 260
Loughborough 153
Lough Neagh 15
Luncheon voucher schemes 313
Luton 299, 300
Lutheran Church 185
M 
Machine Tool:
industry2i5
Trades Association 217
See also Tools
Magazines see Periodicals
Magistrates and Magistrates’
courts 48, 105, 107, 108, 116, 117, 118
Mail order sales 238
Malting industry 229
Malvern 366
Management see Industry
Manchester 8, 9, 153, 200, 251, 286,
291, 300, 341, 356, 373, 377, 380, 381,
384
Man-made fibres 212, 217, 229, 230
Manpower 195, 198, 202, 231, 236,
265, 277, 280, 281, 304, 305, 307-9, 310
INDEX
433
Manpower—contd.
Conciliation and Arbitration Service 318
distribution of 307, 308
Economics, Office of 319
Qualified 308, 361
Service Commission (MSC) 127, 307,
308, 309, 320
See also Employment and individual
industries
Manslaughter no
Manufacturing:
companies 213
establishments, size of 195, 196
industries:
output and exports 7, 187, 189, 193,
198, 212-34
See also Industry and individual
industries
Marchwood (laboratories) 261
Marine:
Biological Associations 357
Dumping at sea 179
Engineering see Engineering and
Shipbuilding
Pollution 179, 357
Safety and Welfare 278, 295
Technology 356, 357
Maritime:
Institute, National 204
International, Satellite Organisation
(INMARSAT) 223, 301
MARECS (maritime series of
communications satellites) 223
Museum, National 373
Pollution Control Unit 179
Market gardening see Agriculture
Market research 240-1
Markets:
commodity 342
discount 336
exchange 341
fish and fish meal 240, 277
food (London) 238, 239, 240
futures 332, 337, 342
London International Financial,
Exchange 342
gold 342
insurance 339-41
Marriage 20, 21, 24
guidance centres 143, 144
rates 20, 24
Marshall Scholarships 158
Martlesham Heath 303
Master of Rolls 117
Maternity services 126, 128, 136,
137
Matrimonial proceedings (law)
116, 117, 118
Mayors and Lord Mayors 32
Meadowbank Sports Centre 396
Meals, provision of:
at place of employment 318
for old people 133, 144
for school children 140, 151
Mechanical engineering 214, 217,
218
handling equipment 218
Medical:
Advisory Service, Employment 320,
321
Association, British 130
Council, General 130
Electronic X-ray scanner systems 221
private insurance schemes 131
profession see Doctors
research 355, 357
Council (MRC) 129, 313, 355, 357
National Institute for 357
in universities 357
schools 151, 153, 357
services:
in industry 319, 320, 321
in prisons 113
for school children 128, 151
social workers 127,135
Medicines:
Commission 129
safety of 129
Medmenham 267
Medway 291
Mental health services 113, 133,
142, 143
Merchant:
banks 335-6
Fleet 293
ownership 293
shipbuilding 224
Mercury Consortium 300
Merseyside 21, 170, 205, 286, 395
Metal manufacture 8, 212, 214-16,
217,219
Meteorological Office 267
Methodist Church 183, 184
Metric conversion tables 403
Metropolitan Police Force 102,
103, 104
Midlands 7, 8, 22, 23, 205, 216, 251
Midwifery 126, 130
Midwives:
Board 130
Royal College of 130
Migration 23
Milford Haven 11,251,291,292
Milk:
Export 228
in schools 151
434
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Milk—contd.
marketing 228, 272
Boards 272
production 228
safety regulations 131
yield 269
Milton Keynes 239
Minerals 9, 244, 254, 263, 357
industrial 9, 244, 254, 263
indigenous resources 263
non-fuel 244, 263-5
exploration 263
ownership 244
production 244, 263-5
Mines and quarries:
employment in 6, 245, 256, 263
industry 9, 244, 254, 256
Inspectorate 319, 320
mining machinery 9, 218
research 257, 263, 320
safety measures 320
See also Coal
Mining Research and
Development Establishment 257
Ministers:
Council of 73, 74
of the Crown 31, 34, 47-9
ministerial responsibility 34, 47-9,
50-1, 190
salaries 49
of State 49, 50, 55, 56, 57
See also Prime Minister and
individual government departments
Monarchy 31-5
accession 31-2
ceremonial 34
Civil List 34
pensions 48
coronation 31-2
history of 1-3
Privy Council 34, 35, 47
relations with:
armed forces 32
churches 32, 48, 182, 183
Commonwealth 31, 32
foreign governments 32, 34
judiciary 32
Parliament 31, 32, 34, 36, 37, 40, 41,
42, 43, 44, 45, 46
Royal:
income and expenditure 34-5
Prerogatives 34, 35, 47-8
Proclamations 47
title 31
succession 31
See also Royal family
Monetary Policy see Public
Finance and Economy, National
Monopolies 208
and Mergers Commission 190, 208, 380
Montrose 292
Motor:
cycle racing 400
cycles 221, 222
dealers and repair services 243
Manufacturers and Traders, Society of
221
racing 393, 400
shows 221
sports 400
vehicles:
design standards 283
distribution 243
industry 8, 187, 221-2
licensing 283, 284, 285
noise levels 180
numbers licensed 281, 285
owners 25, 26, 236, 283
parking 63, 239, 284
safety measures 283, 284-5
taxation 330
Motorways 9, 282, 284
Mountains 4, 10, 12, 15
Mourne 15
Murder 105, 108, no, 123
Museums 10, 53, 55, 372-4, 375
and Galleries Standing Commission on
374
Association 374
finance 373-4
Music 365, 367-8
Amateur, Standing Conference for 368
choral societies 368
colleges and schools 369
Committees, County 368
concerts 367, 368
festivals 366, 367
folk 367
jazz 367
Library, Central 377
Master of the Queen’s 367
orchestras 364, 365, 367, 368
‘pop’367-8
records 377
Royal Academy of 376
Societies, National Federation of 368
Muslims 185
N 
NATO see North Atlantic Treaty
Organisation
National:
Advisory Body for Local Authority
Higher Education 152
INDEX
435
National—contd.
Aeronautics and Space Administration
(NASA) 363
Air Traffic Services 296, 298-9
Broadcasting Councils 386
Bus Company 202, 285
Certificates and Diplomas 154-5
Coal Board (NCB) 202, 244, 254, 256,
257
Consumer Council 210
Council for the Training of Journalists
383
Council for Voluntary Youth Services
159
Debt Office 51
Defence Industries Council 99
Drama Conference 367
Economic Development Council
(NEDC) 190, 196, 314, 317, 318
Economy see Economy and Public
Finance
Engineering Laboratory 203
Enterprise Board 204-5
Equestrian Centre 396, 401
Exhibition Centre 221, 241
Federation of Music Societies 368
Federation of Consumer Groups 210
Film Archive 371
Film Finance Corporation 370
Film School 370
Film Theatre 371
Freight Consortium 202, 285
Foundation for Educational Research
156
Gallery 372
Girobank 303, 334
Health Service 124-35
House Building Society (NHBC) 164
Institute of Adult Education 156
Institute of Agriculture 277, 358
Insurance:
benefits and allowances 136-42
contributions 136
pension scheme 136, 137, 139, 141-2
reciprocal agreements 142
stamps 303
supplementary benefits 140-1
surcharge 327, 330
Investment and Loans Office 331
Loans Fund 66, 322, 324, 331
Maritime Institute 204
Maritime Museum 373
Mobility Scheme 166, 308
Parks 174-5, 395
Physical Laboratory 201, 203
Playing Fields Association (NPFA) 394
Portrait Gallery 373
Product, Gross (GNP) 69, 86, 87, 146
National—contd.
Radiological Protection Board 181
Research Development Corporation 204
Road Company 285
Savings 303
bank 303
certificates and bonds 336, 337
Society for Mentally Handicapped 143
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty
to Children 135, 143
Trusts 172, 173, 373
Union of Journalists (NUJ) 384
Nationalised Industries 195, 201-3,
204, 214, 222, 223, 244, 245, 249, 250,
251, 254, 257, 259, 261, 266
finance and investment 245, 247, 251,
256
labour relations of 317, 318
research 251, 254, 257, 261
See also individual industries
Nationality 23-4, 53
Natural:
beauty, areas of 173-4
Environment Research Council
(NERC) 267, 354, 355, 357
gas see Gas and Energy
History, British Museum 354, 361
Institute of Terrestrial Ecology 357
resources 244-67
Sciences 154
Naturalisation 24, 53
Nature:
Conservancy Council 174, 176, 393
conservation 171-7, 361
voluntary organisations 175
reserves 174, 176, 395
Navigational Aids 220, 295, 299, 301
Navy see Royal Navy
Neurobiology and Mental Health
Board 357
Newburgh 257
Newcastle upon Tyne 171, 239, 287,
288, 368, 372
New:
Covent Garden 240
towns 53, 168
Newhaven 291
Newport 10, 291, 381
News Agencies 382-3
Newspaper:
circulation 378, 379, 380, 381, 382
Editors:
British Association of Industrial 384
Guild of British Newspaper 384
industry 378
new technology 381
owners 378-80
Publishers Association 382, 384
436
BRITAIN 1983 I AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Newspaper—contd.
Society 384
See also Press
Newspapers:
evening 380, 381
national 378, 379, 380
regional 378, 380, 381
Newsprint, supply of 378
Noise:
abatement 177, 180
zones 180
control of 180, 296
Non-ferrous metals industry 216
North Atlantic Treaty
Organisation (NATO) 69, 80, 81, 82,
83, 92-4, 95, 96, 98, 99, 223, 355
Britain’s contribution to 93-4
Conference of National Armaments
Directors 99
Strategic Air Reserve 94
Strategy 92-3
Northern Ireland (see also subject
headings):
administration 15-19, 57
agriculture and horticulture 57, 268,
269, 270, 273, 274, 275
Airports Ltd 299
area 4, 19-20
art, drama and museums 364, 365, 367,
368,369,371
Arts Council of 365, 371
background to civil disturbances 15
broadcasting 19
councils and committee 386-7
Chamber of Commerce and Industry 197
Civil Service 58, 59, 60
Commissioner for Complaints 67, 125
constitution 57
Constitutional Convention 57
Co-ownership Housing Association 165
Council for Educational Research 156
Courts of Law 106, 108, 115, 118
cultural and social life 18-19
District Towns Strategy 168
Economic Council 163
economy 17-18
education 57, 146, 147, 148, 149, 150,
151, 152, 153, 154, 156, 159, 160, 276
Electricity Service 257
employment 17-18
Equal Opportunities Commission 28
Fire Authority and Services 67
forestry 57, 279, 280
gas supply 253
Northern Ireland—contd.
Government departments 57
Department of Agriculture 57, 273,
275, 276, 277, 279, 280
Northern Ireland—contd.
Government departments—contd.
Department of Economic Development
57, 307, 349
Department of Education 57, 146, 149,
152,365
Department of the Environment 51, 53,
61, 64, 161, 162, 168, 172, 175, 176,
177, 178, 179,283
Department of Finance and Personnel
57
Department of Health and Social
Services 57, 125, 126
Government:
background to civil disturbance 15-16
direct rule and political initiatives
16-17
health and welfare services 125, 132
Loans Fund 66
Historic Buildings Council 172
Housing 15, 19, 164, 165
Association 165
Executive 165
Industrial:
Development Board 207
safety 321
industry 17, 205, 206, 207
Local Enterprise Development Unit
(LEDU) 207
law courts 106, 108, 115, 118
legislation 57, too, 102
libraries 57, 63, 377
local government 57, 61, 62, 64, 65, 66
maintenance of law and order 95, too,
102, 103, 104, 105
motorway system 282, 283
music, opera and dance 18, 365, 367, 369
National:
insurance 136
parks 175
Trust 173
Nature Reserve Committee 176
Newspapers 19, 381, 384
new towns 168
Nurses and Midwives, Council of 130
Office 57, 121
poets 18
police 102, 103, 104, 105
population 15, 16
press 19, 381, 382, 384
railways 287
representation in United Kingdom
Parliament 15, 16, 17, 57, 64
roads 57, 64, 282, 283
Secretary of State for 57, 103, 121, 124,
164, 364, 393
social services 18, 57, 64, 125, 132, 136,
143
INDEX
437
Northern Ireland—contd.
Sport 19, 393, 394, 395, 396, 397
Sports Council 19, 394, 396
Tourist Board 195
trade unions 315
transport 57, 283, 285, 286, 287
Transport Holding Company 286
unemployment 18, 307
universities and colleges 153, 154, 155,
277
voting 37, 62, 63
water pollution 178
water supply 57, 64, 265, 267
workers 307
See also Ulster
North:
of England Open Air Museum 373
of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board
(NSHEB) 257, 259, 261
Sea 8, 13, 173, 179, 187, 188, 189, 190,
198, 216, 245, 247-9, 250, 253, 282
See also Gas, Petroleum and Energy
Norwich 288
Nottingham and Nottinghamshire
256, 396
Nuclear:
Fuels Ltd, British 259, 261
Industry Radioactive Waste Executive
181
Installation Inspectorate of Health and
Safety Executive 180
Weapons and equipment see Defence
Nuclear Energy:
advisory committees and boards 246, 356
Agency (NEA) 362
Industry 244, 259, 260-2
international agencies 261, 262, 362
power stations 9, 12, 217, 235, 259, 260
Programme 245, 260-2
reactors 217, 260-1
research 261-2, 355, 356
See also Atomic Energy Authority
Nursery schools see Education
Nursing and Nurses 126, 130
associations 130
Council of Nurses and Midwives 130
General Nursing Councils 130
in the home 126, 133
Royal College of Nursing 130
o 
Observatory:
Edinburgh, Royal 355, 356
Royal Greenwich 355, 356
Occupational therapists 127, 130
Oceanography 357
Offenders:
children 107, 114-15
treatment of too, 110-14, 121, 122
Office:
machinery industry 218
of Fair Trading 243
of Manpower Economics 31
Offshore:
buoy 295
Energy Technology Board 251
equipment industry 224, 247
oil and gas 179, 247, 292
Supplies Office 247
Oil see Petroleum
Old people see Elderly
Olympic Games 394, 397
British Olympic Association 394
Open University 113, 153-4, I55>
156
Opera 364, 367, 368-9
Companies 368-9
English National 368
Kent 369
New Sadler’s Wells Company 368
North 369
Glynolebourne 369
Royal Opera House 368
Training 369
Ophthalmic services 126, 130
Opposition, parliamentary 39, 40,
45,46,61
Optical 201
fibres 199, 219, 302, 320
observatories 356
and radio astronomy 356
telescopes 356
Opticians 126, 130
General Optical Council 130
Opto-electronics 199
Oracle 391
Orders in Council 47
Ordnance Survey 54
Organisation for Economic Co¬
operation and Development
(OECD) 85, 88, 245, 347, 350, 362
Orkney Islands 19, 62, 64, 262, 274,
291,292, 294
Overseas:
aid programme 86-7, 88-90
banks 332,335
broadcasting 389-90, 392
constructional work 235-6
dependent territories, public services
59
detente 80-1
Development Administration 54, 59,
70,87
educational assistance 70, 79, 157-8
438
BRITAIN 1983 I AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Overseas—contd.
North-South Dialogue 90-1
Pest Research Centre 89
refugees 90
relations 69-91
Administration 69-70
Britain and the United Nations 83-5
Commonwealth 76-80
development co-operation 86-91, 362
international peace and security 80-3
membership of the European
Community 71-6
scientific 362-3
students 158
Affairs, UK Council for 158
Surveys Directorate 89
teachers’ exchange schemes 157
Technical Information Unit 362
Trade Board, British 70, 349
See also Trade
Voluntary agencies 90
Oxford 47, 153, 251, 280, 362, 376,
377
P 
Packaging 218, 233
Paint industry 226, 227
Paisley 381
Paper and board industry 218, 233
Paraplegic Sports Society, British
395?396
Paramount Pictures 392
Parks 10, 174, 176, 395
Country 173, 174, 175
Countryside Commissions 174
forest 175
national 174, 176
Science 358
Parliament 6, 9, 31, 32, 34, 35-46,
47,48,49, 50, 51, 54, 57, 58, too, 114,
202, 280, 323, 325, 340, 386, 390
committees 44-5, 324, 325
control of:
finance 35, 40, 44, 45, 51, 53, 323, 324,
325
Government in power 32, 39-40, 41—2
dissolution of 32, 34, 36, 37
duration of 36
elections 36, 38, 39
European 35, 73
functions 35
legislation 4, 35, 41-3, 46, 50, 55
meeting of 35
Opposition 39, 40, 46, 61
party system 37, 38, 39, 40
privileges 46
Parliament—contd.
procedure 40-1
prorogation of 32, 36
relations with :
the Church 182, 183
local authorities 61, 63, 65-6
the Monarchy 31, 32, 34, 35, 36, 37,
39, 43, 46, 47, 48
sessions 36
Standing Orders Committee 44-5
State opening of 34
Statutory Instruments 43
summoning of 32, 45
Whips 40, 49
See also House of Commons and
House of Lords
Parliamentary:
Bills, parliamentary 32, 36, 40, 41-3,
4T 45, 54, 325
procedure 40-3, 45
Royal Assent to 32, 43
Commissioner 44, 46
Committees 44-5, 372
control 45-6
Counsel:
on Bills 54
Office 54
electoral system 38
political broadcasting 41
Secretaries 40, 49, 50, 55, 56
Parole Boards 112, 121
Patent Office 211
Paymaster General 48, 54
Peers and Peeresses 32, 34, 36, 38
Pembrokeshire 12
Penal systems 120
Advisory Council 120
Pennines 4, 22
Pensions:
attendance allowance 139
earnings-related scheme 136
graduated pension scheme 136
inflation-linked 136
invalidity allowance 139
occupational 136
payment of, by Post Office 303
public service 54
retirement 136-7
State pension scheme 136-7
supplementary, old persons 137
war 136, 141-2
widows 138
Penzance 288, 297
Periodical Publishers Association
384
Periodicals 359, 360, 361, 375, 376,
377,378,382,384
Personal social services 64, 132-5
INDEX
439
Pesticides and other Toxic
Chemicals, Advisory Committee
on 276, 320
Pesticides Safety Precautions
Scheme 276, 320
Peterhead 292
Petroleum and petroleum
products 187, 190, 191, 194, 196, 225,
227, 243, 247-51,291,292
British Petroleum Ltd 196, 249
chemicals industry 197, 212, 225, 227
equipment industry 217, 225, 247
exports 249, 250, 292, 344
imports and consumption 247, 250, 291
industry 187, 225, 247, 249-50
National Oil Corporation, British
(BNOC) 53, 202, 249
oilfields 234, 247-9, 25°5 328
Offshore:
equipment industry 179, 225, 247
oil and gas 9, 11, 13, 14, 17, 179, 214,
245, 247, 291, 292, 300
Supplies Office 247
Technology Board 251
pipelines 249, 250-1
prevention of sea pollution by 173,
178-9
production platforms 179, 247, 249
refineries and refining 196, 216, 217, 250
research 251
revenue tax 187, 245, 250, 328-9
tankers 292, 293
terminals 251, 292
Pharmaceuticals 7, 226
Committee on Safety of Medicines 129
Pharmaceutical Society of Great
Britain 130
Pharmacists 126, 130
Philatelic Bureau 303
Photographic equipment 221
Physical Laboratory, National 201,
203
Physical Recreation, Central
Council of (CCPR) 393
Physically handicapped see
Disabled
Physiological Systems and
Disorders Board 357
Physiotherapists 127, 130
Pig industry 270, 275
Pipelines:
gas 253
oil 251
Planning:
Appeals Committee 162
boards and councils, economic 162
development areas and schemes 161-2,
205, 206, 207
Planning—contd.
environmental 63, 64, 161-2
inner cities 168-9
inquiry commissions 162
policies 161, 168
public participation 162-3
regional 161-2, 204, 205-6
Plant health 276, 358, 361
Plastics 225, 226, 234
Plas-y-Brenin National Centre for
Mountain Activities 396
Plas-y-Deri National Outdoor
Pursuits Centre 396
Playing fields I5L I73? 394
Association, National (NPFA) 394
Plimsoll line 294
Plymouth 288
Poet Laureate 48, 375
Poetry festivals and societies 12,
375
‘Polaris’ vessels 93, 96
Police 53, 56, 63, 65, too, 101, 102-6
associations 103
Authorities 103
committees 103
common services 104
forces 102-3
Negotiating Board 103
powers of arrest 103
Royal Commission on too
status and duties 103-4
Political:
broadcasts 41, 390
party system 39
Pollution prevention of:
air 25, 26, 177, 179-80, 320, 357
land 25, 178
noise 25, 131, 177, 180
research 267, 357
rivers 177, 178, 265, 267
sea (by oil) 173, 178, 179, 294
water supply 53, 131, 177,178, 265, 267
Polytechnics see Education
Pony Club 401
Poole 22
Population 6, 20-2, 23, 168, 304,343,
358
age distribution 20-1, 22
birth and death rates 20-1
censuses 20-1, 54
and Surveys, Office of 54
Commonwealth 76-7
density 6, 20-1, 22-3
Dependencies 79, 80
ethnic minorities 28-9
households 20, 25-7
increase in 20, 25
migration 23
440
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Population—contd.
mortality, causes of 21
nationalities 23-4
regional distribution 23
sex ratio 22
trends 20
working 6, 26-7, 212, 236, 304
Portrait Galleries, National 373
Ports and docks 291-2
Associated British Ports 291
authorities 291
container facilities 292
development 170, 292
ownership 292
transport industry 291, 292
Portsmouth 291, 292
Post Office 202, 286, 300, 303, 334, 389
counter services 303
‘Datapost’ 303
‘Expresspost’ 303
‘Intelpost’ 303
mail services 303
mechanisation 303
mini buses 286
National Girobank 303, 334-5
Postal Consultancy Service, British
303
‘Postbus’ 286
See also Telecommunications
Potato production and marketing
270, 272, 274
Marketing Board 272, 274
Pottery industry 8, 232
Poultry:
diseases 275, 357
industry 270
Power stations see Electricity and
Nuclear Energy
Preservation:
councils and societies 172
of buildings 171-2, 364
of coastal areas 173-4, i?9
of rural amenities 174
of trees 173, 174
Press 378-85
Advertising
British Code of 385
Standards Authority 385
Association Ltd 382, 383
broadcasting and the 379-80, 383, 385,
387
Council 384 ]
institutions 384 ]
legal requirements 379-80, 385 i
London 380, 381 £
‘National’ 378, 379, 380 £
News Agencies 382-3 c
ownership 378-80 ;
Press—contd.
Periodical 378, 382
regional 380
training for journalism 383-4
Thomson Foundation 383-4
Prestwick (airport) 299
Price:
guarantees (agricultural) 274
restriction by traders 208
Prime Minister 32, 36, 39, 48, 49, 50,
6L353
Prince of Wales 2, 10, 35
Printing:
industry 233
London College of 384
Prisons and prisoners 112-14, 1 !6
chaplains 114
education 113, 116
employment 113
medical service 113
privileges and discipline 113
psychological services 113
remission of sentence 112, 114
training and employment 113, 114, 116
visitors 113, 120
boards of 113, 120-1
welfare and after-care 113, 120-1
Privy Council 32, 47
Committees 47
Counsellors 47
Probation no, 111-12, 114, 116, 120
officers in, 113, 114
service to the community, scheme 112
Procurator General 54
Procurators Fiscal 106, no
Production and productivity see
Industry
Professional:
and Executive Recruitment (PER) 308
Institutions and associations 359, 360, 361
Property:
Law 116
Service Agency 53, 235
Protection of:
Ancient Buildings, Society for the 172
Animals and Birds 176
Birds, Royal Society for the 176
Rural:
England, Council for 175
Scotland, Association for 175
Wales, Council for 175
Psychiatric social work in, 113
Public:
Accounts Committee 203, 324, 325
administration 191
authorities 196
corporations 31, 187, 202-3, 204, 354,
355,360
INDEX
441
Public—contd.
see also Nationalisation and
individual corporations
expenditure 6, 92, too, 165, 190, 192,
322-5
holidays 30
houses (pubs) 26
libraries 365, 377
passenger transport 281, 283, 285-6,
287, 288
Prosecutions, Director of 102, 106
Record Office 49, 56, 373, 376
Sector borrowing 330-1
Works Loan Board 66, 165
Public Finance 9, 75, 76, 92, 188,
190,192, 322-31
Budget 322, 325-6, 327, 328
cash limits 324
Comptroller and Auditor General
324-5
contingency reserve 325
estimates 323-4
Exchequer 66, 325
see also Treasury
National Debt 331, 333
National Loans Fund 322, 324, 331
sources of revenue 326-30
See also Balance of Payments,
Exchange Control, Expenditure,
Income, Investment Revenue,
Sterling, Taxation and Trade
Publishers Association 376, 384
Publishing 54, 233, 360, 376, 384
Pumps and industrial valves 217
Q 
Quakers 184
‘Quangos’ 51
Queen see Monarchy
Queen Elizabeth Hall 367
Queen’s:
Award for Export and Technology 202
Bench Division (England and Wales) 117
Courts 121
Silver Jubilee Trust 160
University 153, 377
R 
Rabies, precautions against 275
Race Relations 28-30, 53, 117, 311
Employment Advisory Service 311
Ethnic Relations Research Unit 28-9,
358
language teaching 29
Racial equality:
Commission for 29-30
discrimination 29-30, 117, 311
Radar 220, 295, 299
Radio:
astronomy 356
communications 220, 300, 302
see also Broadcasting,
Navigational Aids, and Satellites
industry 220, 392
Interference, International Special
Committee on 392
telegraphy 300
telescopes 356
Radioactivity 180-1
Radiochemical Centre Ltd 226
Radiography 130
Radioisotopes 226
Radiological Protection Board,
National 181
Radiopaging Service 300
Railways 281, 287-90
Board, British 287, 288, 290
British Rail Engineering Ltd. (BREL)
288,290
Channel tunnel 290
development 287
diesel traction 288
electrification 287, 288
employment 287
Employment Inspectorate 319, 320
Freight:
Services 281, 288, 290
‘Speedlink’ 288
grants 287, 288
hotels and catering 290
inter-city 288
mechanisation 288
operations 287
Processing System, Total 288
passenger service 288
private 290
safety measures 321
‘Sealink’ 290, 291
technical centre 290
underground (London) 286
vehicles industry 222, 290
workshops 222, 290
Rainer Foundation 115
Rainfall 19-20
Rambling 393
Ramsgate 294
Rates 66
rebates 66
support grants 65-6
valuation courts 66
water 265
Raw materials, trade in 187, 229
442
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Reactors see Nuclear energy
Reading 153, 373
Recorders (law) 107, 117
Recreation 9-10, 173, 174, 393-402
facilities for 173, 174, 395-6
Physical 151,393,395-6
Central Council of (CCPR) 393
See also Clubs, Leisure and Sports
Recycling and materials
reclamation 178
Red Cross Society, British 143
Referendum on European
Community membership 71
Refineries see Petroleum
Refractory goods 231
Refrigeration machinery 218
Refugees, UK Standing
Conference on 90
Refuse, collection and disposal of
64, 131, 177, 178
Regional:
Arts 364, 365
development 204, 205-7
agencies 206
assisted areas 205
grants and loans 203, 204, 205, 207-8
employment incentives 205, 206, 207,
306
industrial:
incentives 203, 204, 205, 206
policy 201-2, 203
planning boards and councils 161-70
policy, industrial and 204, 205, 206,
207, 208
Water Authorities 266, 393
Registrar:
General 56, 135
General of Shipping and Seamen 295
of Friendly Societies 339
Religion see Churches
Remploy Ltd 308
Rent:
allowances 142, 166
restrictions 165, 166
tribunals 120, 166
Rescue services, sea and air 295,
299
Research, scientific 353-63
advisory councils and committees 204,
235, 354, 355, 356, 357, 358, 362, 363 :
agricultural 276-7, 354, 355, 357, 358 ;
Research Council 276, 354, 355, 357-8 :
associations 359, 360, 361
astronomy 355, 356 ,
biological 356, 357, 360
botanical 361 1
building and engineering 235, 355, 356 1
361 ,
Research, scientific—contd.
chemical 360, 361
communications 303, 356, 363
construction 235, 360
councils 353, 354, 355
Advisory Board for 354
Council, Science and Engineering
(SERC) 355, 356
criminology 101
defence 98-9, 354, 363
ecological 357
electronics 356
engineering 353, 355, 356
environmental 357
establishments 353, 354, 355, 356, 357,
358, 360, 361
expenditure on 353, 354, 355, 356, 357,
358, 363
fellowships and studentships 355, 356,
358, 359, 360, 361
fire prevention 320
fisheries 358
forestry 280
fuel and power 251, 254, 257, 261-2,
356,357
geological 357, 361, 362
Government responsibility 223,
353-63
industry 223, 353, 355, 356, 358
see also individual industries
international collaboration 355
in universities and technical colleges
354, 355, 356, 357, 358-9, 362
land use and planning 357
lectureships and awards 353, 358, 359
medical 129, 353, 355, 357, 358
microelectronics 356
mining 257, 357, 361
nuclear 261-2, 355, 356, 362
optical astronomy 355, 356
pest control 357
petroleum 251, 254
plant 357, 358, 361
policy 353, 354
pollution 181, 267, 357
private institutes for 353, 355, 358,
359
radio-astronomy 356
roads 283
social 354, 358
solar energy 262, 360
space 301, 363
Support for Innovation 204
technological 204, 353, 354, 355, 356,
360, 361, 362
telecommunications 302
television and radio 391
universities 354, 355, 356, 358-9
INDEX
443
Research, scientific—contd.
veterinary 358
water supplies 267
zoological 361
Restrictive practices 208, 209
Court 119, 209
Fair Trading Office of 208, 209
Retail:
organisation and turnover 237-40
types of 2^, 238, 239
see also Shops
trade 237-8
Reuters Ltd 382-3
Revenue 187, 290, 326-30
Rhodes Scholarships 158
Riding (horse) 158, 393, 401
Show jumping 401
Rights of way 175
Risley 261
Road:
Company, National 285
freight 281, 283, 284-5
haulage 283, 284-5
European Community rules 285
passenger transport 281, 285, 286
authorities 285, 286
Research Laboratory, Transport and
(TRRL) 89, 283
Roads 25, 55, 56, 62, 63, 281-2, 283-4
authorities 283
classification 282
development and construction 55, 282,
283
motorways and trunk roads 25, 54, 55,
282,283
Northern Ireland 57, 64, 283
research 283
safety 54, 283-4
transport on 281, 282, 283, 284, 285, 286
Robots 199, 203, 356
British Association 199
Roman Catholic Church see
Church
Rope-making 231
Rotherham 290
Rough (gasfield) 254
Royal:
Academy of Arts 374
Academy of Dramatic Art 367
Academy of Music 376
Air Force 94, 95, 97-8
College 95
Museum 173
Regiment 97
reserve and auxiliary forces 95-6
Staff College 95
Volunteer Reserve 96
Botanic Gardens 361
Royal—contd.
ceremonial 34
College of Art 371, 374
College of Defence Studies 95
College of Midwives 130
College of Nursing 130
Commissions 48, 52, 172, 177
appointment and function of 48
Commonwealth Society 79, 376
Constitution 31
Dockyards 58, 99
Family 31, 32, 33, 34, 35
income and expenditure 34-5
visits 34
Greenwich Observatory 355, 356
Institute of British Architects (RIBA)
192
Institution 359, 360
International Agricultural Show 218
Jubilee Trusts 160
Marines 95, 96
reserve 96
Military academy 95
Mint 11,51,58,219,332
National Life-boat Institution 295
Naval
College 95
Reserve 96
Staff College 95
Navy 94, 95,96
nuclear submarines 96
see also Defence
observatories 355
Observer Corps 98
Opera House 368
Ordnance Factories 58, 99
Prerogatives see Monarchy
Proclamations see Monarchy
Shakespeare Company 366
Smithfield Show 218, 272
Society 354, 359-60, 361, 362
of Arts 360
of Literature 375
for the Prevention of Accidents 283
for the Protection of Birds 176
Rubber industry 225, 226, 233
Rugby 393, 396
football 393, 396, 401
Runcorn 291
Rural:
Amenities, preservation of 174, 175,
176
Councils 206
districts:
councils 62, 63, 64
population 23
industries 206
Preservation Societies 26, 175
444
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Rutherford Appleton Laboratory
355
s 
Sadler’s Wells Company and
Theatre 368
Safety:
at sea 295
Commission, Health and 196, 320
Health and, Executive 312, 320-1
measures 274
Royal Society for the Prevention of
Accidents (RoSPA) 283
See also Agricultural workers, Civil
Aviation, Mines and quarries,
Railways and Roads
Sailing 402
National, Centre 402
St Andrews 14
University 153
St. Fergus 253
St. John Ambulance 143
Salford University 153
Salisbury 366
Salmon fishing 278, 399
Salvation Army 143, 184
Samaritans 143
Sand and gravel industry 263
Sandhurst 95
Sandstone 263
Satellites 223, 301, 357, 363, 391
Save As You Earn (SAVE) 337
Savings 192, 303, 336-7
National:
banks 303,336
bonds 336-7
Certificates 329, 336
contractual 336, 337
Department for 58, 336
Investment Accounts 336
Stock Register 336
Scafell Pike 9
Schools see Education
Science:
Advisory Board for Research Councils
204, 354
and Engineering Research Council
353, 354, 355, 356, 363
and Technology:
Council of, Institutes 360
in industry 204
Institutes of 360
awards 353, 358, 359
Department of Education and see
Education
Museum 361-2, 372, 373
Science—contd.
promotion of 353-63
publications 359, 360
Social Science Research Council 354,
358
See also Research and Universities
Scientific:
and industrial instruments industry
220, 221
co-operation:
between industry and universities 353,
354,355,356,358-9
government and industry 223, 353,
354,355, 356,362,363
with overseas countries 362, 363
counsellors 362
Film Association, British Industrial
and 370
museums 361-2, 372
Parliamentary and, Committee 354
research see Research
Scientists:
number employed 353, 358
training of 353, 354, 355, 356, 357-8
Scotland {see also subject headings):
administration 4, 13, 56
aerodromes and airways 296, 298, 299
area 6, 12-13
Arts Council 372
botanic gardens 361
broadcasting councils and committees
386, 387
Church of see Churches
Common Services Agency 129
economic planning 56, 205, 206
Edinburgh International Festival 14,
366
education 15, 56, 146, 147, 148, 149,
150, 151, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 159,
160
energy 56, 245, 257, 259, 260, 261, 262
Government departments 55, 56
Agriculture and Fisheries 56, 273,
276-7, 279, 354, 358
Central Services 56
Development 13, 56, 173
Economic Planning 56, 162
Education 55, 56, 146, 152, 373, 374
Home and Health 15, 56
Law Officers 56
Lord Advocate’s 48, 55
Record Office 56, 376
Registers of Scotland 56
historic background 2
holidays, statutory 404
housing, action areas 167
industry 13-14, 56, 205, 206, 216, 231
language 14, 149
INDEX
445
Scotland—contd.
local government 13, 55, 61-2, 64, 65,
67
Lord Provost 62
Ministers of State for 55
museums and art galleries 56, 373, 374
music and opera 14, 368, 369
National:
Library of 56, 377
Trust for 173
Youth Orchestra 369
population 12-13, 23
press 380, 381, 384
river purification boards 177
Royal Observatory 355, 356
Secretary of State 55, 56, 103, 112,
121, 123, 124, 146, 162, 164, 171, 172,
175, 177, 266,280,364,393
unemployment 205, 307
water supply 266
Scotland Yard, New 102
Scottish:
Academy of Music and Drama, Royal
367, 369
Amateur Music Association 368
Arts Council 14, 365, 371
Business Education Council 155
Central Institutions 151
Chamber of Commerce 197
Community Drama Association 367
Council:
Development and Industry 349
for Educational Technology 371
of Social Service 143
Courts Administration 56, 108, 118,
119
Crafts Consultative Committee 375
Crime Squad 104
cultural and social life 14-15
Daily Newspaper Society 384
Development Agency 55, 65, 206, 207,
375
Development Department 56, 161,
164, 173, 177, 179
Film Council 371
Gallery of Modern Art 373
Grand Committee (parliamentary) 44
Land Court 118, 274
Law Commission 56, 123
Newspaper Proprietors Association
384
Office 56, 174, 205
Opera Company 14
orchestras 368
Special Housing Association (SSHA)
165
Sports Council 174, 393, 394, 396
Standing Conference of Sport 394
Scottish—contd.
Tourist Board 14, 206, 243
Transport Group 285
Universities 153, 377
Youth Theatre 367
Scouts 143, 159
Sea:
Fish Industry Authority 278
safety at 295
transport 291, 292, 293, 294, 295
Sealink UK Ltd 290, 291, 294
Seamen:
conditions of employment 294-5
Safety and Welfare 295
Seas 19
Selby 256
Service trades 195, 199, 236-43
Severn Bridge 12
Severn river 263
Sewerage and sewage disposal 56,
57, 178, 217, 265, 266, 267
Sex Discrimination 27, 53, 117,311,
318
Sheffield 23, 153, 180, 288, 290, 373
Sheriffs and Sheriff Courts 106,
108, no, 115, 118, 119
Shetland Islands 19, 62, 274, 291,
292, 294, 295
Shipbuilders, British 202, 224, 225
Shipbuilding and marine
engineering 8, 14, 196, 224
Shipowners 293
Shipping 281, 291, 293-5
and Seamen, Registrar-General 295
cargo services 293-4
coastal 291, 292
conferences 294
container facilities and services 9, 281,
292,293, 294
dry bulk carrier vessels 293, 294
employers’ and employees’ organi¬
sations 293,295
employment of 224, 295
exports 224
General Council of, British 293
liners, passenger and cargo 293, 294
merchant fleet, composition 293
on inland waterways 290
organisations 293, 294
ownership 293
passenger services 294
ports 9, 291-2
radar surveillance 295
radio communications 294
relations with Government 294-5
safety 295
tankers and terminals 290, 291, 292,
293
446
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Shipping—contd.
tonnage 293
traffic control and zones 295
tramps 293
shopping centres 239
Shops:
cash and carry, wholesale 240
co-operative societies 237, 240
department stores 236-7
hypermarkets and superstores 239-40
independent 240
multiple stores 236, 237, 238, 239
number of 237, 238, 239
sales promotion 239
self-service 238
supermarkets 29, 239
Shropshire 373, 396
Sickness benefit 139, 313, 314
Sikhs 185
Silsoe 358
Silverware 219
Silviculture see Forestry
Skillcentres 309
Slieve Donard 15
Small Firms Information Centres
207
Smallholdings see Agriculture
Smithfield Market 240
Smogs 180
Smoke control 179-80
Snowdon 10
Snowdonia 10, 12
Soap production 226
Soccer see Football
Social:
attitudes 24-7
centres 10
life 20-9
Science Research Council (SSRC) 156,
313,358
research units 358
Security 53, 135-42, 192, 313
benefits 136-42
contributions 136
Department of Health and Social
Security see Health
expenditure on 124
reciprocal agreements with other
countries 131
Services 124-32
Services 132-5, 192, 322
personal 53, 63, 124, 132-5
Secretary of State for 124
voluntary organisations 135, 143-4
Training in 135
welfare 124-44
Work, Central Council for Education
and Training in 135
Social—contd.
workers 127, 135, 143
See also Health Service, National
and National Insurance
Society:
for Education through Art 374
of Industrial Artists and Designers 201
of Lloyd’s 340
of Manufacturers and Traders 221
for the Protection of Ancient Buildings
172
Soft drinks industry 229
Soil 276, 357
Solar Energy 262, 360
Solicitor:
General 106, 121
for Scotland 48, 55, 56, 106, 121
Solicitors 106, 121, 122
Somerset 260, 373
Southampton 153, 250, 261, 291,
292,373
South of Scotland Electricity
Board see Electricity
Sovereign see Monarchy
Space Activities 301, 363
European:
programme 301, 363
National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA) 363
Science and Engineering Research
Council 363
Space Agency (ESA) 223, 224, 355,
362, 363
See also Research
Speaker:
House of Commons 37, 38, 41, 45, 46
House of Lords 37, 41
Special constables 104
Spectacles 126
Opticians 126, 130
Speed limits 283
Speedlink Trains 288
Sport 393-402
facilities for 395-6
government responsibility 393
National Playing Fields Association
394
organisation and promotion 393, 394
private sponsorship 395
voluntary organisations 393, 394
Sports:
Aid Foundation 395
Association for the Disabled, British
3 94-5
British Paraplegic Society 395, 396
centres, national 396
Councils 174, 393-4, 395, 396, 399
equipment industry 234
INDEX
447
Sports—contd.
popular 397-402
United Kingdom Association for
People with Mental Handicap 395
See also Recreation
Springfield 261
Staff colleges (armed forces) 95
Stafford and Staffordshire 232, 257
Stag hunting 399
Stamp trading 239
Standards Institution, British 201
Standing Committees see
Parliament
Stanhope Bretby 257
Stanlow 250
Stansted (airport) 162, 299
Stationery Office, Her Majesty’s
(HMSO) 51, 54
Statistical Office, Central (CSO)
54
Statutory Instruments 326
Steel:
castings 215
Community, European Coal and
(ECSC) 71, 72, 76, 208, 214
Corporation, British (BSC) 197, 202,
214, 215
products 214
Steelwork plant industry 217-18,
219
Sterling 190, 214, 333, 336, 346, 350
exchange rates 189, 190, 333, 346
Stevenage 267
Stirling University 153
Stock Exchange 66, 331, 332, 341
Stockton 287
Stoke Mandeville:
Hospital 395, 396
Sports Stadium for the Paralysed and
Disabled 395, 396
Stoke Orchard 257
Stonehenge 1
Stranraer 291, 361
Stratford-upon-Avon 366
Strathclyde 13, 260, 274
University (Glasgow) 153, 373
Strikes see Industrial disputes
Students 152, 154, 157-8
from overseas 70, 88, 158, 360, 362,
365
See also Education and Universities
Submarine Cables 219, 301
Submarines 96, 97, 301
Sugar 271
beet 271
Sullom Voe (oil terminal) 207, 235,
291,292
Sumburgh 295, 299
Sunbury-on-Thames 251
Sunshine 20
Supermarkets 239
Support for Innovation 204
Supreme Court of Judicature in
Northern Ireland 118
Surgical instruments 221
Surrey 153
Sussex 8, 153, 373
Swansea 10, 171, 291, 381
Swimming 395, 402
Synthetic:
fibres 226, 230
rubber 226, 233
System ‘X’ 301
T 
Tables statistics (in chapter order):
Land and People
General Statistics 6
Size and Population of some of the
Main Urban Districts, April 1981 23
Government
Percentages of Votes Cast and
Members Elected in the May 1979
General Election 39
Justice and the Law
Serious Offences Recorded by the Police
per 100,000 Population (England and
Wales) 1980 101
Social Welfare
Benefit Rates 137-8
Supplementary Benefits 140
Family Income Supplement 141
War pensions 141
National Economy
Gross Domestic Product by Industry
191
Framework of Industry
Largest Industrial Organisations 197
Industrial Output and Employment
198
Gross Domestic Fixed Capital
Formation in Major Sectors 1977-81
(197 5 prices) 199
Manufacturing and Service Industries
Manufacturing: Size Distribution of
Establishments 213
Retail Trade in Great Britain 1980
238
Energy and Natural Resources
Inland Energy Consumption (in terms
of primary sources) 245
Oil Statistics 249
Coal Statistics 256
448
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Tables—contd.
Generation by and Capacity of Public
Supply Power Stations 259
Production of Some of the Main Non¬
fuel Minerals 265
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
British Production as a Percentage of
Total Supplies 269
Livestock and Livestock Products 270
Main Crops 271
Transport and Communications
Road Mileage 282
Railway Statistics 287
Traffic Through the Principal Ports of
Great Britain 292
Employment
Manpower in Britain 1971-81 304
Analysis of Civil Employment in
Britain 1971 and 1981 305
Public Finance
Sources of Tax and other Receipts
1981-82 and 1982-87 327
Overseas Trade and Payments
Exports and Imports 1971-81 344
Commodity Composition of Trade 1980
345
Principal British Markets and
Suppliers 1980 346
Britain’s Invisible Transactions 1980
347
Britain’s Balance of Payments
1971-81 350
Analysis of Investment and Other
Capital Transactions 1979-81 351
The Press
National Newspapers 379
Tachograph 285
Tankers and terminals see
Shipping
Tape recorders industry 220
Tariff policy 347-8
Tate Gallery 373
Taxation 26-7, 43, 53, 187, 190, 192,
322,325-6, 326-30
banking deposits 328
betting and gaming duties 327, 330,
402
capital gains tax 326, 327, 329
capital transfer tax 326, 327, 329
car tax 327, 330
corporation tax 325, 326, 327, 328
customs and excise duties 51, 326, 327,
330
development land tax 327, 329
estate duty 327
expenditure, taxes on 326, 329-30
income tax 191-2, 325, 326, 327, 328
relief and exemptions 328
Taxation—contd.
National Insurance Surcharge 326,
327, 330
PAYE 326
Petroleum revenue tax 327, 328
stamp duties 326, 327, 330
value added tax (VAT) 326, 327,
329-30
Taxicabs 286
Tayside 257
Teachers and Teaching see
Education
Teaching Company Scheme 356
Technical:
assistance 88, 89, 353, 354, 355, 362-3
assistance programmes, British 362,
363
British Volunteer Programme 88
education see Education
Technological advance 199
Technology see Education,
Research, Science, Universities
and relevant industries
Teesside 4, 22, 291, 292
Telecommunications:
British 202, 220, 300-3, 391
Bureau Fax 301
Data processing services 300
Datel services 302
developments 302-3
earth stations 301
equipment industry 220
Exchanges 301
finance 300
maritime communications 223, 295,
301
Martlesham Heath (Research Centre)
303
Mercury Consortium 300
microelectronics 301
optical fibres 219, 302
overseas services 301
packet switching service 302
‘Prestel’ 220, 239, 301-2, 391
radiopaging services 300
research 303
satellites 224, 301, 363, 391
submarine cables 219, 301
system ‘X’ 301
telegrams 302
Telegram Transmission Centre 302
telegraphs 302, 385
telephones 220, 300-1
specialised services 300
Teletext 220, 302, 391
Telex 220, 302
Viewdata service 301, 391
X-Stream 302
INDEX
449
Telegraph and telephone
equipment industry 220
Telescopes, optical and radio 355,
356
Television and Radio 386- 92
see also Broadcasting, Independent
Television and Licences
Temperature 19-20
Tennis see Lawn
Territorial Home Service Force 96
Textile industries 13-14, 17, 187,
189,229-30
machinery industry 17, 217, 218
Thames:
barrier 235
river and valley 6, 22, 270
Theatre Association, British 367,
376
Theatre 364, 365, 366-7
amateur 367
for young people 367
National 366
professional 366
Shakespeare Companies, Royal 366
training for 367
See also Drama
Thermometrical Table 404
Thomson Foundation 383-4
Thomson Television College 392
Timber industry 8, 280
Timeline 300
Tin industry 9, 216, 263
Tinplate industry 8, 216
Tobacco:
industry 17, 227, 229
revenue duty 327, 330
Toilet preparations industry 226-7
Tools industries:
exhibition 217
hand 218
machine 217
small (engineers) 218
Topography 54
Totalisators 402
Tourism 10, 12, 14, 243
Tourist:
Association of British Travel Agents
243
Authority, British 206, 243
boards 243
trade 55, 206-7, 243
Town Development Schemes 168,
170,171
Toy industry 334
Tractors 221-2
Trade 75, 187, 188, 193-4
associations 196-7
commercial policy 346-8
Trade—contd.
controls on 348-9
Department of and Secretary of State
for 51, 54, 179, 190, 208, 209, 212, 294,
295, 296, 339, 349, 372, 380
Marks Registry 211
overseas 74, 193-4, 214, 216, 217, 218,
219, 221, 222, 224, 225, 226, 227, 229,
230,232,233,235
area distribution 344-5
balance of payments 187, 188, 349-52
Board, British 70, 349
commodity composition 343-4, 345
exports 187, 188, 190, 193, 214, 216,
217, 218, 219, 225, 227, 230, 234, 245,
250, 343, 344, 345, 346, 348, 349
Government assistance to 349
imports 187, 343, 344, 345, 346, 348
international 187, 188, 193-4
invisible transactions 188, 189, 193-4,
343,345-6, 350
markets 344-5, 346
pam*™ 0/343-4, 345
statistics 343-7
tariffs 346-8
value and volume 0/343, 344
restriction and controls 194, 209
Fair Trading, Office of 208-9
retail 237-40
wholesale 240-1
Cash and Carry Warehouses 240
Trades Union Congress 314-15, 320
Scottish 315
Trades unions 196, 313-14, 315
affiliations 314, 315
Certification Officer 313, 315
Civil Service 319
educational facilities 315
European, Confederation 315
International Confederation of Free
Trade Unions 315
press 384
Trading, Director-General of Fair
208, 209
Traffic:
air 295, 296
Commissioners 286
congestion 282, 284
control 284, 298-9
inland waterways 281, 290
in towns 283, 284, 288
London 284, 286
Northern Ireland 283, 286
ports 291-2
rail and road 281, 284, 285, 287, 288,
290
research and development 283, 285,
292
450
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Traffic—contd.
sea 281, 291, 292, 293
wardens 104
Training:
for industry 145, 154, 155, 308, 309
boards 309
Instructor, Training:
Colleges 309
Units 308
Opportunities Schemes ( TOPS) 309
Transport 7, 25, 54, 57, 63, 191, 196,
199,281-300
air 281, 295-300
and Road Research Laboratory
(TRRL) 89, 283
bus and coach 285
National Bus Company 285
Department of and Secretary of State
for 54, 190, 282, 283, 284, 288, 354
Docks Board, British 291
Executives 286, 287
for school children 151
Helicopters 295, 297
Holding Company (Northern Ireland)
286, 287
Hotels Ltd, British 290
hovercraft 290, 294
inland 281-90
London 282, 286, 288, 291, 299
nationalised 281, 285, 286, 287, 288,
290, 291, 293
National Freight Consortium (NFC)
202, 285
Northern Ireland 57, 286, 287
passenger services 288, 294
policy 281-2, 294-5
rail 9, 286-90
research 283
road 9, 54, 57, 281-6
haulage 284-5
safety measures 283-4, 295j 297-8
tachograph 285
sea 293-5
services, public 284, 285, 286, 287,
288, 290, 291, 293, 294, 295-6, 297
subsidies and grants 287, 288, 290,
292,296
taxis 286
traffic in towns 284
See also Civil Aviation and Shipping
Travel see Tourist trade
Treason 106, 110
Treasury 48, 51, 55, 57, 323, 325, 331,
333
bills 330, 331, 333, 334, 336
Chancellor of the Exchequer 48, 325
Chief Secretary to the 49
Counsel 106
T reasury—contd.
Solicitor’s Department 48, 51, 55
Treatment of Offenders 110-4
Trawsfyndydd 12
Treaty of:
Accession 72
Rome 72, 207, 209
Tlatelolco 82
Trees 173, 174, 175
Tribunals 51, 119-20
Council on 120
Trinity House, Corporation of 295
Trooping the Colour 34
Tropical:
Medicine Research Board 357
Products Institute 89
Trust companies 338-9
Trustee Savings Banks 332, 335
Tunnels see Bridges and
Tyne and Wear 22, 178, 239, 287
Tyneside and Tyne ports 4, 216, 287
u 
Ulster:
Architectural Heritage Society 172
Countryside Commission 175
Defence Regiment 96
Drama Festivals, Association 367
museums and art galleries 18, 373
New University (Coleraine) 153, 377
Orchestra 368
Polytechnic 146, 151, 154, 155
Sheltered Employment Ltd 308
See also Northern Ireland
Ulsterbus Ltd 286
Underground railways 286-7
Unemployment 6, 189, 205, 306-7
benefit (insurance) 136, 139
Unicorn Theatre for Young People
367
United Kingdom:
Area 4, 18
Association for People with Mental
Handicap 395
citizenship 23-4
constitution 31
general statistics 6
historical outline 1-3
International Maritime Organisation
178
physical features 19-20
population 6
Register 180
Search and Rescue Region 295
Standing Conference on Refugees 90
See also subject headings
INDEX
451
United Nations:
agencies:
Committee on Disarmament 82
Committee on Human Rights 84
Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD) 90, 347
contributions to 85
Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organisation ( UNESCO) 85, 362,
378
Food and Agriculture Organisation
(FAO) 85
International Atomic Energy Agency
82, 362
International Labour Organisation 85
International Maritime Organisation
178
International Telecommunication
Union (ITU) 392
World Health Organisation ( WHO) 85
arms control and disarmament 82-3
Britain and the 69, 83-4
budget 85
economic and social affairs 83-4
Forces 84
General Assembly 85
Helsinki conference 74, 81
relations with 74, 94
Search and Rescue Region 295
Security Council 69, 84
support for 83
Universal Declaration of Human
Rights 84
voluntary funds 85, 89
United Press International 383
United:
Reformed Church 184
States:
educational and research co-operation
363
nuclear disarmament with 82
trade with 217, 224, 228, 233, 344
World College 158
Unit Trusts 337, 338-9
Universities 12, 145, 146, 151, 152,
1533 1543 US, 156, 1573 158, 160, 200,
355, 356, 358, 373, 3743 376, 377
agricultural degree courses 276
degrees, diplomas and certificates 151,
153, 154, 155,276,280
extra-mural courses 155-6
finance 146, 152
forestry courses 280
halls of residence 153
museums and libraries 373, 374, 376
physical education at 395
research 356, 357, 358
scholarships and research fellowships
Universities—contd.
152, 158,355,358
Special Commonwealth Awards 157
sport 395
staff 153
students 152, 153, 154, 157, 158
technological education 151, 152,
154-53 3553 356
University:
colleges 152, 153, 158
Grants Committee 152, 354, 358
interchange schemes 157-8, 362
Open 113, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156
Unmarried mothers 133
Urban:
aid programme 170, 395
planning 161-71
population 23
transport 281, 286-7, 29°
V 
Vaccination 132, 270, 275
Vaccines 270, 275
Valuation for rating 66
Value added tax see Taxation
Valves, industrial 217
Vegetables:
crops 270, 272
processing 228, 272
Vegetation 268, 357
Vehicle:
industries 218, 221
licensing 283, 284, 330
safety 54
Vending machines, automatic 218
Ventilation equipment 218
Veterinary:
Laboratory, Central 275, 277
medical products 276
Product Committee 279
service and research 275, 277, 357
state service 275
Victoria and Albert Museum 372,
374
Victorian Society 172
Viewdata service 301
Viking (gasfield) 391
Virological laboratories 132
Visnews 391
Visual Arts 372
Vocational guidance and training
113, 116, 145, 154-5,309,311
Voluntary:
agencies 89-90
organisations 113, 124, 132, 133, 135,
142-4, 161, 172, 393
452
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
V oluntary—contd.
childcare 133, 135, 142-4
clubs 395
education 146, 147, 149, 151, 159, 160,
182
preservation societies 172
prisoners’ aid 113
welfare 124, 128, 132, 133, 142-4
youth services 159-60
Service
International 89, 90
Overseas 89, 90
Unit 143
Volunteer Programme, British 88
Voting:
in House of Commons 41
in House of Lords 41
in local government elections 62
in parliamentary elections 38, 39
w 
Wages:
Councils 311,319
Inspectorate 319
and salaries 6, 118-19, 192, 312, 319
equal pay 28, 311,318
negotiations 311,312, 318, 319
statutory regulations 318-19
Wales:
administration 4, 11, 55
agriculture 12, 268, 269, 270, 273
area 10-11, 19-20
Atlantic College 158
broadcasting councils and committees
386,387
Church see Churches
Countryside Commission 173
cultural and social life 12
development:
Board for Rural 165, 168, 206
Corporation 349
economy 11-12
employment 6
environment planning 161, 164
government 11
historical background 1-2
industry 11-12, 205, 206, 207, 216
local government 61, 62, 63, 65
National:
Library 12, 55, 377
Museum of 12, 55, 373
Sports Centre for 395, 396
Youth Orchestra 369
population 6, 10, 23
ports 291
press 381
Wales—contd.
Prince of 2, 10, 34
Royal National Eisteddfod 366
Secretary of State for 161, 164, 171,
172, 176, 265,283,364,393
Sports:
Council for 55, 394, 396
Trust 395
Tourist Board 54, 206, 243
Trades Union Council 314
University of 153
See also subject headings
Wallingford 235
War Museum, Imperial 373
War pensioners 136, 141-2
Warren Spring Laboratory 203
Warrington 355
Warsaw Pact 83, 92, 93
Warwick and Warwickshire 153
Waste:
radioactive 181, 261
reclamation and recycling 178, 199,
261
Water:
authorities 177, 266
companies, statutory 266
conservation 265, 266
consumption 265
Council, National 266
Development Board, Central Scotland
266
pollution 53, 131, 173, 177, 178, 266,
267
rate 265
recreation 173, 393, 396, 402
regional, authorities 266, 393
Research 267
Centre 267
Laboratory 267
sources of 244, 265, 266
supply 131, 266
Waterways Board, British 290, 291,
393
Wave energy 262
Weald and Downland Museum 373
Wealth, distribution of 26-7, 191-2
Weapons see Defence
Weather 19-20
forecast services 300
Weedkillers 226
Weed Research Organisation 357
Weights and Measures 210, 403
Welfare:
blind, deaf and disabled 124, 127,
132-3,139, 142, 143
centres 128, 133
children 114-16, 128, 132, 133-5, I42>
M3
INDEX
453
Welfare—contd.
children—contd.
Youth treatment centres 114
elderly 124, 127, 132, 133, 142-4
ethnic minorities 29
family 126, 133, 135, 140-1
industrial 319-21
mentally ill 126, 133
mothers 133, 137
prisoners and probationers 111,112, 113
Social 124-44
voluntary organisations 143
See also National Insurance and
Health
Welsh:
Amateur Music Federation 368
Arts Council 365, 368, 371, 375
College of Music and Drama 367, 369
Development Agency 65, 206, 207
Film Board 370
Folk Museum 373
Fourth Channel Authority 388
Grand Committee 44
language 11, 12, 149, 381, 388
National Opera 12, 369
Office 11, 12, 52, 61, 161, 164, 174,
179,265,207
Water Authority 266
Wembley:
Conference Centre 241
Stadium 393, 397, 401
Western Isles 62, 64
Westminster Abbey 32
Whisky industry 14, 228
Whitley Councils, National 60
Whole House, Committee 44
Wholesale trade 240
Widows’ benefits and pensions 138,
139,142
Wigmore Hall 367
Wind energy 262
Winds 19-20
Windsor 366
Winfrith 260, 261
Wires and cables (insulated)
industry 219
Women:
in armed forces 95
average earnings 28, 311
employment 27-8, 236, 305, 311, 312
equal:
opportunities 28
Opportunities Commission 28
pay for 28, 311
rights 28, 311
periodicals for 382
proportion in population 20, 305
sex discrimination 27-8, 311,318
Women’s:
Institutes, National Federation of 156
Royal Voluntary Service 144
Woodlands 173, 174, 280
Wool 8, 14, 270, 272
industry 7-9, 230-1
Marketing Board, British 274
See also Knitwear and Textile
industries
Worcester 366
Work:
health and safety at 274, 319-21
hours of 6, 312
Research Unit 313
See also Employment
Workers:
immigrant 29-30, 310-11
manual 311-12
professional, managerial and clerical
198, 200, 308, 312
Workers’ Educational Association
(WEA) 155-6
Works councils and committees
317-18
World:
Bank 89
Council of Churches 186
Data Centres (for space research) 302
Health Organisation (WHO) 85
United, Colleges 158
Wrexham 381
Writers 10, 11
Wylfa 12, 260
Y 
Yarmouth Great 292
York 153, 366, 373
Province of 182
Yorkshire 6, 22, 216, 260, 373, 401
Young:
Men’s Christian Association (YMCA)
144, 156
Offenders 107, 114, 115-16
Women’s Christian Association
(YWCA) 144
Workers’ Scheme 306
Youth:
and Music 369
careers service 308
centres and clubs 159
National Association of Youth Clubs
159
Hostels Associations 159
Opportunities Programme 306
orchestras 369
services 159-60
454
BRITAIN 1983 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Youth—contd.
National Council for Voluntary
(NCVYS) 159
Theatre, National 367
Training Scheme 306, 309
Treatment Centres 114
voluntary organisations 142-4, 159-60
workers 159-60
z 
Zoological Society 361
library 361
research 361
Zoos and safari parks 361
Printed in England for Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
by Balding + Mansell Limited
Dd7i8266 Proi7764 C175 12/82
ISBN on 701027 8
[Papa
... . rt [wtatray
Wostray U
Westray\ ►T\
North
Ronaldsay
\N ester n
\s\es
-
f
f
