1984
An Official Handbook
1984
An Official Handbook
LONDON: HER MAJESTY'S STATIONERY OFFICE
Prepared by the Central Office of Information
© Crown copyright 1984
First published 1984
Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
Government Bookshops
49 High Holborn, London WCIV 6HB
13a Castle Street, Edinburgh EH2 3AR
Brazennose Street, Manchester M60 8AS
Southey House, Wine Street, Bristol BS1 2BQ
258 Broad Street, Birmingham B1 2HE
80 Chichester Street, Belfast BT1 4JY
Government publications are also available
through booksellers
Obtainable in the United States of America
from Kraus — Thompson Organisation Ltd,
Millwood, New York 10546
£12.95
ISBN 0 11 701033 2
O «
Contents
Page
Introduction viii
1 Land and People 1
Introduction 1
The Four Lands 4
Physical F eatures 18
The Social Framework 18
2 Government 29
The Monarchy 29
Parliament 83
The Privy Council 45
Her Majesty’s Government 45
Government Departments 48
The Civil Service 55
Local Government 58
The Fire Services 64
3 Overseas Relations 66
Membership of the European Community 68
The Commonwealth 73
International Peace and Security 7 6
Britain and the United Nations 80
Other International Organisations 81
Development Co-operation 82
4 Defence 88
Civil Defence 94
Defence Procurement 94
5 Justice and the Law 96
The Law 96
Criminal Justice 96
Civil Justice 111
Administration of the Law 114
6 Social Welfare 119
National Health Service 119
Personal Social Services 127
Social Security 130
Voluntary Service 137
7 Education 140
The Youth Service 153
8 The Environment 156
Planning 156
Housing 160
Conservation 166
Control of Pollution 171
9 The Churches 176
10 National Economy 180
11 Framework of Industry 187
12 Manufacturing and Service Industries 204
Manufacturing 204
Construction 225
Service Industries 226
13 Energy and Natural Resources 234
Energy 234
Non-fuel Minerals 252
Water 254
14 Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 256
Agriculture 256
Fisheries 265
Forestry 266
15 Transport and Communications 268
Inland Transport 268
Ports 277
Shipping 279
Civil Aviation 281
Communications 285
16 Employment 290
17 Public Finance 307
18 Banking and Financial Institutions 316
19 Overseas Trade 326
20 Promotion ofScience and Technology 335
21 Promotion of the Arts 346
22 The Press 360
23 Television and Radio 368
24 Sport and Recreation 375
Appendix 1
Currency 387
Metric Conversions for British Weights and Measures 387
Bank and Public Holidays in Britain ,1984 388
Appendix 2 389
Guide to Sources 389
Index 391
Diagrams
Availability of certain durable goods
The Royal Family: genealogical tree
Regional distribution of bilateral aid 1982
Housing by tenure
Final expenditure at market prices in 1982
Components ofconsumers’expenditure in 1972 and 1982
Primary energy consumption
Aircraft and helicopters operated by British Airways in March 1983
25
31
84
162
184
186
236
283
Maps
Fold-in map
Britain
Membership of the European Community
New Towns
Enterprise zones
Oil
Gas
Coal
Electricity
Some minerals produced in Britain
Main railway passenger routes
inside back cover
5
69
158
161
238
242
245
248
253
275
Photographs
The Countryside
The Houses of Parliament
The Countryside
Aids for the Disabled
Medical Aids
Optical Aids
Repairing Lasers
Joint European Torus (JET)
Cranfield Institute of Technology
Communications Technology
Computer Teaching Aids
Architecture
Glyndebourne Festival Opera
Sport
Facing page 40
Between pages 40 and 41
Facing page 41
Facing page 136
Between pages 136 and 137
Facing page 137
Facing page 200
Between pages 200 and 201
Between pages 200 and 201
Facing page 201
Facing page 296
Between pages 296 and 297
Between pages 296 and 297
Facing page 297
The cover shows lasers in use for research on data image-processing systems operating entirely
at light frequencies as an alternative to conventional electronics at GEC’s Wembley Research
Laboratory.
Introduction
Britain 1984 is the thirty-fifth official handbook in the series; it has
been prepared by the Central Office of Information on behalf of the
Foreign and Commonwealth Office. The handbook is widely known as
an established work of reference and is the mainstay of the reference
facilities provided by British information services in many countries. It
is on sale by Her Majesty’s Stationery Office throughout the world.
Britain 1984 describes many features in the life of the country, includ¬
ing the workings of the government and other major institutions. It does
not attempt an analytical approach to current events.
Care should be taken when studying British statistics to note whether
they refer to England, to England and Wales (considered together for
many administrative and other purposes), to Great Britain, which
comprises England, Wales and Scotland, or to the United Kingdom
(which is the same as Britain, that is, Great Britain and Northern
Ireland) as a whole.
The factual and statistical information in Britain 1984 is compiled with
the co-operation of other government departments and agencies, and
of many other organisations. Sources of more detailed and more
topical information (including statistics) are mentioned in the text and
a guide to official sources is given in Appendix 2.
The text, generally, is based on information available up to Sep¬
tember 1983.
Reference Services
Overseas Publications and Foreign Languages
Central Office of Information, London.
1 Land and People
Historical
Outline
England and
Wales
Introduction
Britain comprises Great Britain (England, Wales and Scotland) and Northern
Ireland, and is one of the ten member states of the European Community. Its full
name is the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
The word Britain derives from Greek and Latin names probably stemming from
a Celtic original, which is also reflected in the name of the region of north¬
western France (‘Brittany’ in English) settled by migrants from Britain in the
fifth and sixth centuries ad. Although, in the prehistoric time scale, the Celts
were relatively late arrivals in the British Isles (following cultures which had
produced such notable monuments as the stone circles of Avebury and
Stonehenge) it is only with them that Britain emerges into recorded history, and
the term Celtic is often used rather generally to distinguish the earlier inhabi¬
tants of the British Isles from the later Anglo-Saxon invaders.
Following sorties by Julius Caesar in 55 and 54 bc Britain was occupied by the
Romans in the first century ad and an ordered civilisation was established
under their rule for two or three hundred years except in the territory north of
Hadrian’s Wall (the wall across northern England planned by Hadrian, Roman
Emperor from 117 to 138 ad) and in some western areas. Christian missionaries
arrived not only in Roman Britain but in Scotland and Ireland.
The final Roman withdrawal in the fifth century, however, followed a long
period of increasing disorder during which there began raids on the island from
northern Europe - mainly by peoples traditionally described as Angles (from
Schleswig), Saxons and Jutes. It is from the Angles (who are reputed to have
settled mainly in the region now known as East Anglia) that the name England
derives. In the following two centuries the raids turned into settlement and the
establishment of a number of small kingdoms (with the Britons, or Celts, main¬
taining an independent existence in the areas now known as Wales and Corn¬
wall). Among these kingdoms, more powerful ones which claimed overlordship
over the whole country were established, first in the north (Northumbria), then
in the central area (Mercia) and finally in the south (Wessex). However, the rise
of Wessex in the ninth century under the leadership of Alfred the Great
(849-99) was contemporaneous with further raids and settlement from
Europe, in this case by the Vikings from Scandinavia. In the tenth century the
Wessex dynasty defeated the invading Danes and established a wide-ranging
authority in England. A second wave of Danish invasions, however, led to the
establishment of a Danish dynasty in England between 1017 and 1042, when the
Wessex line was restored.
The last successful invasion of England took place following a disputed suc¬
cession when Duke William of Normandy (a duchy established by the Vikings
and owing only nominal allegiance to the French king) enforced his claims by
defeating the English at the Battle of Hastings in 1066. There was considerable
settlement by Normans and others from France, French became the language
of the nobility for the next three centuries and the legal and, to some extent,
social structure was influenced by that which prevailed across the Channel.
2
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Scotland
Ireland
The monarchy established by William and his successors was (except in inter¬
vals of civil war) considerably more effective both in administrative and mili¬
tary terms than its predecessors and it began to establish its authority over
increasingly wide areas of the British Isles. This policy was pushed forward with
most energy by Edward I (1272-1307). His most lasting success was in Wales,
the main stronghold into which the Britons had retreated. With the death in
battle in 1282 of the Welsh Prince Llewellyn the royal authority became firmly
established there. Edward gave his own heir the title of ‘Prince of Wales’ which
has subsequently been bestowed upon the eldest son of the sovereign. The
rising led by Owain Glyndwr at the beginning of the fifteenth century showed
strong continuing Welsh national feeling but a new dimension to the situation
was provided by the accession to the English throne in 1485 of Henry VII of the
Welsh House of Tudor. Wales was politically assimilated to England under the
Act of Union in 1535.
A more difficult problem concerned relations between England and Scotland.
Hadrian’s Wall had proved no insurmountable barrier between the Romans
and their northern neighbours, and far-reaching expeditions both by the
Romans into Scotland and by the Scottish people known as Piets into England
took place. In the sixth century the Scots from Ireland or ‘Scotia’ settled in the
areas of Scotland now known as Argyll. What is now Lothian was English in
population, and Welsh (Britons) moved north from the invading English into
Strathclyde. A united kingdom, under the Scots king Kenneth MacAlpine,
emerged in the ninth century while Scotland, like England, was endeavouring
to defend itself against the Vikings.
Claims by English kings that the Scottish kingdom owed them allegiance
caused endless dissension contributing to intermittent and inconclusive border
warfare throughout the Middle Ages, though the idea of uniting the two coun¬
tries by force ended with the English defeat at Bannockburn in 1314.
The eventual unification of the crowns reflected the fact that, after the Refor¬
mation (Henry VIII’s break away in 1534 from the authority of the Roman Catho¬
lic Church), old national antagonisms had become less important than religious
differences. Following the death of Henry’s daughter, the childless Elizabeth I
in 1603, the Protestant James Stuart, James VI of Scotland (son of Mary, Queen
of Scots, whose grandmother was a sister of Henry VIII), was welcomed to the
English throne as James I. England, Wales and Scotland were henceforth
known as Great Britain. Apart from the union of the monarchies, however,
England and Scotland remained separate during the seventeenth century,
except for an enforced unification by Oliver Cromwell early in the period of the
Commonwealth (1649-1660) after he had defeated royalist forces in Scotland.
By the beginning of the following century political and economic arguments for
a closer union were making themselves heard in both countries. Eventually, in
1707, both sides agreed on the formation of a single parliament for Great Britain
although Scotland retained its own system of law and church settlement. The
union was put under strain when Queen Anne died in 1714 and George, Elector of
Hanover (descended from a daughter of James I) succeeded the Stuarts on the
British throne. ‘Jacobite’ rebellions on behalf of the exiled members of the
House of Stuart took place in 1715 and 1745 and it was from the highlands of
Scotland that they attracted most of their, in the event, ineffective support.
In Ireland, out of a patchwork of Celtic and pre-Celtic peoples similar to that in
Britain, a number of kingdoms had emerged before the Christian era; any
supremacy established by one over the others in the following 1,000 years was of
a temporary nature. In cultural matters Ireland compared favourably with the
remainder of Europe during the Dark Ages and, in particular, Christianity sur-
LAND AND PEOPLE
3
vived in Ireland when it had been displaced for the time being in England by
Anglo-Saxon invaders. Ireland, however, did not escape the incursions of the
Vikings, who dominated the country during the tenth century.
In 1169 Henry II of England launched an invasion of Ireland, the overlordship
of which he had been granted by the Pope who was anxious to bring the Irish
church into full obedience to Rome. A large part of the country came under the
control of Anglo-Norman magnates but their descendants tended to assimilate
to their new country and little direct authority was exercised from England
during the Middle Ages.
The Tudor monarchs showed a much greater tendency to intervene in
Ireland. Henry VIII’s assumption of the title of King of Ireland in 1541 arose from
his desire to apply the Reformation settlement and from this time on the relig¬
ious issue was to produce far-reaching consequences. The determination to
establish royal authority in Ireland was strengthened during the reign of
Elizabeth I by the fear that the country might be used by Philip of Spain in his
efforts to subjugate England, and a series of campaigns were waged against
Irish insurgents. The main focus of the resistance was the northern province of
Ulster and, with its collapse in 1607, Ulster became an area of settlement by
immigrants from Scotland and England. (There was settlement by immigrants
elsewhere in Ireland, though on a lesser scale.)
The English civil war of 1642-52 led to further risings in Ireland which were
crushed by Cromwell. The restoration of the monarchy in 1660 was followed by
the accession of the Roman Catholic James II to the throne in 1685, and there
was more fighting after his deposition three years later in favour of his nephew
and son-in-law, the Protestant William of Orange and his wife Mary.
During most of the eighteenth century there was an uneasy peace and
towards its end various efforts were made by British governments to achieve
stability. In 1782 the Irish Parliament (dating from medieval times) was given
legislative independence; the only constitutional tie with England was the
Crown. The Parliament represented, however, only the privileged Anglo-Irish
minority, who had obtained possession of most of the agricultural land, and
Catholics were excluded from it. Against the background of an abortive rebel¬
lion in 1798 and the prospect of intervention by F ranee (with which England was
at war between 1793 and 1800) the Irish Parliament was induced to vote for
union with what, from 1801, was to be the Parliament of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Ireland.
The ‘Irish question’ continued as one of the major problems of British politics
during the nineteenth century. In 1886 the Liberal Government introduced a
Home Rule Bill which would have given an Irish Parliament authority over most
internal matters while reserving to Britain control over external affairs. This led
to a split in the Liberal Party and the failure of the Bill. It was not until 1914 that
Home Rule was enacted by the Government of Ireland Act. Its implementation
was, however, prevented both by the threat of armed resistance on the part of
the Protestant majority in Ulster and by the outbreak of the first world war.
A nationalist uprising in Dublin in 1916 was suppressed, but with the end of
the first world war a guerrilla force known as the Irish Republican Army (IRA)
began operations against the British administration. In 1921 a settlement was
reached under which six of the nine counties of the province of Ulster received
their own Parliament, but remained represented in and subject to the supreme
authority of the British Parliament, while the remainder of Ireland as the Irish
Free State (later to become the Irish Republic) became a self-governing state
outside the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Channel Islands Although the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man are not part of the United
and Isle of Man Kingdom, they have a special relationship with it because of the antiquity of
r
ENGLAND
Government
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
their connection with the Crown. The Channel Islands were integrated into the
Duchy of Normandy in the tenth and eleventh centuries and have been
territories of the Crown ever since the Conquest. The Isle of Man was under the
nominal sovereignty of Norway until 1266 when it was ceded to Scotland,
subsequently passing to the Earls of Derby for a period but eventually coming
under the direct administration of the Crown in 1765. Today the territories are
Crown dependencies, with their own legislative assemblies and systems of local
administration and of law, and their own courts. The British Government is
responsible for their defence, their international relations and, ultimately, their
good government.
The position of the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man in the European Com¬
munity is broadly that the islands remain outside the Community except for
customs purposes and for certain aspects of the Common Agricultural Policy.
Community provisions relating to the free movement of persons and services do
not apply.
The Four Lands
In the following pages, brief descriptions of England, Wales, Scotland and
Northern Ireland bring together, for each of the countries, a number of topics
which are dealt with more fully in later chapters. For Northern Ireland, some
background to the present political position is included.
England is predominantly a lowland country. There are upland regions in the
north (the Pennine Chain, the Cumbrian mountains and the Yorkshire moor¬
lands) and in the south-west in Devon and Cornwall. For the most part,
however, the country is undulating or flat and, in the south, crossed by low
ranges of hills including the Cotswolds and the Kent and Sussex Downs. The
greatest concentrations of population are in the London and Thames estuary
areas, the west Yorkshire and north-west industrial cities, the midlands conur¬
bation around Birmingham, the north-east conurbation on the rivers Tyne and
Tees, and along the Channel coast. (For main urban districts, see Table 2, p 21.)
Immigration from Europe over the centuries has led to the establishment of
Irish and Jewish communities in many of the larger cities. In the latter part of
the twentieth century immigrants from the South Asian subcontinent and the
Caribbean have also formed distinctive urban communities.
The Church of England, which was separated from the Roman Catholic
Church at the Reformation, is the Established Church in England, with privi¬
leges balanced by certain duties which it must fulfil; the Sovereign must always
be a member of the Church and appoints its two archbishops, 24 bishops and
some other senior clergy.
England has no government minister or department exclusively responsible for
its central administration of domestic affairs, in contrast to Wales, Scotland and
Northern Ireland. Instead, responsibility is shared among a number of govern¬
ment departments, whose responsibilities in some cases also cover aspects of
affairs in Wales and Scotland. There are 523 members of Parliament for
England in the House of Commons (see also p 37), and arrangements are made
for the discussion of English affairs. Traditionally, of the two major political
parties, the Conservatives find their support chiefly in suburban and rural
areas, while the Labour Party derives its main support from urban industria¬
lised areas. In the 1983 election England returned 362 Conservative members of
Parliament, 148 Labour, 10 Liberal and 3 Social Democrats. (A section on the
Party System can be found in Chapter 2.) Local government outside London is
administered through a two-tier system of 45 counties subdivided into districts.
Britain
0 50 100 miles
l l
r i i i
0 50 100 150 kilometres
— International boundaries
 Country boundaries
  County boundaries in England
and Wales and regional
boundaries in Scotland
4$°
Shetland Islands
Orkney Islands
..y 0
6
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Table 1: General Statistics
England Wales Scotland Northern United
Ireland Kingdom
Population
(’000, mid-1982 estimate)
Area
(sq km)
(sq miles)
Population density
(persons per sq km)
(persons per sq mile)
Gross domestic product
(£ per head, 1981)
Employees in
employment
(’000, mid-1982)
Percentage of
employees in:
(June 1982, provisional)
agriculture, forestry and
fishing
engineering and allied
industries
all other manufacturing
construction
mining, quarrying, gas,
electricity and water
service industries
Unemployment rate
(per cent, September
1983)
Average gross weekly
earnings
(£, all full-time men, April
1982)
Identifiable public
expenditure
(£ per head, 1981-82)
46,799 2,808 5,166
130,439
50,363
358
929
17,319
1-6
130
15-4
4-7
30
62-2
20,768
8,018
135
350
2-6
10-6
15-2
60
61
59-5
11-8 15-1
78,772
30,414
66
170
3,679 3,118 3,546
877 1,872
2- 4
10 0
14-5
6-9
3- 7
62-6
14 0
154-8 146-9 154-5
1,567
14,121
5,452
111
287
2,654
451
1,449 1,704
1,882
1- 9
7-0
14-6
5-6
2- 3
68-6
21-0
144-6
2,256
56,340
244,100
94,247
231
598
3,611
20,520
1-7
12-5
15-4
5-0
3-2
62-3
12-4
154-5a
Sources: See Appendix 2
“Great Britain only
London is administered by a central council and 33 bodies responsible for par¬
ticular areas (see also p 59).
Eight ‘standard’ regions in England are delimited principally for statistical
purposes: South East, East Anglia, South West, West Midlands, East Midlands,
Yorkshire and Humberside, North West and North. They play no part in local
government and do not always coincide with the regional units adopted by cen¬
tral government departments. (Standard regions are shown on p 158.)
LAND AND PEOPLE
7
The legal system of England comprises on the one hand a historic body of
conventions, known as ‘common law’ and ‘equity’, and on the other, parliamen¬
tary and European Community legislation. Common law stems from the work
of the king’s judges after the Norman conquest of 1066 who sought to bring
together into a single body of legal principles the various local customs of the
Anglo-Saxons. Great reliance was placed on precedent, and the practice of
reporting on cases commenced in the thirteenth century. Equity law derives
from the practice of petitioning the king’s Chancellor in cases not covered by
common law. The English legal system is therefore distinct from many of those
of Western Europe which have codes deriving from Roman Law. The Habeas
Corpus Act 1679 is a fundamental statute forbidding imprisonment without
trial.
The Economy Up to the eighteenth century the English economy was mainly agrarian and the
chief manufacture was wool cloth. Trade, particularly following voyages of
exploration, developed rapidly. London as the capital city, and a major port and
mercantile centre, and the textile areas (East Anglia, south-western England
and west Yorkshire) were the most populous and prosperous regions. In the late
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, however, rapid growth took place in the
midlands, the north-west, west Yorkshire and the north-east, where the
coalfields, iron ore deposits and ports permitted Britain to become the first
industrialised nation, basing its wealth on coal mining, on the manufacture of
iron and steel, heavy machinery and textiles, on shipbuilding and on trade.
London enhanced its position with the growing strength of the economy but
East Anglia and the west country, remote from areas of industrial development,
were affected by agricultural depression, and entered a period of relative
decline.
In the twentieth century, the second period of industrialisation, based on new
sources of energy, new manufacturing industries and new forms of transport,
has continued to change the broad pattern of regional and industrial
development in England. In the 1920sand 1930s the northern industrial centres
saw their traditional industries weakened owing to fluctuations in world trade
and competition from other industrialising countries and, in some cases, from
substitute products. London, its surrounding counties and the West Midlands
generally benefited from the newer, more mobile, industries. These included
chemicals (such as pharmaceuticals, dyes, plastics and artificial fibres), elec¬
trical and electronic engineering, vehicle manufacture, aircraft building,
instrument engineering, aluminium and rubber manufacture and a wide range
of consumer goods, including processed food, drink and tobacco products as
well as durables. In the latter half of the century, the continued expansion of the
newer industries has combined with the effects of new and expanding towns
programmes, aimed at reducing overcrowding in the older urban centres, to
produce further economic growth in the counties around London (especially to
the north and west of it), and expansion in East Anglia and in the South West. At
the same time successive governments have supported measures to make the
older industrial regions attractive to new industries and more recently to revive
economic activity in inner urban areas. Rationalisation programmes for the
steel, coal and shipbuilding industries have been implemented.
East Anglia, still largely agricultural, was the fastest growing English region
in both population and industrial activity in the 1960s and 1970s. Particular
growth points have been Peterborough, the east coast ports (which, besides
benefiting from relative proximity to the northern European Community
countries, have in some cases become important bases for the development of
gas resources in the southern North Sea) and nine towns receiving population
overspill from London. Food processing, agricultural machinery, vehicle
8
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
engines and electronic and instrument engineering are the strongest
industries, and the service sector has been growing in Cambridge, Ipswich and
Norwich.
Greater London and the industrial cities of the West Midlands, the North
West, Yorkshire and Humberside and the North continue to represent the
largest concentrations of manufacturing industry. London is an important area
for products of all kinds including food and drink (especially brewing), instru¬
ment engineering, electrical and electronic engineering, clothing, furniture and
printing. Of importance in the surrounding south-eastern counties are oil refin¬
ing (along the Thames and near Southampton), pharmaceuticals, pumps,
valves and compressors, instrument engineering, electronics (particularly in
Berkshire and Hertfordshire, and around Chelmsford), motor vehicles,
aerospace, building materials, timber, paper and plastics products. There is
diversity, too, in the North West, with significant activity in food processing
(especially grain milling, bread and flour confectionery and biscuits), chemicals
of all kinds, textile machinery, insulated wires and cables, computers (Man¬
chester being one of the largest centres in the country), motor vehicles,
aerospace, clothing, glass making (with the world’s largest flat glass maker!
Pilkington’s, in St Helens), paper and rubber products. Lancashire is the centre
of the cotton and allied textile industries.
The characteristic manufactures of the West Midlands are metals (steel tubes,
iron castings and non-ferrous metals), machine tools, electrical engineering,
motor vehicles, carpets, pottery (with over 80 per cent of Britain’s ceramic
industry located in Staffordshire) and rubber production. Of the other regions,
Yorkshire and Humberside has important shares of cocoa, chocolate and con¬
fectionery production, iron and steel, machine tools, textile machinery, woollen
and worsted goods (producing about two-thirds of Britain’s wool textiles), car¬
pets, clothing and glass containers. The North has general chemicals, iron and
steel, process plant, shipbuilding and marine engineering, and clothing; the
East Midlands has steel tubes, iron castings, over two-thirds of Britain’s hosiery
and knitted goods industry, and footwear; and the South West has food process¬
ing (especially dairy products), aerospace, pumps, valves and compressors, and
paper products.
In agriculture, large and medium-sized holdings are proportionately more
important in England than elsewhere in Britain, and the number of mixed
holdings has been falling, as part of a general tendency towards greater special¬
isation. Dairying is most common in the west of England, where the wetter
climate encourages the growth of good grass; sheep and cattle are reared in the
hilly and moorland areas of northern and south-western England; and arable
farming, pig and poultry farming and horticulture are concentrated in the east
and south. Horticulture is also important in the West Midlands. Forestry is
mainly found in the North, South East and South West regions. The principal
fishing ports are in the South West and on the east coast.
England has plentiful energy resources in its coalfields and from nuclear
power stations and has access to offshore oil and gas reserves. (The electricity
grid of England and Wales is the largest interconnected power network under
unified control in the Western world.) About 60 per cent of Britain’s deepmined
coal is produced in the East Midlands and Yorkshire coalfields, the former being
the most productive in the country. There are seven nuclear power stations
around the coasts of southern England, and projects to construct two more in
the north and one on the south coast are nearing completion. The world’s first
large-scale nuclear power station was established at Calder Hall in Cumbria in
1956, while substantial investment in reprocessing capacity is being under¬
taken nearby. Important mineral deposits in England include aggregates for the
construction industry (sand, gravel and crushed rock), industrial minerals
LAND AND PEOPLE
9
Cultural and
Social Life
(including clay, salt from the North West and china clay from Cornwall), tin ore,
also from Cornwall, and iron ore from the East Midlands and Humberside.
Investment in water resources includes the Kielder Reservoir in Northumbria,
which when filled in 1982 became one of Europe’s largest man-madelakes.
A motorway network has been constructed in England since the 1950s and at
present comprises four long-distance arterial routes linking London and the
cities of the midlands, the north and north-west and the south-west, and over 30
shorter motorways, mainly near London and Manchester. Priority is being
given to the London orbital route and schemes of industrial importance. Inter¬
city travel has been improved by the introduction of high-speed rail services
which are among the fastest in the world. Many ports have been equipped to
deal with new developments in shipping (such as container ships) and to take
account of changes in the nature of trade brought about by the increase in oil
traffic through North Sea ports. The major airports are Heathrow (the busiest
international airport in the world) and Gatwick, both serving London, and
Manchester and Luton.
Employment in service industries has accounted for an increasing share of
total employment in recent years, expansion being particularly marked in
financial and business services. London is one of the world’s leading centres of
banking, insurance and other financial services. Decentralisation of some office
services from the capital has led to a growth in office employment in the South
West and East Anglia in particular. London and the surrounding counties
account for two-thirds of advertising and market research activity, more than
half of all services offered by research establishments (other than those
attached to businesses), half of central government services and nearly half of
non-food wholesale distribution in England. After London and the South East,
the North West, with its main centre in Manchester, is the next most important
concentration of service industries. Tourism and catering have also expanded:
overseas visitors spent about £2,753 million in England in 1982, two-thirds of it
in London. They are, however, tending to spend more time in areas outside
London in the south-east, the south-west and the midlands. The south-west is
the most popular region for domestic tourism, accounting for more than a fifth
of main holidays. The Lake District, with 11 major lakes, and peaks including
Scafell (England’s highest point, at 978 metres, 3,210 feet), is also very popular
with walkers and climbers.
Cultural life in England takes so many forms that a brief summary can only
attempt to suggest its variety. London alone has about 100 theatres, including
some 40 in the ‘West End’, together with fringe and suburban theatres, about a
dozen major centres for music concerts, ballet and opera, seven major art
galleries, a dozen major museums (with over 80 smaller galleries and
museums), some 400 public libraries, and over 140 West End, local and
independent cinemas. In a typical week there are many lectures, poetry
readings, and jazz, rock or folk music performances. Leisure facilities include
discotheques, bingo halls, amusement arcades, ice and roller skating rinks and
swimming pools. With its ceremonial occasions, palaces, other historic
buildings and shops, London is also one of the world’s leading tourist centres.
About 15 attractions (Westminster Abbey, the Tower of London, Madame
Tussaud’s, the London Zoo and the museums and art galleries) each receive
more than a million visitors a year.
Because of its size and its position as the capital city, London is not repre¬
sentative of the rest of England, but much the same broad range of cultural
interests is reflected in most other cities and towns. There are, for example,
about 280 theatre centres and 110 fringe theatres elsewhere in England. The
English Tourist Board lists some 1,130 art galleries, museums, and similar insti-
10
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
WALES
Government
tulions in the rest of England. A recent development has been the growth of
leisure centres where a wide range of recreations is offered. Distinctive features
of the northern industrial cities are special social clubs, working men’s clubs,
which attract major international entertainers. In addition there are many rural
or outdoor recreations which are strongly supported and there is active interest
in numerous games and sports, many of them having been devised in England.
The English love of gardens and landscapes is associated with a tradition of
sightseeing visits to the numerous country houses, gardens and unspoilt rural
and coastal areas. There are seven national parks, two forest parks, some 30
designated ‘areas of outstanding natural beauty’, about 140 country parks ap¬
proved by the Countryside Commission, 550 ‘outstanding conservation areas’,
620 km (385 miles) of designated heritage coastline and 1,550 historic buildings
and gardens listed by the English Tourist Board. Newer developments include
the opening of safari and wildlife parks and of ‘theme’ parks devoted, for
example, to maritime history, which offer a diversity of entertainments as well.
Many regions and towns have associations with the great English writers and
artists, such as William Shakespeare, William Wordsworth, Arnold Bennett,
Charles Dickens, the Bronte sisters, Thomas Hardy, Thomas Gainsborough
and John Constable.
Wales is a country of hills and mountains with extensive tracts of high plateau
and shorter stretches of mountain ranges deeply dissected by river valleys. The
highest mountains are in Snowdonia in the north-west; the highest peak is
Snowdon (1,085 metres, 3,560 feet). The lower-lying ground is largely confined
to the relatively narrow coastal belt and the lower parts of the river valleys. The
main areas of settlement are in the southern valleys and coastal areas where
two-thirds of the population live. The chief urban centres are Cardiff, Swansea
and Newport. Wales is a principality; Prince Charles, the heir to the throne, was
invested by the Queen with the title of Prince of Wales at Caernarfon Castle in
1969 when he was 20.
The country has its own Welsh language, spoken (according to the 1981
census) by 19 per cent of the population, chiefly in the rural north and west. The
Welsh name of the country is Cymru. Measures have been adopted since the
1960s to revive the use of the language, which is of Celtic origin, and closely
resembles Breton, spoken in Brittany in France. They include recognising the
equal validity of Welsh with English in law courts, the encouragement of
bilingual education in schools, and the extended use of Welsh for official pur¬
poses and in broadcasting. Welsh-language television programmes are trans¬
mitted in Wales by the fourth television channel, as well as by the BBC.
There is no established church in Wales, the Anglican church having been
disestablished in 1920 following decades of pressure from adherents of the more
evangelical Methodist and Baptist persuasions. Methodism in particular had
spread rapidly in Wales in the eighteenth century, assuming the nature of a
popular movement among Welsh speakers and finding strong support later in
industrial communities.
The country returns 38 members of Parliament (see also p 37) and there are
special arrangements for the discussion of Welsh affairs. For the last 60 years
the industrial communities of Wales have always supported the Labour Party in
elections, ensuring a Labour majority in Wales. In the 1983 election 20 Labour,
14 Conservative, 2 Plaid Cymru (Welsh Nationalist) and 2 Liberal members were
returned. Substantial administrative autonomy is centred on the Secretary of
State for Wales, who is a member of the Cabinet, and has wide-ranging responsi¬
bilities relating to the economy, welfare services and the provision of amenities.
The headquarters of the administration is the Welsh Office in Cardiff, which
LAND AND PEOPLE
11
also has an office in London. In 1979 proposals for the establishment of an
elected Welsh assembly in Cardiff to take over policymaking and executive
powers from central government were rejected in a referendum held in Wales.
Local government is exercised through a system of elected authorities similar to
that in England, and the legal system is identical with the English one.
The Economy The south Wales coalfield was developed during the latter part of the industrial
revolution in the second half of the nineteenth century, creating populous
urban centres which drew labour from the rural areas and from England and
Ireland. However, the economy was narrowly based, mainly on coal, iron, steel
and tinplate, and contracted sharply during the 1920s and 1930s, resulting in
severe employment problems and substantial emigration. Since 1945 the Gov¬
ernment’s regional policies have introduced a diverse spread of manufacturing
firms, including, most recently, Japanese and American electronics concerns,
to help offset the contraction in the traditional basic industries. (Wales is
developing as an important centre for electronics in Britain.) In addition, there
is a range of modern light engineering concerns as well as chemical and plastics
plants, while the Royal Mint was transferred to Llantrisant from London in 1968.
South Wales remains the principal industrial area but new manufacturing
firms have also been introduced on the smaller coalfield in north-east Wales,
around Wrexham and Deeside, again to offset the decline in the older, basic
industries which previously dominated the area. Light industry has also been
attracted to the towns in the rural areas in mid- and north Wales and an impor¬
tant refinery complex has developed around Milford Haven, which is one of
Britain’s major oil ports.
Agriculture occupies about 80 per cent of the land area, the main activities
being sheep and cattle rearing in the hill regions and dairy farming in the low¬
lands. Wales accounts for about 11 per cent of forest area in Britain and over 20
per cent of Forestry Commission timber production.
Wales produces about 7 • 5 per cent of Britain’s coal, including all of its
anthracite, and has the capacity to produce 9 per cent of its electricity; the
biggest pumped storage power station in Europe, at Dinorwig, came into opera¬
tion in 1983. There are nuclear power stations at Wylfa and Trawsfynydd. Wales
exports about a third of its water supply to England.
Communications in the south have been greatly improved, with the building
of the Severn Bridge and the completion of motorway and high-speed rail links
with England.
There has been expansion in financial and professional services and in the
tourism and catering trades. With its north coast resorts, and the attractions of
three national parks (Snowdonia, the Brecon Beacons and the Pembrokeshire
Coast), Wales accounts for 15 per cent of domestic tourism.
Cultural and There is much literary, musical and dramatic activity in Wales and there is a
Social Life National Library and National Museum. Welsh literature is one of the oldest in
Europe. The country is well known for its choral singing and the Welsh National
Opera has achieved an international reputation. The special festivals of Wales,
known as eisteddfodau, encourage Welsh literature and music. The greatest of
these is the Royal National Eisteddfod of Wales, held annually, entirely in
Welsh, and consisting of competitions in music, singing, prose and poetry. The
small town of Llangollen has extended its eisteddfod to include artists from all
over the world in the annual International Eisteddfod. Famous modern Welsh
artists have included the opera singer Sir Geraint Evans and the poet Dylan
Thomas. The politicians David Lloyd George (former Prime Minister) and
Aneurin Bevan were noted orators in a strong Welsh tradition. An active local
press includes a number of Welsh language publications. Great interest is
12
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
aroused by the annual rugby football competition in which sides representing
Wales, England, Scotland, Ireland and France take part.
Health services are provided mainly under the National Health Service,
administered by the Welsh Office, while personal social services, and education
(except at university level), are provided mainly through the local authorities.
Educational provision is similar to that in England except for the use of Welsh in
some schools. The collegiate University of Wales, founded in 1893, comprises
seven member institutions.
SCOTLAND Scotland may be divided broadly into three areas: the sparsely populated
highlands and islands in the north, accounting for just over half the total area of
the country: the central lowlands, containing three-quarters of the population
and most of the industrial centres and cultivated farmland: and the southern
uplands, containing a number of hill ranges, which border on England. The
highest mountains are the Grampians in the central highlands, with Ben Nevis
(1,342 metres, 4,406 feet) the highest peak. The chief urban centres are the
capital Edinburgh, the main industrial centre Glasgow, Aberdeen and Dundee.
The period from 1750 onwards has been one of considerable and continuous
emigration of Scots to England and overseas. The rate slowed markedly in the
1970s as the offshore oil and gas industries developed and there was inward
migration to the north-east of Scotland. The large outflow of people from Strath¬
clyde has continued, however, though at a lower level than before. In the mid¬
nineteenth century, as Scotland industrialised rapidly, there was large-scale
immigration from Ireland, which led to the establishment of sizeable Roman
Catholic communities.
The period from 1750 until the beginning of the twentieth century was also
one of stability and economic progress and of remarkable achievements in
many fields. Among the famous men to emerge were David Hume, Robert
Burns, Sir Walter Scott, Adam Smith, Robert Adam, James Watt, John
MacAdam, Lord Kelvin and James Clerk Maxwell.
The Church of Scotland, which became the established church in 1690, has
complete freedom in all matters of doctrine, order and discipline. It is a Protes¬
tant church which is Presbyterian in form, that is, governed by a hierarchy of
church courts, each of which includes laymen.
Government There are special arrangements for the conduct of Scottish affairs within the
British system of government and separate Acts of Parliament are passed for
Scotland where appropriate. In the 1983 general election the 72 Scottish seats in
the House of Commons were apportioned as follows: 41 Labour, 21 Conservative,
5 Liberal, 3 Social Democrat, and 2 Scottish National (see also p 37). Since 1959
Scotland, like Wales, has had a majority of Labour members of Parliament.
Administrative tasks relating to a wide range of economic and social functions
are the responsibility of the Secretary of State for Scotland, a member of the
Cabinet, working through the Scottish Office, with its administrative headquar¬
ters in Edinburgh, and an office in London. A proposal for an elected assembly
for Scotland, on which a referendum was held in 1979, failed to gain the support
of the required 40 per cent of the electorate, even though a majority of those
voting gave it their approval.
Local government generally operates on a two-tier basis broadly similar to
that in England and Wales but established by separate legislation.
The principles and procedures of the Scottish legal system (particularly in
civil law) differ in many respects from those of England and Wales, stemming
from the adoption of elements of other European legal systems, based on
Roman law, during the sixteenth century.
LAND AND PEOPLE
13
The Economy In the first half of the twentieth century Scotland experienced the same
pressure on its chief industries as did the north of England and Wales, but there
has been considerable transition in the economy since 1945.
The most important development has been the expansion of offshore-related
industries following the discovery of oil and gas under the North Sea. Some
85,000 to 100,000jobs have arisen directly or indirectly as a result of North Sea
activities. While some traditional industries (coal, steel, shipbuilding, textiles)
have been in decline for a number of decades, oil-related expansion has helped
other traditional industries such as engineering, and has combined with growth
in newer industries, government regional aid, and a high level of investment by
overseas companies (especially from the United States), to produce new areas of
growth. The north and north-east of Scotland have benefited most from the
offshore developments, with Aberdeen as the administrative centre.
Prominent among other newer industries is electronic engineering which has
developed greatly in the industrial centres of the Strathclyde, Lothian and
Tayside regions. Scotland is now an important electronics and high technology
centre. Employment has also grown in chemicals, especially petrochemicals,
the food and drink industries and light engineering. The five new towns (East
Kilbride, Glenrothes, Livingston, Irvine and Cumbernauld) have been notable
growth areas.
The traditional Scottish manufactures remain important. They include
shipbuilding, textiles (high quality tweeds, Harris tweed being especially well
known, woollens and knitwear) and whisky distilling.
Scotland has one-third of Britain’s total agricultural land, but 70 per cent of it
consists of hill grazing for cattle and sheep. About 10 per cent of the agricultural
area is used for crops, and 70 per cent of this is under barley. Scotland accounts
for nearly half of Britain’s forest area and for 40 per cent of public sector timber
production. Fishing remains an important activity: more than 65 per cent of
total landings of fish in Britain are made by Scottish vessels.
Despite the advent of oil, Scotland remains heavily dependent on electricity
and gas. Nuclear and hydro-electric generation supply a higher proportion of
energy than in any other part of Britain. Large supplies of unpolluted water form
a major resource.
Communications, both domestic and international, have improved in many
central and coastal areas, particularly in the north and north-east, owing to the
stimulus of the offshore oil industry and road and bridge-building programmes.
The offshore oil industry has also encouraged expansion in financial and busi¬
ness services which have been traditionally strong in Scotland. Tourism is of
major importance and accounts for 11 per cent of domestic tourism in Britain.
Scotland’s cultural and historic associations, its varied scenic beauty, and the
opportunities for sport and recreation are particular attractions. Scotland is the
home of golf and courses at St Andrews, Gleneagles, Turnberry and Prestwick
are internationally renowned. Skiing is growing in importance, with centres at
Aviemore, Glenshee, Glencoe and the Lecht.
Cultural and A vigorous cultural life in Scotland has as its highlight the annual Edinburgh
Social Life International Festival. The Scottish Arts Council (a committee of the Arts
Council of Great Britain with a large degree of autonomy) supports a wide range
of activities. Notable performing arts bodies are the Scottish National
Orchestra, Scottish Opera, Scottish Ballet, Scottish Chamber Orchestra, Scot¬
tish Baroque Ensemble and the BBC Scottish Symphony Orchestra. Scotland
possesses excellent collections of the fine and applied arts, notably in the
National Galleries of Scotland, the Royal Scottish Museum and the National
Museum of Antiquities in Edinburgh, and the City of Glasgow Museum and Art
Galleries.
14
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
NORTHERN
IRELAND
Government:
Background to
Civil
Disturbances
A language of ancient Celtic origin, Scots Gaelic, is spoken by some 80,000
people mainly in the islands and north-west of Scotland. It is the indigenous
language, with its own literary background. Scottish people in the lowlands
have for centuries spoken Scots (or Lallans), a derivative of the Northumbrian
dialect of Old English, which has its own recognised literary tradition and has
seen a revival in recent times.
An active press includes two daily newspapers based in Edinburgh and
Glasgow which have a circulation outside Scotland. There are ten other dailies
and three Sunday newspapers. Articles in some papers are printed in Gaelic.
Television programmes are produced by BBC (Scotland) and by three indepen¬
dent companies, covering the highland, lowland and border regions. BBC Radio
Scotland covers most of the population and there are five ‘community’ services
in the highlands and islands, two of them mainly in Gaelic, and two in the
borders. Independent radio stations provide services for Edinburgh, Glasgow,
Dundee/Perth, Aberdeen, Ayr and Inverness.
As in the rest of Britain the National Health Service, and local authority social
services, education and housing programmes provide for the welfare of the
community.
Local authorities are responsible for the provision of most education, except
at university level. Secondary education in Scotland is almost completely
organised on comprehensive lines. Independent bodies administer vocational
further education institutions and colleges of education. There are eight
universities, of which four (St Andrews, Glasgow, Aberdeen and Edinburgh)
were established in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, while the other four
have been established since 1964. The educational tradition has been particu¬
larly strong in Scotland, helping many Scots to positions of eminence in the arts
and sciences.
Over 50 per cent of Scotland’s housing has been built since 1945, only
Northern Ireland having a larger percentage. Scotland has a high proportion of
housing rented from public authorities (over 50 per cent compared with a
national average of just over 30 per cent).
Northern Ireland is at its nearest point only 21 km (13 miles) from Scotland. It has
a 412-km (256-mile) border in the south and west with the Irish Republic. At its
centre lies Lough Neagh, Britain’s largest freshwater lake (381 square km, 147
square miles). Many of the principal towns lie in valleys leading from the Lough,
including the capital, Belfast, which stands at the mouth of the river Lagan. The
Mourne Mountains rising sharply in the south-east include Slieve Donard,
Northern Ireland’s highest peak (852 metres, 2,796 feet).
Just under two-thirds of Northern Ireland’s population are descendants of
Scots or English settlers who crossed to north-eastern Ireland mainly in the
seventeenth century; most belong to the Protestant faith, and have a traditional
loyalty to the maintenance of the union with Great Britain. The remainder, over
a third, are Irish in origin, mainly Roman Catholic and, in varying degrees,
nationalist in political opinion, favouring union with the Irish Republic. Deeply
divided for generations, both sides of the community have tended to see them¬
selves as besieged minorities: Protestants as a minority in the whole of Ireland,
Roman Catholics as a minority within Northern Ireland.
From 1921 Northern Ireland had its own Parliament in which the mainly Protes¬
tant ‘Unionists’ formed the Government after successive elections. Roman
Catholics in the community resented this continuing domination, and their
exclusion from political office was accompanied by discrimination in such
matters as housing, employment and local voting rights. Although substantial
advances for the whole population were achieved in social welfare and
LAND AND PEOPLE
15
Direct Rule
and Political
Initiatives
economic development, in some respects provision for the Roman Catholics
lagged behind that for the Protestants, and during the late 1960s an active and
articulate civil rights movement emerged.
The sectarian disturbances which followed and the introduction of the Army
in 1969 in a peace-keeping role were exploited by extremists from both sections
of the community, notably the Provisional Irish Republican Army (which broke
away from the Official IRA in 1970) claiming to protect the Roman Catholic
minority. Subsequently, sectarian divisions have been exacerbated by the
actions of terrorists from both sides.
The demands of the civil rights movement were met by a series of reforms.
Among the most important were measures to ensure the proper representation
of minorities in local government and fairer housing allocations in the public
sector.
More recent measures include the outlawing of religious and political dis¬
crimination in employment, and the establishment of an independent police
complaints board. Commissioners have been appointed to look into complaints
of maladministration, including discrimination, by central or local govern¬
ment; actions by official bodies have been made illegal if they discriminate on
religious or political grounds; a human rights commission has been set up; and
a law against sex discrimination has been implemented. While terrorism
continues, certain emergency powers are in force (see p 98), but there has been
much concern to reconcile them as far as possible with respect for individual
liberties; the measures are temporary, need regular renewal by Parliament and
are subject to independent review. Most traditional rights, including the
freedom of the communications media and the right to prosecute the security
forces if they exceed their authority, remain in force. Northern Ireland’s legal
system, and the safeguards it enshrines, is broadly similar to that in England
and Wales.
The activities of many groups and individuals have indicated a wish in both
parts of the community to overcome intimidation by armed terrorists and to
resolve sectarian conflict by peaceful means, and, although terrorism
continues, the level of violence is much lower than some years ago. The police
take the primary role of maintaining order; the Army’s task is one of assisting
the civil authorities, and the number of soldiers on service has been considera¬
bly reduced. Security policy rests on the principle of fair and effective enforce¬
ment of the law by bringing terrorists to justice through the courts. They are
tried for criminal offences and not for political beliefs. At the heart of the policy is
a determination to develop the effectiveness of the police to the point where
military involvement in the maintenance of law and order is no longer needed.
When, despite the Northern Ireland Government’s substantial reform
programme, the intefcommunal violence continued, the United Kingdom Gov¬
ernment concluded that the best hope of ending terrorism and achieving political
progress would be for the United Kingdom Parliament and Government to take
over the responsibilities for law and order in Northern Ireland. The Northern
IrelandGovernmentfeltunabletoacceptthisandresigned.andin 1972aperiodof
‘direct rule’ began, with a United Kingdom Cabinet minister responsible for
functions previously exercised by the Northern Ireland Government and for the
Northern Ireland departments (see p 54).
Several major but unsuccessful initiatives towards stable and effective devol¬
ved government supported by both sides of the community have since been
made. A new constitution which devolved powers to an elected legislative
assembly, and a ‘power-sharing’ executive representing all sections of the
community, encountered Protestant ‘Loyalist’ opposition culminating in a
general strike in 1974; in 1976 an elected constitutional convention failed to
16
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Economy
agree on a system of government that would command widespread acceptance;
in 1978 a planned framework for a form of devolution to consolidate common
ground among the political parties was rej ected; and in 1980 there was a political
conference and extensive discussions. In 1981 the appointment of a Northern
Ireland Council to advise the Secretary of State was proposed but the political
parties in Northern Ireland were not prepared to accept this.
In October 1982 elections took place to a new 78-member Assembly which
met for the first time in November (although not all of the members elected took
their seats). The Assembly provides an opportunity for elected representatives
to try to reach agreement on how a devolved government might be established
and, pending devolution, it has deliberative and consultative functions.
The Government’s policy continues to rest on the two fundamental principles
that, first, there will be no change in Northern Ireland’s status as part of the
United Kingdom without the consent of the majority of people of Northern
Ireland, and second, any form of devolved government must be acceptable to
both sides of the community.
The future of Northern Ireland is a matter for the United Kingdom Govern¬
ment and Parliament and the people of Northern Ireland, and the
principle of self-determination is enshrined in law. A 1973 ‘border poll’ showed
clearly that the majority of people in Northern Ireland wished to remain part of
the United Kingdom. At the same time, the Government attaches importance to
co-operation with the Irish Republic, particularly in security matters.
Northern Ireland returns 17 members to the United Kingdom Parliament.
Northern Ireland’s geographical position on the western edge of Europe, its lack
of many mineral or energy resources (both coal and oil have to be imported), and
the small size of the local market have all tended to favour the concentration of
industry and population on the eastern seaboard close to trading links with the
rest of the United Kingdom. Most of Northern Ireland’s trade is with, or through,
Great Britain. With certain exceptions, the parts of the region beyond the
immediate influence of the industrialised area around Belfast have stayed
mainly rural, with generally small and often scattered communities relying
mainly on farming.
Since the end of the second world war three dominant trends have been
apparent in the economy. First, employment in the traditionally important
industries (shipbuilding, linen and agriculture) has steadily declined. Second,
there has been growth in the numbers seeking work, reflecting the relatively
high rate of natural increase of the population, which is only partly offset by
migration. Third, in an effort to counterbalance these factors and to promote
growth, programmes within the broad framework of United Kingdom regional
policy have been carried out to develop infrastructures and attract investment
from within the country and from abroad. Despite the progress made many of
Northern Ireland’s economic problems were intensified from around the
mid-1970s, mainly as a result of the adverse effect of terrorism on attempts to
attract outside investors, and a depressed international economic climate.
Belfast has Britain’s largest shipyard; and other well-established industrial
activities include the manufacture of aircraft, textile machinery and a wide
range of engineering products, tobacco and clothing. There has also been exten¬
sive development in vehicle components, oil-well equipment, electronic
instruments, telecommunications equipment, carpets and synthetic rubber.
Agriculture (predominantly livestock and products) is still the most impor¬
tant industry, almost a tenth of civil employment (including the self-employed)
accounting for over three times the proportion in Britain as a whole.
The Government’s economic measures have helped to promote major
industrial development in Northern Ireland despite the effects of terrorism.
LAND AND PEOPLE
17
Cultural and
Social Life
However, the world recession has led to rising unemployment as in the rest of
the country; the Northern Ireland unemployment rate is persistently the
highest of any of the standard regions. To meet this special problem successive
governments have offered higher incentives than are available in the rest of the
country to encourage new investment both from within Britain and from
overseas, and assistance to mitigate high energy costs. Between 1945 and the
end of 1982 more than 300 industrial establishments were set up with govern¬
ment help; together they employed almost half the total manufacturing
workforce. Northern Ireland’s productivity and industrial relations records for
some years have been better than those in the country as a whole.
The modern diversification of the economy has helped to stimulate output,
productivity and incomes, and has assisted in narrowing the gap between living
standards in Northern Ireland and those in the rest of the United Kingdom.
Gross domestic product per person, which tends to be depressed in Northern
Ireland relative to the country as a whole as a result of higher unemployment,
lower activity rates and larger family sizes, has nonetheless risen from just
under two-thirds of the British average in 1963 to about four-fifths. Average
earnings are more than nine-tenths of the national average.
The principle underlying Northern Ireland’s financial relations with the rest
of the country is that it has parity, both of taxation and services, with England,
Scotland and Wales. To maintain social services at the level of those in Great
Britain, to meet the cost of security measures, and to compensate for the natural
disadvantages of geography and lack of resources, the United Kingdom Govern¬
ment’s subvention to Northern Ireland in 1982-83 was just under £1,200
million.
Despite the civil unrest and economic recession, for thousands of visitors
(700,000 in 1982), as well as for local people. Northern Ireland’s landscape and
natural features, its cultural traditions and festivals continue to offer special
attractions. For many North Americans the land from which their forebears
emigrated (a number of United States presidents have been descended from
Northern Ireland families) has a unique interest. The story of this contribution
to American life, the history of Northern Ireland, and aspects of its culture —
from the dialects and strong literary tradition (poets like Louis MacNeice and
Seamus Heaney have international reputations) to the songs and dances and
folk art — are recorded in the Ulster-American Folk Park, the Ulster Museum
and the Ulster Folk and Transport Museum respectively.
With its own Arts Council, Northern Ireland has orchestras, much theatre and
ballet and the restored Belfast Grand Opera House. The Queen’s Festival, one of
several annual events, is a major international occasion. The strong arts tradi¬
tion has produced such soloists as flautist James Galway and soprano Heather
Harper.
In day-to-day social life Northern Ireland is in many ways similar to the rest of
the United Kingdom. The National Health Service provides both hospital and
practitioner services, and health and personal social services correspond fairly
closely although the administrative framework is different. Education, too, is
much the same, from school to university level; emphasis on the comprehen¬
sive principle in secondary schools has, however, been very small. Housing and
the improvement of the urban environment present significant problems for the
authorities, notably in Belfast where a continuing rehabilitation programme is
being carried out, but planning and conservation arrangements are much like
those in the rest of the country.
Distinctive local programmes are broadcast and there is a local press;
national radio and television networks are received, however, and the national
press is sold widely. Sport plays an important role in the community, and many
world-class sportsmen and women have come from Northern Ireland.
18
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Physical Features
Britain constitutes the greater part of the British Isles, a geographical term for a
group of islands lying off the north-west coast of mainland Europe. The largest
of the islands is Great Britain (the mainlands of England, Wales and Scotland).
The next largest comprises Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic. Off the
southern coast of England is the Isle of Wight and off the extreme south-west are
the Isles of Scilly; off north Wales is Anglesey. Western Scotland is fringed by
small islands and to the north-east are the Orkneys and Shetlands. All these
have administrative ties with the mainland, but the Isle of Man in the Irish Sea
and the Channel Islands between Great Britain and France are largely self-
governing, and are not part of England, Wales, Scotland or Northern Ireland.
Britain’s area is some 244,100 square km (94,200 square miles), of which
nearly 99 per cent is land and the remainder inland water. This is about the
same size as the Federal Republic of Germany, New Zealand or Uganda, and
half the size of France. It is just under 1,000 km (some 600 miles) from the south
coast to the extreme north of Scotland and just under 500 km (some 300 miles)
across in the widest part. There are numerous bays and inlets and no place in
Britain is as much as 120 km (75 miles) from tidal water. The prime meridian of
0° passes through the old observatory at Greenwich (London).
The seas surrounding the British Isles are shallow, usually less than 90
metres (50 fathoms or 300 feet), because the islands lie on the continental shelf.
To the north-west along the edge of the shelf the sea floor plunges abruptly from
180 metres (some 600 feet) to 900 metres (about 3,000 feet). The shallow waters
are important because they provide breeding grounds for fish. The warming
effect on the air of the North Atlantic current is magnified as its water spreads
across the shelf.
Britain has a generally mild and temperate climate. The prevailing winds are
south-westerly and the weather from day to day is mainly influenced by
depressions moving eastwards across the Atlantic. The weather is subject to
frequent changes but to few extremes of temperature. It is rarely above 32°C
(90°F) or below - 100C(14°F). Near sea level in the west the mean annual tem¬
perature ranges from 8°C (46°F) in the Hebrides to 11 °C (52°F) in the extreme
south-west of England; latitude for latitude it is slightly lower in the east. The
mean monthly temperature in the extreme north, at Lerwick (Shetland), ranges
from 3°C (37 °F) during the winter (December, January and February) to 12°C
(54°F) during the summer (June, July and August); the corresponding figures
for the Isle of Wight, in the extreme south, are 5°C (41 °F) and 16°C (61 °F). The
annual rainfall is about 1,100 millimetres (over 40 inches), the mountainous
areas of the west and north having far more rain than the lowlands of the south
and east. Rain is fairly well distributed throughout the year, but, on average,
March to June are the driest months and September to January the wettest. The
distribution of sunshine shows a general decrease from south to north, a
decrease from the coast inland, and a decrease with altitude. During May, June
and July (the months of longest daylight) the mean daily duration of sunshine
varies from five hours in northern Scotland to eight hours in the Isle of Wight;
during the months of shortest daylight (November, December and January)
sunshine is at a minimum, with an average of half an hour a day in northern
Scotland and two hours a day on the south coast of England.
The Social Framework
The way of life of the people of Britain has been changing rapidly in the twen¬
tieth century. As in many other countries underlying causes include two major
wars, a lower birth rate, longer expectation of life, a higher divorce rate,
widening educational opportunities, technical progress, and a better standard
of living.
LAND AND PEOPLE
19
POPULATION
Birth Rates
Mortality
This section deals with the social framework in very broad and informal terms
as a background to the information given in later chapters.
With nearly 56 million people, Britain ranks about fourteenth in the world in
terms of population. The population in April 1981 was 55,629,000 compared
with 38 -2 million in 1901, about 6 -5 million at the end of the seventeenth
century and some 2 million at the end of the eleventh century. Early figures are
based on contemporary estimates, but from the beginning of the nineteenth
century relatively plentiful and reliable information is available. Most of it
comes from two main sources: the regular flow of statistical information based
on compulsory registration of births, marriages and deaths, and the censuses
taken regularly every ten years since 1801 (because of war there was no census in
1941). The most recent was in April 1981. Statistical information about the popu¬
lation in Britain is probably more complete and detailed than in any other
country. In the period 1975-78 for the first years since records began (other
than in war) the population fell slightly, reflecting a temporary decline in the
birth rate. The upward trend was resumed in 1979. Projections for the future
suggest that population growth will take place at a much slower rate than was
expected a few years ago. Britain’s total population is expected, on 1979 esti¬
mates, to be 56 • 4 million in 1986,58 • 4 million in 2001 and 59 • 6 million in 2016.
In 1982 there were 692,000 live births (in England, Scotland and Wales, 11,000
fewer than in 1981). The total period fertility rate (an indication of the average
size of family) has, in general, been declining and in 1982 was 1.75; which is
below the level of 2.1 required for the replacement of the population.
Several factors may have contributed to the relatively low birth rate. Con¬
traception has become more widespread and effective, making it easier to plan
families, and voluntary sterilisation of men and women has also become more
common. An appreciable proportion of pregnancies (about 40 per cent of those
conceived outside marriage and 8 per cent of those conceived within marriage)
are ended by legal abortion.
The postponement of conception within marriage coupled with a trend to¬
wards later marriage has led to an increase, to 25, in the average age at which
women have their first child in marriage. Another feature is the current
preference for smaller families, especially two-children families, than in the
past, which has led to a significant decline in the proportion of families with four
or more children.
At birth the expectation of life for a man is about 70 years and for a woman 76
years compared with 49 years for men and 52 years for women in 1901. The
improving health of the population has mainly had the effect of increasing
young people’s chances of reaching the older age groups. Life expectancy in the
older age groups has increased relatively little.
The general death rate has remained about the same for the past 50 years, at
about 12 per 1,000 population, reflecting the gradual ageing of the population
since there has been a considerable decline in mortality at most ages, particu¬
larly among children and young adults. The infant mortality rate (deaths of
infants under one year old per 1,000 live births) was 11-1 in 1981; neonatal
mortality (deaths of infants under four weeks old per 1,000 live births) was 6 • 7
in 1981; and maternal mortality is about 0 • 1 per 1,000 live births.
The causes of the decline in mortality include better nutrition, rising stand¬
ards of living, the advance of medical science, the growth of medical facilities,
improved health measures, better working conditions, education in personal
hygiene, and the smaller size of families. Major changes since 1951 in the causes
Marriage and
Divorce
Age and Sex
Structure
Distribution
of Population
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
of death have included the virtual disappearance of deaths resulting from infec¬
tious diseases (notably tuberculosis) and an increase in the proportion of deaths
caused by circulatory diseases (including heart attacks and strokes) and by
cancer.
During the last decade there has been a marked change in the pattern of mar¬
riage. In 1972 there were 480,300 marriages in Britain, but by 1981 the number
had declined to 397,800. The proportion of the population of England and
Wales who were or had been married has remained at around 63 per cent. Of the
population aged 16 or over in England and Wales in 1981, 64 per cent were
married, 24 per cent single, 9 per cent widowed and 4 per cent divorced. The
trend of the 1960s towards earlier marriage was reversed at the beginning of the
1970s, since when there has been a slow increase in the average age for first
marriages, which in England and Wales is now just over 25 for men and 23 for
women. Remarriages (of one or both parties) account for about one-third of all
marriages in Great Britain, compared with 20 per cent in 1971 and 15 per cent in
1961, and about 11 per cent of all marriages are remarriages where both partners
had been divorced.
The divorce rate has been increasing steadily and in 1981 about 12 decrees of
divorce were made absolute for every 1,000 married couples in England and
Wales, compared with two in 1961. The rates are much lower in Scotland and
Northern Ireland. In 1981 about 155,600 divorceswere granted in GreatBritain;
the proportion granted to wives was about 70 per cent. The average age of
people at the time of divorce in England and Wales has been falling and is now
about 38 for men and 35 for women.
Another feature, common to many other Western European countries, has
been a considerable increase in cohabitation. Nearly 20 per cent of women in
Great Britain marrying in the late 1970s where the marriage was the first for
both parties had lived with their husbands before marriage (compared with 6
per cent in the early 1970s) and about 11 per cent ofwomen not currently married
were cohabiting during 1980 and 1981. Cohabitation occurs more frequently for
separated or divorced women than for single women. There is some evidence of
a growing number of stable non-married relationships and in the proportion of
illegitimate births (which now account for over 13 per cent of live births in
Britain compared with 6 per cent in 1961) registered by both parents.
Although the total population has remained relatively stable in the last decade,
there have been noticeable changes in the age and sex structure, including a
decline in the proportion of young people under 16 and an increase in the propor¬
tion of elderly people, especially those aged 85 and over. The estimated age
distribution of the British population in mid-1981 was roughly as follows: under
16 years, about 22 per cent; 16-64, 63 per cent; and 65 and over, 15 per cent.
Some 18 per cent of the population were over the normal retirement ages (65 for
men and 60 for women), compared with 15 per cent in 1961.
In April 1981 there were 28 • 6 million females and 27 million males in Britain,
representing a ratio of nearly 106 females to every 100 males. There are about 6
per cent more male than female births every year. Because of the higher morta¬
lity of men at all ages, however, there is a turning point, at about 50 years of age,
at which the number of women exceeds the number of men. This imbalance
increases with age so that there is a preponderance of women among the
elderly.
The population density is about 231 per square km which is relatively high in
comparison with most other countries. England is the most densely populated
with 358 people per square km (with Greater London having a density of 4,238
LAND AND PEOPLE
21
Migration
people per square km), and Scotland the least densely populated with 66
people per square km, while Wales and Northern Ireland have 135 and 111 people
per square km respectively.
Table 2 gives figures for some of Britain’s largest urban areas. About half the
population lives in a belt across England, with south Lancashire and West
Yorkshire at one end, the London area at the other, and the industrialised mid¬
lands at its centre. Other areas with large populations are: the central lowlands
of Scotland: north-east England from north of the river Tyne down to the river
Tees; south-east Wales; the Bristol area; and the English Channel coast from
Poole, in Dorset, eastwards. Less densely populated areas are the eastern
fringes of England between the Wash and the Thames estuary, and the far
south-west. The eight major metropolitan areas which have been denoted as
‘conurbations’ in successive population censuses accommodate a third of Great
Britain’s people while comprising less than 3 per cent of the total land area.
They are: Greater London, Central Clydeside, Greater Manchester, Merseyside,
South Yorkshire, Tyne and Wear, the West Midlands and West Yorkshire. Most
of the mountainous parts, including much of Scotland, Wales and Northern
Ireland and the central Pennines, are very sparsely populated.
Since the nineteenth century there has been a general trend, especially in
London, for people to move away from the congested urban centres into
suburbs. The 1981 census recorded that only in the remoter rural areas has the
rate of population growth been higher in the 1970s than in the 1960s. There has
also been a geographical redistribution of the population from Scotland and the
northern regions of England to East Anglia, the South West and the East Mid¬
lands. Another feature has been an increase in the rate of retirement migration,
the main recipient areas (where in some towns the elderly can form over one-
third of the population) being the south coast of England and East Anglia.
Table 2: Size and Population of the Main Urban Districts, Mid-1982
Area
square square
km miles
Population
thousands
Greater London
Birmingham
Glasgow
Leeds
Sheffield
Liverpool
Bradford
Manchester
Edinburgh
Bristol
Belfast
Coventry
Cardiff
1,580
264
198
562
368
113
370
116
261
110
140
97
120
609-7
102-0
76-3
217-0
141
43-
142-
44.
100
42-
54-0
37-3
46-3
6,765 1
1,017-3
761-0
716-1
545-8
510
464
458
444
399
324
317
279-8
Traditionally Britain has had a net outflow of people to the rest of the world, but
in 1979 for the first time for many years there was a small net inflow of some
6,000 people.1 Subsequently the traditional pattern has been restored, with a
1 International migration statistics exclude movements to and from the Irish Republic.
22
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Nationality
Immigration
Control
net outflow of34,000people in 1982. Between 1973 and 1982 some 2 • 27 million
people left Britain to live abroad and nearly 1 • 9 million came from overseas to
live in Britain, so that net emigration reduced the population by about 410,000.
Of the 259,000 emigrants in 1982, 29 per cent left for Australia, Canada or New
Zealand, 15 per cent for other Commonwealth countries, 14 per cent for other
European Community countries and 11 per cent for the United States. Of the
225,000 immigrants, 11 per cent came from Australia, Canada or New Zealand,
24 per cent from other Commonwealth countries and 24 per cent from other
European Community countries. A significant number of those leaving or
entering Britain were returning migrants.
Nationality legislation is embodied in the British Nationality Act 1981 which took
effect from 1 January 1983. Under this citizenship of the United Kingdom and
Colonies was replaced by three citizenships: British Citizenship for people
closely connected with Britain, the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man; British
Dependent Territories Citizenship for people connected with the dependencies;
and British Overseas Citizenship for those citizens who did not acquire either of
the other citizenships. With one small exception, citizens of the United
Kingdom and Colonies who had a right of abode in Britain when the Act came
into force acquired British Citizenship.
British Citizenship is acquired automatically at birth by a child born in
Britain if his or her father or mother is a British citizen or is settled in Britain. A
child adopted in Britain by a British citizen is a British citizen. A child born
abroad to a British citizen born, adopted, naturalised or registered in Britain is a
British citizen by descent. The Act safeguards the citizenship of a child born
abroad to a British citizen in Crown service, certain related services, or in
service under a European Community institution. British citizenship may also
be acquired by registration by certain children born in Britain who do not auto¬
matically acquire such citizenship at birth or born abroad to a parent who is a
citizen by descent; by British Dependent Territories citizens, British overseas
citizens, British subjects under the Act (three very limited categories) and
British protected persons after five years’ residence in Britain (except for people
from Gibraltar who may be registered without residence); and by naturalisation
for Commonwealth citizens, citizens of the Irish Republic, and foreign nation¬
als. The British Nationality (Falklands Islands) Act 1983 conferred British
citizenship (with effect from 1 January 1983) on those Falkland Islanders who
did not acquire it under the 1981 Act. For naturalisation, which is at the Home
Secretary’s discretion, five years’ residence, good character and sufficient
knowledge of English, Welsh or Scottish Gaelic are required except for the
spouse of a British citizen who needs only three years’ residence and no lan¬
guage qualification. Most existing entitlements to registration (including those
for Commonwealth citizens and Irish citizens settled in Britain since before
1973, and in certain circumstances that for women married to citizens of the
United Kingdom and Colonies before 1983) are preserved for five years from 1
January 1983. In 1982, 76,000 people acquired citizenship by naturalisation
and registration in Britain.
Immigration into Britain is controlled by the Immigration Act 1971 (as amended
by the British Nationality Act 1981). This Act confers the right of abode (and
exemption from control) on British citizens and on certain Commonwealth citi¬
zens who had the right of abode before 1 January 1983 when the British Nation¬
ality Act 1981 came into force. Those who do not have this right require
permission to enter and remain in Britain, which is given in accordance with
rules made under the Immigration Act. These immigration rules allow for
admission to stay in various capacities which may be of a temporary nature.
LAND AND PEOPLE
23
THE
ECONOMIC
AND SOCIAL
PATTERN
Housing and
the
Environment
such as visitors and students, or with a view to eventual settlement, such as
work-permit holders, business people and persons of independent means.
A visa or other form of entry clearance may be needed for entry and those
wishing to come to Britain for employment must hold work permits, although
these permits are not required for certain types of employment. Additionally,
Commonwealth citizens who have a grandparent born in Britain and European
Community nationals do not need work permits. Persons who have been given
permission to enter or remain in Britain may normally bring their dependants,
provided the requirements of the immigration rules are met.
The majority of people (some 97 per cent) live in private households (in families
or on their own). The remainder include residents in hotels, and people in the
armed services and in educational or other institutions. In 1981 eight out of ten
people lived in a unit headed by a married couple.
Among many changes in household and family structure is the continuing
fall in the average size of households in Great Britain from over four persons in
1911 to 3 • 1 in 1961 and 2 • 7 in 1981. The fall reflects a greater proportion of people
living on their own (8 per cent) or in one-parent families, the increasing number
of elderly people (more of whom are living alone), and the preferences of parents
for smaller families. The trend towards smaller households (22 per cent of
households consist of one person) is expected to continue and the number of
one-person households is forecast to increase from 4 • 4 million in 1979 to about
6 million by 1991, of which 3 • 6 million would be pensioner households.
Four British households out of five live in houses rather than flats and over half
of all households own or are buying their own homes. Terraced housing, much
of it built in the early years of the present century, provides accommodation for
about 30 per cent of all households. In inner urban areas slum clearance and
redevelopment have been major features of post-1945 public housing
programmes, but the modernisation and conversion of sub-standard housing
have increasingly been encouraged as alternatives to clearing and rebuilding.
Emphasis in new building is on low-rise, high-density designs, often incorporat¬
ing gardens or patios. Nearly half of Britain’s housing stock has been built since
1945.
The main housing development of the past 100 years, however, has been
suburban. Many families now live in houses grouped in small terraces, or semi¬
detached or detached, usually of two storeys with gardens, and providing two
main ground-floor living rooms, a kitchen, from two to four bedrooms, a
bathroom, and one or two lavatories. Originally many houses were located in
‘ribbon development’ along main roads, but in recent years housing estates
have nearly always been sited away from main roads.
Housing standards are continually improving; some 98 per cent of house¬
holds in Great Britain have exclusive use of a bath or shower, and a similiar
proportion sole use of an inside lavatory (high percentages by international
standards) while 59 per cent have central heating.
An important influence on the planning of housing and services has been the
growth of car ownership; about 60 per cent of households have the use of at least
one car (or van), including 15 per cent with the use of two or more. Greater access
to motorised transport and the construction of a network of modern trunk roads
and motorways have resulted in a considerable increase in personal mobility
and changed leisure patterns, as well as changes in the design of housing and
shopping areas. Most detached or semi-detached houses in new suburban
estates have garages, and out-of-town shopping centres, usually including large
supermarkets, are often specially planned for the motorist and offer an alterna¬
tive to shopping in the centres of older towns.
24
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Living
Standards
The growth in car ownership has brought very great benefits but also a
number of problems, notably, in many towns and cities, increased congestion,
noise and air pollution. Public transport, too, has been affected, and many ser¬
vices have been reduced or eliminated, especially in rural areas. The people
without access to a car include those among the poorer sections of the
community, or the elderly or infirm; mobility allowances help the disabled.
Restrictions on bus licensing have been relaxed in order to make it easier for
new services to develop, and car-sharing is encouraged for journeys such as
those to work.
There has been a steady reduction of the main atmospheric and fresh water
pollutants that have been of concern in the past, producing dramatic improve¬
ments in, for example, the quality of the air in cities and the conditions of major
rivers, although various forms of pollution remain a problem in some areas.
There is a high degree of concern for the natural and the urban environment, as
shown by the enormous growth in the past few decades in the number of organi¬
sations (especially voluntary societies) concerned with conservation.
Marked improvements in the standard of living have taken place during the
twentieth century, but generally at a slower rate than in some other major
industrialised countries. Real personal disposable income in 1982 amounted to
£82,000 million at 1975prices, 12.2 per cent higher than in 1976. The volume of
consumer spending, after allowing for inflation, remained unchanged through
most of 1981 and 1982, but in 1983 began to rise again. Long-term trends in the
pattern of expenditure show a substantial rise in expenditure on housing,
alcohol, motor vehicles, televisions, telephones, electrical and some other
durable goods, and entertainment, and in expenditure overseas. As real
incomes have risen, the share of expenditure on food has fallen. Unlike most
other countries, the share devoted to tobacco continues to decline; an increas¬
ing number of people have stopped smoking for health reasons.
The general level of nutrition remains high. Over the last 20 years there have
been substantial rises in the consumption of poultry, instant coffee, pork and
processed (including frozen) vegetables, while home consumption per person of
mutton and lamb, beef and veal, bread, potatoes, eggs, milk, butter, sugar, tea
and some other foods has fallen. However, another feature has been an increase
in the number of meals eaten away from home, either at work or in restaurants,
and a growth in the consumption of food from ‘take-away’ and ‘fast-food’ shops.
In addition, in the 1960s and 1970s the proportion of convenience foods eaten
grew as women increasingly went out to work and had less time to prepare
meals, and as the variety of prepared foods rose in line with the growth in
ownership of refrigerators and freezers. Other features have included the conti¬
nuing popularity of health foods and slimming products.
Alcohol consumption has risen substantially since the 1950s, although the
level is well below that of some other European Community countries, and
alcohol abuse has become a growing problem. Beer remains much the most
popular alcoholic drink, but consumption of wines and spirits has been growing
and many wine bars and continental-style cafes have opened in recent years. A
high proportion of beer is drunk in public houses (‘pubs’), which are a tradi¬
tional social centre for many people, but there is a tendency for more beer to be
drunk at home and in clubs; beer consumption has recently been falling. A
notable development has been the large increase in consumption of lager, now
estimated to account for about 30 per cent of the beer consumed.
Ownership of many durable goods has been increasing and some goods, such
as televisions, vacuum cleaners and refrigerators, are available in more than 90
per cent of households. Of durable goods shown in the diagram above, owner¬
ship of telephones, freezers and central heating systems is growing most
LAND AND PEOPLE
25
Women
Availability of Certain Durable Goods
Per cent of households with goods
 il
(full or partial)
rapidly; other durable goods growing in popularity include music centres and
other audio equipment, video recorders and home computers.
Alterations in the pattern of income distribution have included a fall in the
share of the top 10 per cent from 33 • 2 per cent of total pre-tax income in 1949 to
26 • 1 per cent in 1978-79, although successive falls have been mainly retained
in the top half of the distribution. Income before tax of the self-employed is more
unevenly distributed than total income, largely because of the very large
incomes of a small number of people, mainly professionals such as lawyers,
accountants and doctors. The combined effect of the tax system and the receipt
of benefits is to redistribute incomes on a more equal basis.
Wealth is much more unevenly distributed, with the top 1 per cent of the popu¬
lation aged 18 or over owning about 24 per cent of marketable wealth, the top 10
per cent having 59 per cent and the top 50 per cent having 95 per cent. The
inclusion of‘non-marketable’ rights in occupational and state pension schemes
reduces these shares substantially to around 13, 37 and 80 per cent respectively.
There has been little change in the distribution of marketable wealth, but the
trend for marketable wealth plus occupational and state pension rights shows a
fairly continuous movement towards greater equality after 1974, indicating the
growing significance of pension rights as part of total wealth.
Considerable changes have occurred in the twentieth century in the economic
and domestic lives of women, due, in part, to the removal of almost all sex dis¬
crimination in political and legal rights. At the heart of women’s changed role
has been the rise in the number of women, particularly married women, at
work. With the availability of effective methods of family planning there has
been a decline in family size. Women as a result are involved in child-bearing for
a much shorter time and this, together with a variety of other factors which have
26
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Equal
Opportunities
Ethnic and
National
Minorities
made housework less burdensome, has made it possible for women with even
young children to return to work.
Since the second world war the proportion of married women in the labour
force has grown to more than half of those under 45 and three-fifths of those
between 45 and 60. The proportion of the total labour force accounted for by
married women increased from 4 per cent in 1921 to just over 25 per cent in 1981,
and many families have come to rely on married women’s earnings as an
essential part of their income; British women comprise about two-fifths of the
labour force. There is still a significant difference between women’s and men’s
earnings but the equal pay legislation which came into force at the end of 1975
appears to have narrowed the gap.
Women’s average hourly earnings, exclusive of overtime (for full-time
employees), increased from just under two-thirds of those of men in 1970, to
nearly three-quarters in 1982. Nevertheless, women’s wages remain relatively
low because women tend to work in lowly paid sectors of the economy, and they
work less overtime than men.
These changes have been significant but, because tradition and prejudice can
still handicap women in their careers and personal lives, major legislation to
help to promote equality was passed in the 1970s.
Under the Equal Pay Act 1970 (and corresponding legislation in Northern
Ireland), women in Great Britain are entitled to equal pay with men when doing
work that is the same or broadly similar, or work which has been given an equal
value under a job evaluation scheme. It is intended to amend the legislation so
that equal pay may be claimed for work of equal value even when it has not been
subject to ajob evaluation. The Sex Discrimination Act 1975 makes discrimina¬
tion between men and women unlawful in employment, education, training
and the provision of housing, goods, facilities and services. Discriminatory
advertisements which breach the Act are also unlawful. (Northern Ireland has
similar legislation.) In most cases complaints of discrimination may be taken
before the county courts in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, or the sheriff
courts in Scotland; complaints concerning employment are dealt with by
industrial tribunals. The Equal Opportunities Commission was set up in 1975
(1976 in Northern Ireland under separate legislation) to enforce the Sex Dis¬
crimination Act and the Equal Pay Act. Its aims are to eliminate sex discrimina¬
tion and promote equal opportunities. The Commission advises people of their
rights under both Acts and may give financial or other assistance to help indi¬
viduals to conduct a case before a court or tribunal. It also has power to conduct
investigations and to issue notices requiring discriminatory practices to stop. In
addition, it keeps legislation under review and may submit proposals for
amending it to the ministers concerned.
Britain has a long history of accommodating minority groups and in the last two
hundred years or so a variety of people have settled in the country, some to avoid
political or religious persecution, others seeking a better way of life or an escape
from poverty.
The Irish have long made homes in Britain, and comprise the largest single
minority group. Many Jewish refugees started a new life in the country towards
the end of the nineteenth century and in the 1930s, and after 1945 large numbers
of other European refugees settled in Britain. The large communities from the
West Indies and South Asian sub-continent date from the 1950s and early 1960s.
There are also sizeable groups of Americans, Australians, Chinese and various
European communities such as Greek and Turkish Cypriots, Italians and
Spaniards. More recently Ugandan Asians and refugees from Indo-China have
settled in Britain.
LAND AND PEOPLE
27
Race Relations
Act
Commission for
Racial Equality
In 1981 the population of New Commonwealth1 and Pakistani ethnic origin
was estimated at 2 • 2 million (just over 4 per cent of the total population of Great
Britain) of whom over 40 per cent were born in Britain. Most of them share
aspirations that are broadly similar to those of the British community as a whole
and they enjoy full political and civic rights. Although the circumstances of
many members of the ethnic minority communities are less fortunate than
those of other groups (for example, they suffer disproportionately from unem¬
ployment and often live in poor housing in the older urban areas) there have
been important advances over the last 20 years in employment and housing
conditions, and many individuals have achieved distinction in their careers and
in public life.
The difficulties minorities face are being alleviated by continuous social
programmes, some of which benefit the whole community, while other projects
are directed towards meeting the minorities’ special needs. Although fewer
children than formerly go to school with no knowledge of English, there are still
many who have an insufficient grasp of the language. Language teaching is
recognised to be of prime importance and additional teachers are appointed to
schools with ethnic minorities. For adults, classes at or outside their place of
work are run by local authorities and voluntary organisations. Government
grants are available to authorities with substantial ethnic minority groups
towards the salaries of extra staff such as teachers, health visitors and
interpreters.
The welfare of ethnic minorities and good relations between minorities and
the local community are promoted by community relations councils and other
voluntary bodies. In recognition of the special problems and tensions that can
arise between the police and ethnic minorities, consultation between the police
and the community is seen as having particular importance. Policies for pro¬
moting equality of opportunity in a multi-racial society in which all citizens
receive equal respect are pursued against a background of legislation against
discrimination.
The Race Relations Act 1976 makes discrimination unlawful on grounds of
colour, race or ethnic or national origin in the provision of goods, facilities and
services, in employment, training and related matters, in education, in
housing and in advertising. It strengthened legislation passed in 1968 which, in
turn, widened the scope of the first race relations legislation enacted in 1965; it
also strengthened the criminal law on incitement to racial hatred.
The 1976 Act brought the law against racial discrimination into line with that
against sex discrimination (see above), and gave complainants direct access to
civil courts and, in the case of employment complaints, to industrial tribunals.
The Commission for Racial Equality was established by the Race Relations Act
1976 with statutory duties to work towards the elimination of discrimination
and to promote equality of opportunity and good relations between people of
different racial groups. It has power to investigate unlawful discriminatory
practices and to issue non-discrimination notices, enforceable in the courts,
requiring that such practices should cease. It has an important educational
role and may issue codes of practice in employment. It is also the principal
source of advice for the general public about the Race Relations Act and has
discretion to assist individuals with their complaints.
The Commission supports the work of the 100 or so community relations
councils, which are independent, voluntary bodies set up in most areas with a
significant ethnic minority population to promote harmonious community
All other Commonwealth countries except Canada, Australia and New Zealand.
28
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Leisure
Trends
relations at the local level. It makes grants towards the salaries of the com¬
munity relations officers employed by the councils, most of whom also receive
funds from their local authorities, and gives grants to ethnic minority self-help
groups and to other projects run by or for the benefit of the minority
communities.
Most people have considerably more free time, more ways in which to spend it
and higher real incomes than had previous generations. Agreed hours of full¬
time work are usually from 35 to 40 hours a week, although many people actu¬
ally work somewhat longer because of voluntary overtime. A large majority of
employees work a five-day week.
The most common leisure activities are home based, or social, with visiting
or entertaining relatives or friends and watching television among the most
popular. Watching television is the main evening pastime for all except young
men. Nearly all households have a television set and in winter the population
aged five and over spend on average 20 hours a week watching programmes.
Growing numbers are using video recorders to provide television viewing
suited to their individual taste and to watch programmes at times other than
their transmission. Other popular pursuits include: listening to the radio,
records or cassettes; reading; do-it-yourself home improvements such as
house painting and decorating; going out for a meal or for a drink or to the
cinema or to watch a sporting event; gardening; outings (such as visits to the
countryside, seaside or to museums); photography; visits to social clubs and
leisure centres; and social and voluntary work. About half the households in
Britain have a pet, the most common being dogs (of which there are thought to
be more than 5 million in Britain) and cats (nearly 5 million).
Sports and other pastimes have grown in popularity, reflected by increasing
membership of the main organisations concerned with outdoor activities,
although for some sports, such as football, attendances have been declining.
Activities in which people participate include, in order of popularity, walking,
darts, and swimming.
Almost all full-time employees are entitled to a paid holiday each year in
addition to public holidays and by the end of 1981 over four-fifths of manual
workers had a basic holiday entitlement of four weeks or more.
The number of holidays (of four or more nights) taken in Great Britain by
British residents was 32 • 5 million in 1982 compared with 37.5 million in 1972.
Holidays abroad in 1982 numbered 14 • 25 million, compared with 8.5 million in
1972 and well over half involved ‘package’ arrangements. More than four-fifths
of overseas holidays were taken in other European countries, with Spain being
the most popular destination; it received over one-quarter of all British holiday¬
makers abroad. The next most popular destinations were France, Greece,
Italy, and the United States. The main holiday period is May to September
when over 80 per cent of holidays in Britain and 70 per cent of holidays abroad
are taken. Some 40 per cent of the population, however, took no holiday away
from home in 1982.
2 Government
Succession,
Accession and
Coronation
The United Kingdom constitution, unlike that of most other countries, is not
contained in any single document. Formed partly by statute, partly by common
law and partly by convention, it can be altered by Act of Parliament, or by
general agreement to create, vary or abolish a convention. The constitution
thus adapts readily to changing political conditions and ideas.
The organs of government are clearly distinguishable although their func¬
tions often intermingle and overlap. The legislature, Parliament, is the supreme
authority. The executive consists of: (a) the Government — Cabinet and other
ministers who are responsible for initiating and directing national policy, (b)
government departments, which are responsible for national administration,
(c) local authorities, which administer and manage many local services, and (d)
public corporations responsible for the operation of particular nationalised
industries or, for example, of a social or cultural service, subject to ministerial
control in varying degrees. The judiciary determines common law and inter¬
prets statutes, and is independent of both legislature and executive.
The Monarchy
The British people look to the Queen not only as their head of State, but also as
the symbol of their nation’s unity. The monarchy is the most ancient secular
institution in the United Kingdom. During the last thousand years its conti¬
nuity has only once been broken (by the establishment of a republic which
lasted from 1649 to 1660) and, despite interruptions in the direct line of
succession, the hereditary principle upon which it was founded has always
been preserved. The royal title in the United Kingdom is: ‘Elizabeth the Second,
by the Grace of God of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and of Her other Realms and Territories Queen, Head of the
Commonwealth, Defender of the Faith’. The form of the royal title is varied for
those other member states of the Commonwealth of which the Queen is head of
State,1 to suit the particular circumstances of each. (For a list of member states
see p 73.)
The seat of the monarchy is in the United Kingdom. In the Channel Islands
and the Isle of Man the Queen is represented by a Lieutenant-Governor. In the
other member nations of the Commonwealth of which the Queen is head of
State, her representative is the Governor-General appointed by her on the
advice of the ministers of the country concerned and completely independent of
the United Kingdom Government.
In the United Kingdom dependencies the Queen is usually represented by
governors, who are responsible to the British Government for the good govern¬
ment of the countries concerned.
The title to the Crown derives partly from statute and partly from common law
rules of descent. Lineal Protestant descendants of a granddaughter of James I of
England and VI of Scotland (Princess Sophia, the Electress of Hanover) are
1 The other Commonwealth countries of which the Queen is head of State are: Antigua and Bar¬
buda, Australia, The Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Canada, Fiji, Grenada, Jamaica, Mauritius,
New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Saint Christopher and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Solomon Islands and Tuvalu.
30
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Acts of
Government
alone eligible to succeed, and although succession is not bound to continue in
its present line, it can be altered only by common consent of the member
nations of the Commonwealth of which the Queen is Sovereign.
The sons of the Sovereign have precedence over the daughters in succeeding
to the throne. When a daughter succeeds, she becomes Queen-Regnant, and
the powers of the Crown are vested in her as though she were a king. While the
consort of a king takes her husband’s rank and style, the constitution has never
given any special rank or privileges to the husband of a Queen-Regnant
although in practice he fills an important role in the life of the nation, as does the
Duke of Edinburgh.
The Sovereign succeeds to the throne as soon as his or her predecessor dies
and there is no interregnum. He or she is at once proclaimed at an Accession
Council to which all members of the Privy Council are summoned. The Lords
Spiritual and Temporal (see p 34), the Lord Mayor and Aldermen and other
leading citizens of the City of London are also invited.
The Sovereign’s coronation follows the accession after a convenient interval.
It is a ceremony which has remained essentially the same for over a thousand
years, even if details have often been modified to conform to the customs of the
time. It takes place at Westminster Abbey in London in the presence of repre¬
sentatives of the Houses of Parliament and of all the great public interests of the
United Kingdom, of the Prime Ministers and leading members of the other
Commonwealth nations, and of representatives of other countries.
The Queen personifies the State. In law, she is head of the executive, an integral
part of the legislature, head of the judiciary, the commander-in-chief of all
armed forces of the Crown and the ‘supreme governor’ of the established
Church of England. As a result of a long process of evolution, during which the
monarchy’s absolute power has been progressively reduced, the Queen acts on
the advice of her ministers, which she cannot ignore. The United Kingdom is
governed by Her Majesty’s Government in the name of the Queen.
Within this framework, and in spite of a trend during the past hundred years
towards assigning powers directly to ministers, there are still important acts of
government which require the participation of the Queen. These include
summoning, proroguing (discontinuing until the next session without dissol¬
ution) and dissolving Parliament; giving royal assent to Bills passed by both
Houses of Parliament; appointing many important office holders, including
government ministers, judges, officers in the armed forces, governors, diplo¬
mats and bishops and some other senior clergy of the Church of England; con¬
ferring peerages, knighthoods and other honours;1 and remitting all or part of
the penalty imposed on a person convicted of a crime. An important function is
appointing the Prime Minister and by convention the Queen invites the leader
of the political party which commands a majority in the House of Commons to
form a government. In international affairs, the Queen as head of State has the
power to declare war and make peace, to recognise foreign states and
governments, to conclude treaties and to annexe or cede territory.
With rare exceptions (as when appointing the Prime Minister), these acts
involving the use of ‘royal prerogative’ powers are nowadays performed by gov¬
ernment ministers who are responsible to Parliament and can be questioned
about a particular policy. It is not necessary to have Parliament’s autho-
1 Although most honours are conferred by the Queen on the advice of the Prime Minister, a few
are conferred on her personal selection - the Order of the Garter, the Order of the Thistle, the
Order of Merit and the Royal Victorian Order.
The Royal Family
From the reign of Queen Victoria up to September 1983
QUEEN VICTORIA, 1819-1901,
1. Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha (Prince Consort)
.a '•as
IB
-IB ! C o '
m g
acoO 3
•r M ■ o
£
o ^ SI
ZL I-< Os
^ OJ M
s-e'
1 3 3
5-Q M
00 M
s gta
>-Sq
Q §5
2 *< ■
><w
> IBj
Q £<
^ CZ
0£W
z^u
3 Eg,
Sb T "Ur'S
- u
y oo.5u_
G 00 ^ o
^ s
Uh OO
S u -o 13
■3 O C C
a
MO r"
uT u M
3.S
o..a^s:<
3-3
. B< O « m W
—« OJ u < TJ
S-3 E S -
y^s’gl-
a og<w
-S.E
ctf £
^ £< o c
y *C •
£0
c c
3
Q J3
3SJ2o!> u_
£ S 3^ o>*.Q3 Ov-ZI
oo>, kO^^oOtj^-o^
2 E ^•3-5~-3’3-“'u: tj-3 l;-3
N a. > J Q u J J C u J J J ,4
vO><
s«
“Z
.w
wg
■OX-
05^
0 i!
Wh
0<-
Ij
2S
>.c<2
■03 o
>>•“ r~
■3^ ov
M
J 3 •
CJ=
Co
o S
"eS r-
Oh-1 o
W «+-( M
X O .
< CS
w
. ^ „\o “ o
>> 0 o\-t- o
« C a^.W O
5£a:S; «
^ “EE
>■3
M J "
a
w «
D3 ■B
0” ^ **1 °
a E m a H ^
§ §
0 Z -
V C3 ^
O -1-u
a
2 £3
§ >^§
^ .0^,0.
c S'E
Z. L> S.is
o o'H 3 ^
o ^ ^ *5 >>
3 &■%
Q 5^S
*
w
is y
rt »0 J-« C
Os Os Os Cu 3
« „ «
>xi c «.E
t! O o § N .
£
« o'0 ^
N ^
H
P5 2a C
2 ill
G .2 ^ C T3 ^
Q h y o^o
S y i: t^n
S<umo
32
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Ceremonial and
Royal Visits
Royal Income
and
Expenditure
rity to exercise these powers, although Parliament has the power to restrict or
abolish a prerogative right.
Ministerial responsibility in no way detracts from the importance of the
Queen’s role in the smooth working of government. She holds meetings of the
Privy Council, gives audiences to her ministers and other officials at home and
overseas, receives accounts of Cabinet decisions, reads dispatches and signs
innumerable state papers; she must be informed and consulted on every aspect
of national life; and she must show complete impartiality.
Such is the significance attached to these royal functions that provision has
been made for a regent to be appointed to perform them should the Queen be
totally incapacitated. The regent would be the Queen’s eldest son, the Prince of
Wales, then those in succession to the throne who are of age. In the event of the
Queen’s partial incapacity or absence abroad, there is provision for appointing
Counsellors of State (the Duke of Edinburgh, the four adult persons next in line
of succession, and the Queen Mother) to whom the Queen may delegate certain
royal functions. However, Counsellors of State may not, for instance, dissolve
Parliament (except on the Queen’s express instructions), or create peers.
Ceremonial has always been associated with British kings and queens, and, in
spite of the change in the outlook of both the Sovereign and the people, many
traditional customs and ceremonies are retained. Royal marriages and royal
funerals are marked by public ceremony, and the Sovereign’s birthday is
officially celebrated early in June by Trooping the Colour on Horse Guards
Parade. State banquets take place when a foreign monarch or head of State
visits Britain; investitures are held at Buckingham Palace to bestow honours;
and royal processions add significance to such occasions as a State opening of
Parliament, when the Queen drives from Buckingham Palace to Westminster.
Each year the Queen and other members of the royal family visit many parts of
the United Kingdom. Their presence at scientific, artistic, industrial and chari¬
table events of national and local importance encourages nationwide interest
and publicity. The Queen pays state visits to foreign governments, accom¬
panied by the Duke of Edinburgh. She also undertakes lengthy tours in the
other countries of the Commonwealth. Other members of the royal family pay
official visits overseas, occasionally representing the Queen, and often in con¬
nection with an organisation or a cause with which they are associated.
More than three-quarters of all expenditure arising from the royal family’s
official duties is met by public departments. This includes the costs of the royal
yacht, the Queen’s Flight, travel by train and the upkeep of the royal palaces.
Apart from this the Queen’s public expenditure on staff and expenses incurred
in carrying out official duties as head of State is financed from the Civil List,
approved by Parliament. Her private expenditure as Sovereign is met from the
Privy Purse, which is supplied mainly from the revenues of the Duchy of Lan¬
caster; 1 and her personal expenditure as a private individual from her own per¬
sonal resources. There are annual allowances approved by Parliament to other
members of the royal family, though not to the Prince of Wales, who as Duke of
Cornwall is entitled to the net revenue of the estate of the Duchy of Cornwall (he
has voluntarily surrendered a proportion of the revenue to the nation). The
Queen pays into the Exchequer a sum equivalent to that provided by Parlia¬
ment in respect of certain members of the royal family.
1 The Duchy of Lancaster is an inheritance which, since 1399, has always been enjoyed by the
reigning Sovereign; it is kept quite apart from his or her other possessions and is separately
administered by the Chancellor of the Duchy.
GOVERNMENT
33
Parliament
Parliament is the supreme legislative authority. Its three elements, the Queen,
the House of Lords and the elected House of Commons, are outwardly separate,
are constituted on different principles, and meet together only on occasions of
symbolic significance such as the State opening of Parliament when the
Commons are summoned by the Queen to the House of Lords. As a law-making
body, however, Parliament usually requires the concurrence of all its parts.
Parliament can legislate for the United Kingdom as a whole, for any of the
constituent parts of the country separately, or for any combination of them. It
can also legislate for the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man, which are Crown
dependencies and not part of the United Kingdom, having subordinate legisla¬
tures which make laws on island affairs.1
Free from any legal restraints imposed by a written constitution, Parliament
is able to legislate as it pleases: generally to make, unmake, or alter any law; to
legalise past illegalities and make void and punishable what was lawful when
done and thus reverse the decisions of the ordinary courts; and to destroy estab¬
lished conventions or turn a convention into binding law. It can prolong its own
life beyond the normal period without consulting the electorate.
In practice, however. Parliament does not assert its supremacy in this way.
Its members bear in mind the common law and have tended to act in accord¬
ance with precedent and tradition. The validity of an Act of Parliament which
has been duly passed, promulgated and published cannot be disputed in the
law courts, but no Parliament would be likely to pass an Act which it knew
would receive no public support. The system of party government helps to
ensure that Parliament legislates with its responsibility to the electorate in
mind.
As a member of the European Community, the United Kingdom recognises
the various types of Community legislation, and sends 81 elected members to
the European Parliament (see p 70).
The Functions The main functions of Parliament are (1) to pass laws, (2) to provide, by voting
of Parliament taxation, the means of carrying on the work of government, and (3) to scrutinise
government policy and administration, particularly proposals for expenditure.
In discharging these functions Parliament helps to bring the relevant facts and
issues before the electorate. By custom, Parliament is also consulted before the
ratification of all important international treaties and agreements, the making
of treaties being, in theory at least, a royal prerogative exercised on the advice of
the Government and not subject to parliamentary approval.
The Meeting of A Parliament has a maximum duration of five years, but is often dissolved and a
Parliament general election held before the end of this term. The maximum life has been
prolonged by legislation in such rare circumstances as the two world weirs.
Dissolution and writs for a general election are ordered by the Queen on the
advice of the Prime Minister.
The life of a Parliament is divided into sessions. Each usually lasts for one
year — beginning and ending most often in October or November and intersper¬
sed with ‘adjournments’ at night, at weekends, at Christmas, Easter and the
late (English) Spring Bank Holiday and during a long summer recess starting in
late July or early August. The average number of ‘sitting’ days in a session is
about 175 in the House of Commons and about 150 in the House of Lords. At the
1 The legislatures of the Channel Islands (the States of Jersey and the States of Guernsey) and the
Isle of Man (the Tynwald Court) consist of the Queen, the Privy Council and the local assemblies.
It is the duty of the Home Secretary, as the Privy Council member primarily concerned
with island affairs, to scrutinise each legislative measure before it is submitted to the Queen in
Council.
34
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The House of
Lords
start of each session the Queen’s speech to Parliament outlines the Govern¬
ment’s broad policies and proposed legislative programme. Each session is ter¬
minated by prorogation. Parliament then ‘stands prorogued’ until the new
session opens (on occasions Parliament has been dissolved without proro¬
gation). A short speech is made on behalf of the Queen summarising
Parliament’s work during the past session. An adjournment does not affect
uncompleted business, but prorogation terminates nearly all parliamentary
business, so that all public Bills not completed lapse, and must be reintroduced
in the next session unless they are to be abandoned.
The House of Lords consists of the Lords Spiritual and the Lords Temporal. The
Lords Spiritual are the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, the Bishops of
London, Durham and Winchester, and the 21 senior diocesan bishops of the
Church of England. The Lords Temporal consist of (1) all hereditary peers and
peeresses of England, Scotland, Great Britain and the United Kingdom who
have not disclaimed their peerages, (2) all life peers and peeresses, and (3) those
Lords of Appeal (‘law lords’) created life peers to assist the House in its judicial
duties. Hereditary peerages carry a right to sit in the House (subject to certain
disqualifications), provided the holder is 21 years of age or over, but anyone
succeeding to a peerage may, within 12 months of succession, disclaim that
peerage for his or her lifetime. Disclaimants lose their right to sit in the House
but gain the right to vote at parliamentary elections and to offer themselves for
election to the House of Commons.
Temporal peerages, both hereditary and life, are conferred on the advice of
the Prime Minister. They are usually granted either in recognition of service in
politics or other walks of life or because the Government of the day wishes to
have the recipient in the House of Lords. The House also provides a place in
Parliament for men and women whose advice is useful to the State, but who do
not wish to be involved in party politics.
In mid-1983 there were 1,184 members of the House of Lords, including the
two archbishops and 24 bishops. In order of precedence the Lords Temporal
consisted of three Peers of the Blood Royal, 27 Dukes, 36 Marquesses, 177 Earls
and Countesses, 110 Viscounts and 805 Barons and Baronesses, of whom 358
were life peers. Of the 118 Irish peers 47 were entitled to sit in the House of Lords
because they were holders of an English, Scottish or United Kingdom peerage.
Other Irish peerages which pre-date the union (see p 3) do not entitle their
holders to membership of the House of Lords.
Not all peers with a right to sit in the House of Lords attend the sittings.1 Peers
who frequently attend the House (the average daily attendance is about 290)
include elder statesmen and others who have spent their lives in public service.
They receive no salary for their parliamentary work, but can recover expenses
incurred in attending the House and certain travelling expenses.
The House is presided over by the Lord Chancellor, who takes his place on the
woolsack2 as ex officio Speaker of the House. In his absence his place may be
taken by a deputy speaker, a deputy chairman or, if neither is present, by a
speaker chosen by the Lords present. The first of the deputy speakers is the
Lord Chairman of Committees, who is appointed at the beginning of each
session and takes the chair in all committees, unless the House decides other-
1 Some hereditary peers do not establish their claim to succeed and so do not receive a writ of
summons entitling them to sit in the House. Lords may apply for leave of absence for the dur¬
ation, or for the remainder, of a Parliament.
2 The woolsack is a seat in the form of a large cushion stuffed with wool from several Common¬
wealth countries; it is a relic from the medieval period when wool was the greatest source of the
country’s wealth.
GOVERNMENT
35
The House of
Commons
Parliamentary
Electoral
System
wise. The Lord Chairman and the Principal Deputy Chairman of Committees
are salaried officers of the House.
The permanent officers include the Clerk of the Parliaments who is respon¬
sible for the records of proceedings including judgments and for the promul¬
gation of Acts of Parliament, and who is also the accounting officer for money
voted to the House; the other Clerks at the Table who, with the Clerk of the
Parliaments and the other officers and officials of the House, are collectively
known as the Parliament Office; the Gentlemen Usher of the Black Rod, who is
also Serjeant at Arms in attendance upon the Lord Chancellor and is respon¬
sible for security and for accommodation and services in the House of Lords’
part of the Palace of Westminster; and the Yeoman Usher who is Deputy
Serjeant at Arms and assists Black Rod in his duties.
The House of Commons is elected by universal adult suffrage and consists of
650 members of Parliament (MPs), of whom 23 are women. Of the 650 seats,
523 are for England, 38 for Wales, 72 for Scotland, and 17 for Northern Ireland.
General elections are held after a Parliament has been dissolved and a new
one summoned by the Queen. When an MP dies or resigns1 or is given a peerage,
a by-election takes place. Members are paid an annual salary of £16,106 (from
January 1984) and an allowance of £ 12,000 (from April 1984) for secretarial and
research expenses. They also have a number of other allowances, including
travel allowances, a supplement for London members and, for provincial
members, subsistence allowances. (For ministers’ salaries, see p 47.)
The chief officer of the House of Commons is the Speaker, elected by MPs to
preside over the House. Other officers are the Chairman of Ways and Means,
and two deputy chairmen who act as Deputy Speakers, elected by the House on
the nomination of the Government. They, like the Speaker, neither speak nor
vote other than in their official capacity. The House is administered by a
Commission chaired by the Speaker.
Permanent officers (who are not MPs) include the Clerk of the House of
Commons, who is the principal adviser to the Speaker of the House on its privi¬
leges and procedures; his department has responsibilities relating to the
conduct of the business of the House and its many committees. The Clerk is
also accounting officer for the House. The Serjeant at Arms, who waits upon the
Speaker, carries out certain orders of the House, is the official housekeeper of
the Commons part of the building, and is responsible for its security. Other
officers serve the House in the Library, the Department of the Official Report
(Hansard), the Administration Department and the Refreshment Department.
For electoral purposes the United Kingdom is divided into constituencies, each
of which returns one member to the House of Commons. To ensure equitable
representation, four permanent Boundary Commissions, one each for
England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, make periodic reviews of con¬
stituencies and recommend any redistribution of seats that may seem neces¬
sary in the light of population movements or other changes. Their last
recommendations were submitted to Parliament in 1982-83 and formed the
basis for the constituencies in the 1983 general election.
Elections are by secret ballot. British subjects (including Commonwealth
citizens) and citizens of the Irish Republic may vote provided they are aged 18 or
over, resident in the United Kingdom, registered in the annual register of
' An MP who wishes to resign from the House can do so only by using the technical device of
applying for an office under the Crown (Bailiff of the Chiltern Hundreds or Steward of the Manor
*of Northstead), ancient offices which disqualify the holder from membership of the House but
which carry no salary and have no responsibilities.
36
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Party
System
electors for the constituency and not subject to any disqualification. People not
entitled to vote include members of the House of Lords, patients detained under
mental health legislation, sentenced prisoners and people convicted within the
previous five years of corrupt or illegal election practices. Service voters
(members of the armed forces and their spouses. Crown servants and staff of
the British Council employed overseas, together with their wives or husbands if
accompanying them) may be registered for an address in a constituency where
they would live but for their service.
Each elector may cast one vote, normally in person at a polling station.
Service voters resident abroad and merchant seamen may vote by proxy or, if
in the United Kingdom at the time of the election, by post. Electors who are
physically incapacitated or unable to vote in person because of the nature of
their work are also entitled to vote by post. (There are government proposals to
enable holidaymakers away from home on polling day, and Britons living
abroad, to vote.)
Voting is not compulsory; nearly 73 per cent of a total electorate of some 42
million people voted in the general election of June 1983. The candidate who
polls the most votes in a constituency is elected.
British subjects and citizens of the Irish Republic may stand and be elected as
MPs provided they are aged 21 or over and are not subject to any disqualifi¬
cation. Those disqualified include undischarged bankrupts, people sentenced
to more than one year’s imprisonment, clergy of the Church of England,
Church of Scotland, Church of Ireland and Roman Catholic Church, peers, and
holders of certain offices listed in the House of Commons Disqualification Act
1975. The latter include holders of judicial office, civil servants, some local gov¬
ernment officers, members of the regular armed forces, or the police service,
some members of public corporations and government commissions, and in
addition British members of the legislature of any country or territory outside
the Commonwealth. A candidate’s nomination for election must be signed by
two electors as proposer and seconder, and by eight other electors registered in
the constituency. He or she does not require any party backing. A candidate
must also deposit £150, which is forfeited if his or her votes do not exceed 12-5
per cent of those validly cast. (The Government has announced proposals to
increase this deposit and to reduce the percentage of the poll necessary for can¬
didates to save their deposits.)
The maximum sum a candidate may spend on an election campaign is £2,700
plus 2 • 3 pence for each elector in a borough constituency or 3 • 1 pence for each
elector in a county constituency. A candidate may post an election address to
each elector in the constituency, free of charge. All election expenses apart
from the candidate’s personal expenses, are subject to the statutory limit.
The party system, existing in one form or another since the eighteenth century,
is an essential element in the working of the constitution.
The present system relies heavily upon the existence of organised political
parties, each laying policies before the electorate for approval. The parties are
not registered or formally recognised in law, but in practice most candidates in
elections, and almost all winning candidates, belong to one of the main political
parties.
The percentages of votes cast for the main political parties in the general
election of June 1983 and the resulting distribution of seats in the House of
Commons are given in Table 3.
The party which wins most seats (although not necessarily the most votes) at
a general election, or which has the support of a majority of members in the
House of Commons, usually forms the Government. By tradition, the leader of
the majority party is asked by the Sovereign to form a government; and about
GOVERNMENT
37
100 of its members in the House of Commons and the House of Lords receive
ministerial appointments (including appointment to the Cabinet — see p 47) on
the advice of the Prime Minister. The largest minority party becomes the
official Opposition with its own leader and ‘shadow cabinet’.
Leaders of the Government and Opposition sit on the front benches of the
Commons with their supporters (the back-benchers) sitting behind them.
Similar arrangements for the parties also apply in the House of Lords; however,
Lords who do not wish to be associated with either the Government or the
Opposition may sit on the ‘cross-benches’. The effectiveness of the party
system in Parliament rests largely on the relationship between the Govern¬
ment and the opposition parties. Depending on the relative voting strengths of
the parties in the House of Commons, the Opposition might seek to overthrow
the Government by securing its defeat on a ‘matter of confidence’. In general,
however, its aims are to contribute to the formulation of policy and legislation
by constructive criticism; to oppose government proposals that it considers
objectionable; to secure concessions on government Bills; and to increase
public support and enhance its chances of electoral success.
Table 3: Percentages of Votes Cast, and Members Elected, in the 1983
General Election
Party
% of Votes
Cast
Party
Members
Elected
Conservative 42 • 4
Labour 27-6
Social Democratic
—Liberal Alliance a 25 -4
Others 4 • 6
Conservative 397
Labour 209
Liberal 17
Social Democratic 6
Scottish National 2
Plaid Cymru
(Welsh Nationalist) 2
Official Unionist
(Northern Ireland) 11
Democratic Unionist
(Northern Ireland) 3
Ulster Popular Unionist
(Northern Ireland) 1
Social Democratic and
Labour (Northern Ireland) 1
Provisional Sinn Fein
(Northern Ireland) b  1
Total 650
“ The Liberal and Social Democratic Parties formed an alliance in 1981 to contest the general election.
b The Provisional Sinn Fein member has not taken his seat.
The detailed arrangements of government business are settled, under the
direction of the Prime Minister and the Leaders of the two Houses, by the Chief
Government Whips in consultation with the Chief Opposition Whips. The Chief
Whips together constitute the ‘usual channels’ often referred to when the ques¬
tion of finding time for debating some particular issue is discussed. The Leaders
of the two Houses are primarily responsible for the direction of business and for
providing facilities for the Houses to debate matters about which they are
concerned.
38
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Parliamentary
Procedure
Outside Parliament, party control is exercised by the national and local
organisations. Inside Parliament, it is exercised by the Chief Whips and their
assistants (chosen within the party) whose duties include keeping members
informed of forthcoming parliamentary business, maintaining the party’s
voting strength by ensuring that members attend important debates, and con¬
veying to the party leadership the opinions of back-bench members. The impor¬
tance a party attaches to a vote on a particular issue is indicated to the MPs by
the underlining (once, twice or three times) on the notice sent to them; failure to
comply with a ‘three-line whip’ is usually seen as rebellion against the party’s
policy. Party discipline tends to be less strong in the Lords than in the
Commons.
The Chief Government Whip in the Commons is Parliamentary Secretary to
the Treasury; of the other Government Whips, three (one of whom is Deputy
Chief Whip) are officers of the Royal Household, five hold titular posts as Lords
Commissioners of the Treasury and five are Assistant Whips. Salaries are also
paid to the Chief Opposition Whips in both Houses and to two of the Opposition
Assistant Whips in the Commons. The Government Whips in the Lords hold
offices in the Royal Household and act as government spokesmen.
Annual assistance from public funds helps opposition parties to carry out
their parliamentary work at Westminster. It is limited to parties which had at
least two members elected at the previous general election or one member
elected and a minimum of 150,000 votes cast. The amount is: £1,080 for every
seat won plus £2 • 16 for every 200 votes, up to a maximum of £325,000. Since
1945 there have been six Conservative and six Labour Governments and the
great majority of members of the House of Commons have represented either
the Conservative or the Labour Party.
Parliamentary procedure is based on custom and precedent, partly formulated
in standing orders governing details of practice in each House. The system of
debate is much the same in the two Houses: the subject originates in the form of
a motion (a proposal made by a member in order to elicit a decision from the
House). When a motion has been moved and seconded, the Speaker proposes
the question as the subject of debate. At the end of each debate the question is
decided by a vote on a simple majority. The main difference between the two
Houses is that in the Lords the office of Speaker carries with it no authority to
check or curtail debate, such matters being decided by the general sense of the
House, whereas in the Commons the Speaker has full authority to give effect,
promptly and decisively, to the rules and orders of the House. The Speaker of
the Commons must guard against abuse of procedure or infringement of mino¬
rity rights; has discretion to allow or disallow a closure motion (to end discuss¬
ion so that the matter may be put to the vote); and has powers to check
irrelevance and repetition in debate, and to save time in other respects. In cases
of grave disorder the House can be adjourned or the sitting suspended by the
Speaker. Voting in the Commons is under the direction of the Speaker whose
duty it is to pronounce the final result. In the event of a tied vote the Speaker
gives the casting vote, but only in accordance with established conventions
which preclude an expression of opinion on the merits of the question.
The voting procedure in the House of Lords is similar to that in the Commons,
except that the Speaker or chairman has an original, but no casting, vote. Bills
and subordinate legislation are in general allowed to proceed in the form before
the House unless a majority votes to reject or amend them; on other motions the
question is decided in the negative unless there is a majority in favour. When
the House is sitting judicially (see pp 103 and 112) the judgment under appeal is
not changed if the votes are equal.
GOVERNMENT
39
The Commons has a public register of MPs’ financial interests. Members with
a relevant pecuniary interest in a matter before the House, direct or indirect,
must declare it when taking part in a debate, though to operate as a disqualifi¬
cation from voting the interest must be direct, immediate and personal. In any
other proceedings of the House or in transactions with other members or with
ministers or civil servants, MPs must also disclose any relevant financial inter¬
est or benefit.
Proceedings of both Houses are public, except on extremely rare occasions;
the minutes (in the Commons called Votes and Proceedings and in the Lords,
Minutes of Proceedings) and the speeches (The Official Report of Parliamentary
Debates, Hansard) are published daily. The records of the Lords from 1497 and
of the Commons from 1547, together with the parliamentary and political
papers of certain past members of the Houses, are available to the public in the
House of Lords Record Office. Parliament is not televised,1 but proceedings are
recorded and sound transmissions of some are made on television and radio,
either live or recorded. A Parliamentary Sound Archive has been established.
Legislative The law undergoes constant reform in the courts as established principles are
Proceedings interpreted, clarified or reapplied to meet new circumstances, but substantial
changes are the responsibility of Parliament and the Government through the
normal legislative process.
A draft law takes the form of a parliamentary Bill. Most Bills are public Bills
involving measures relating to public policy, but there are also private Bills
which deal solely with matters of individual, corporate or local interest. Public
Bills can be introduced, in either House, by a government minister or by a
private member. Most public Bills that become law are in practice sponsored by
the Government.
Before a Government Bill is finally drafted, there is normally considerable
consultation with professional bodies, voluntary organisations and other agen¬
cies interested in the subject matter, such as major interest and ‘pressure’
groups which aim to promote a specific cause. Proposals for legislative changes
are sometimes set out in Government ‘White Papers’ which may be debated in
Parliament before a Bill is introduced. From time to time consultative
documents, sometimes called ‘Green Papers’, set out for public discussion gov¬
ernment proposals which are still at a formative stage.
Bills must, in principle, be passed by each House (see below.) As a rule Gov¬
ernment Bills likely to raise political controversy go through the Commons
before the Lords, while those of an intricate but uncontroversial nature often
pass through the Lords first. (Consolidation Bills are always introduced in the
House of Lords.) A Bill with a mainly financial purpose is nearly always intro¬
duced in the Commons, and a Bill involving taxation must be based on resolu¬
tions agreed by that House, often after debate, before it can be introduced. If the
main object of a Bill is to create a public charge, it can only be introduced by a
minister or, if brought from the Lords, be proceeded with in the Commons if
taken up by a minister, an arrangement which gives the Government con¬
siderable control over legislation.
At the beginning of each session private members of the Commons ballot for
precedence in introducing a Bill on one of the Fridays specially allocated; the
first 20 are successful. After the ballot a private member may also present a Bill
after question time (see p 43), or seek to introduce a Bill under the ‘ten minute
1 Debates on televising proceedings have taken place on several occasions and in 1968 an internal
television experiment took place in the Lords. In 1980 the Commons voted to allow the intro¬
duction of a private member’s Bill to permit the televising of proceedings, but it progressed no
further.
40
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
rule which allows two speeches, one in favour of and one against the measure,
after which the House decides whether to allow the Bill to be brought in. Private
members Bills do not often proceed very far, but a few become law each session.
If one secures a second reading, the Government usually introduces any neces¬
sary money resolution. Private members’ Bills may be introduced in the House
of Lords at any time, but the time that can be given to them in the Commons is
strictly limited.
The process of passing a public Bill is similar in both Houses. The Bill receives
a formal first reading on introduction, is printed, and after a while (between one
day and several weeks depending on the nature of the Bill) is given a second
reading after a debate on its general principles and merits. In the Commons a
non-controversial Bill may be referred to a second reading committee to decide
whether it should be read a second time. After a second reading in the
Commons, a Bill is usually referred for detailed examination to a standing com¬
mittee (see p 41). If the House so decides, the Bill may be referred to the whole
House sitting in committee. The committee stage is followed by the report
stage, during which further amendments may be considered. At the third
reading a Bill is reviewed in its final form. In the Commons this stage is taken
without a debate unless there is a motion in the name of six MPs that the ques¬
tion ‘be not put forthwith’ — a procedure frequently used. The House may vote
to limit the time devoted to examining a Bill by passing a government timetable
motion, commonly referred to as a ‘guillotine’. After the third reading a
Commons Bill is sent to the Lords where it goes through broadly the same
stages. In the Lords, after the second reading, a Bill is considered by a com¬
mittee of the whole House unless the House takes the rare decision to refer it to a
Public Bill Committee. It is then considered on report and read a third time; at all
these stages amendments may be made. A Bill which starts in the Lords and is
passed by that House is then sent to the Commons for all the stages there.
Amendments made by the second House generally must be agreed by the first,
or a compromise reached, before a Bill can become law.
Most Government Bills introduced and passed in the Lords pass through the
Commons without difficulty because of their non-controversial nature.
However, if a non-governmental Lords Bill were unacceptable to the Commons
it would generally not become law because no debating time would be allotted
to it. The Lords, on the other hand, do not in general prevent a Bill insisted upon
by the Commons from finally becoming law. Normally they either accept the
Bill without changes, or amend and return it for consideration by the Commons,
who frequently agree to the amendments made. In practice, the Lords pass
without amendment Bills authorising taxation or national expenditure. A Bill
that deals only with taxation or expenditure must become law within one
month of being sent to the Lords, whether or not they agree to it, unless the
Commons directs otherwise. If no agreement is reached between the two
Houses on a non-financial Commons Bill (or an amendment to it) the Lords can
in practice delay the Bill (with certain exceptions) for about 13 months. At the
end of this time it may, in accordance with the Parliament Acts, be submitted to
the Queen for royal assent, provided it has again been passed by the Commons.
A Bill to lengthen the life of a Parliament would require the full assent of both
Houses in the normal way.
The limitations on the power of the Lords, contained in the Parliament Acts
1911 and 1949, are based on the belief that the principal legislative function of
the non-elected House nowadays is to act as a chamber of revision, comple¬
menting, not rivalling, the elected House.
When a Bill has passed through all its parliamentary stages, it is sent to the
Queen for royal assent, after which it is part of the law of the land and known as
an Act of Parliament. The royal assent has not been refused since 1707.
THE COUNTRYSIDE
Above: Loch Maree
looking towards Slioch,
Highlands, Scotland.
Left: Long Melford,
Suffolk, England.
THE HOUSES OF 1
jjjjjjj
m it 15
H: i^if fi i* fo
PARLIAMENT
Far left below: The
Chamber of the House
of Commons.
Left centre: The
Central Lobby.
Left: The Queen’s
Robing Room where
the Queen puts on the
Robe of State and the
Imperial State Crown
when she opens
Parliament.
Below: The Chamber
of the House of Lords
with the Royal
Throne.
THE COUNTRYSIDE
Above: Antrim
Mountains, Northern
Ireland.
Right: A farmstead in
the Brecon area, Wales.
GOVERNMENT
41
Delegated
Legislation
Parliamentary
Committees
Committees of
the Whole House
Standing
Committees
Select
Committees
Private Bills, promoted by people or organisations outside Parliament (often
local authorities) to give them special powers not granted by the general law, go
through substantially the same procedure as public Bills, but most of the work
is done in committee, where procedures follow a semi-judicial pattern: the pro¬
moter must prove the need for the powers or privileges sought and opposing
interests are heard. Both sides may be legally represented.
Delegated legislation, used to relieve pressure on parliamentary time, gives
ministers and other authorities the power to regulate administrative details
after a law has been passed. To minimise the risk that powers thus conferred on
the executive might supersede or weaken parliamentary government, they are
normally delegated to authorities directly responsible to Parliament. Moreover,
the Acts of Parliament by which particular powers are delegated normally
provide for some measure of parliamentary control over legislation made in the
exercise of these powers, for instance, by reserving to Parliament the right to
affirm or annul the orders themselves. Certain Acts also require direct consul¬
tation with organisations affected before rules and orders can be made.
A joint committee of both Houses reports on the technical propriety of these
‘statutory instruments’. In order to save time on the floor of the House, where
statutory instruments may be considered, the Commons also uses standing
committees to consider the merits of instruments, with any decisions reserved
to the House.
Either House may resolve itself into a committee (of the whole House) to con¬
sider Bills in detail after their second reading. A committee of the whole House is
presided over by the Chairman of Ways and Means (the Chairman of Commit¬
tees in the House of Lords) or a deputy chairman.
House of Commons standing committees include those which examine public
Bills at the committee stage and, in certain cases, at the second reading and
report stages; two Scottish standing committees; the Scottish Grand Com¬
mittee; the Welsh Grand Committee; and the Northern Ireland standing com¬
mittee. Ordinary standing committees have no distinctive names, being
referred to simply as Standing Committee A,B,C, and so on, and are each
appointed specially to consider a specific Bill. Each has between 16 and 50
members with a party balance reflecting as far as possible that in the House as a
whole. The Scottish Grand Committee, which comprises all 72 Scottish
members and 10 to 15 others (and can be convened in Edinburgh), considers the
principles of Scottish Bills referred to it at second reading stage, the Scottish
estimates and other matters concerning only Scotland. The Welsh Grand
Committee, with all 38 Welsh members and up to five others, considers Bills
referred to it at second reading stage, and matters concerning only Wales. The
Northern Ireland committee considers matters relating specifically to the
province. A standing committee on regional affairs attended by any of the 523
members from the English constituencies is occasionally appointed to consider
matters relating to the English regions. The Lords’ equivalent to a standing
committee, a Public Bill Committee, is rarely used.
In 1979 a new House of Commons select committee structure was set up in an
attempt to provide closer examination of government departments and
policies, and of the way ministers discharge their responsibilities.
This was in response to a recognition that Parliament was probably less
effective a check on the executive than it had been for much of the nineteenth
century. With the growth of mass political parties, the individual independence
of many MPs has tended to become subordinated to party interests, and with the
42
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Joint
Committees
Party
Committees
Other Forms of
Parliamentary
Control
great extension of the range and complexity of central government activities,
and the parallel growth of bureaucracy, MPs have a more difficult task in
checking the actions of ministers and their departments.
The 14 committees examine the expenditure, administration and policy of the
main government departments and related bodies. The Foreign Affairs
Committee, for example, ‘shadows’ the work of the Foreign and Common¬
wealth Office, and there are select committees on Scottish and Welsh Affairs.
The committees are constituted on a party basis, in approximate proportions to
party strength in the House. Other regular committees include those on
European Legislation, Public Accounts, Members’ Interests, the Parliamentary
Commissioner for Administration, and Sound Broadcasting. The Committee of
Selection and the Standing Orders Committee have duties relating to private
Bills, and the Committee of Selection also chooses members to serve on stand¬
ing and select committees. A Liaison Committee to consider general matters
relating to select committees has been established. On rare occasions a parlia¬
mentary Bill is examined by a select committee (a procedure additional to the
usual legislative process).
In their scrutiny of government policies, the committees question ministers,
senior civil servants and interested bodies and individuals. Through hearings
and published reports, they bring before Parliament and the public a body of
fact and informed opinion on many important issues, and build up considerable
expertise in their subjects of inquiry.
In the House of Lords, besides the Appeal and Appellate Committees in which
the bulk of the House’s judicial work is transacted, there are select committees
on the European Communities, Science and Technology, House of Lords’
Offices, Hybrid Instruments, Leave of Absence and Lords’ Expenses, Personal
Bills, Private Bills, Standing Orders, Privileges, Procedure, Selection, and
Sound Broadcasting.
The two Houses may agree to set up joint select committees, and joint commit¬
tees are also appointed in each session to deal with Consolidation Bills and dele¬
gated legislation.
In addition to the official committees of the two Houses there are several unoffi¬
cial party organisations or committees. The Conservative and Unionist
Members’ Committee (the 1922 Committee) consists of the back-bench
membership of the party in the House of Commons. When the party is in office,
ministers attend its meetings by invitation and not by right, but when the party
is in opposition, the whole membership of the party may attend meetings and
the leader appoints a consultative committee which acts as the party’s ‘shadow
cabinet’. The Parliamentary Labour Party is a corporate body comprising all
members of the party in both Houses; when the Labour Party is in office a liaison
committee acts as a channel of communication between the Government and
its back-benchers in both Houses; when the party is in opposition the Parlia¬
mentary Labour Party is organised under the direction of an elected Parlia¬
mentary Committee which acts as the ‘shadow cabinet’.
The effectiveness of parliamentary control of the Government is a subject of
continuing discussion, both inside and outside Parliament. Control is exercised
finally by the ability of the House of Commons to force the Government to resign
by passing a resolution of ‘no confidence’ or by rejecting a proposal which the
Government considers so vital to its policy that it has made it a ‘matter of confi¬
dence’ or, ultimately, by refusing to vote the money required for the public
service. In addition to the system of close scrutiny by select committees, the
House of Commons offers a number of opportunities for a searching examin-
GOVERNMENT
43
Parliamentary
Commissioner
for
Administration
ation of government policy by both the Opposition and the Government’s own
back-benchers.
These include:
1. Question time when for an hour on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and
Thursday, ministers answer MPs’ questions. Parliamentary questions are
one means of eliciting information about the Government’s intentions, as
well as a way of airing, and possibly securing redress of, grievances brought
to MPs’ notice by constituents. MPs may also put questions to ministers for
written answers, which are published in Hansard, the official report. (At
question time in the House of Lords questions are addressed to the Govern¬
ment rather than to a particular minister.)
2. The right of MPs to use motions for the adjournment of the House to open
discussions on constituency cases or matters of public concern. There is a
half-hour adjournment period at the end of the business of the day; and
immediately before the adjournment for each recess (Christmas, Easter,
spring and summer), a full day is spent discussing matters raised by private
members. Moreover, an MP wishing to discuss a ‘specific and important
matter that should have urgent consideration’ may, at the end of question
time, ask leave to move the adjournment of the House. If the Speaker accepts
the terms of the motion, the MP asks the House for leave for the motion to be
put forward. Leave can be given unanimously, or if 40 or more MPs support
the motion, or if fewer than 40 but more than ten support it and the House (on
a vote) is in favour. Once leave has been given, the matter is debated for three
hours, usually on the next day.
3. The 19 Opposition days each session when the Opposition can choose
subjects for debate.
4. Debates on the occasion of the passage, three times a year, of Consolidation
Fund or Appropriation Bills, when members can exercise their traditional
right of ‘raising grievances’, on matters for which any minister is responsible,
when voting the necessary supplies (money) for the Crown.
Procedural opportunities for criticism of the Government also arise during
the debate on the Queen’s speech at the beginning of a session, during debates
or motions of censure for which the Government gives up part of its own time,
and during debates on the Government’s legislative proposals.
Opportunities for criticism are provided in the House of Lords at daily ques¬
tion time, during debates on specific motions and in questions (which can be
debated) at the end of the day’s business.
The involvement of Parliament, and more particularly the House of
Commons, in the management of the revenues of the State and payments for
the public service is described in Chapter 17.
To keep the two Houses informed of European Community developments,
and to enable them to scrutinise and debate Community policies and proposals,
there are two select committees (see above), and ministers make regular
statements about Community business.
The Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration (the ‘Parliamentary
Ombudsman’) investigates, independently, complaints of maladministration
when asked to do so by MPs on behalf of members of the public. Powers of
investigation extend to administrative actions by central government depart¬
ments but not to policy decisions (which can be questioned in Parliament) nor to
44
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Parliamentary
Privilege
NORTHERN
IRELAND
ASSEMBLY
matters affecting relations with other countries. Complaints by British citizens
arising from dealings with British posts overseas are open to investigation in
some circumstances. The Commissioner has access to departmental papers
and reports the findings to the MP who presented the complaint. The Commis¬
sioner is required to report annually to Parliament. In addition he publishes
details of selected investigations at quarterly intervals and may submit other
reports where necessary. A Commons select committee has responsibility for
overseeing the Commissioner’s work.
Each House of Parliament has certain rights and immunities to protect it from
unnecessary obstruction in carrying out its duties. The rights apply collectively
to each House and individually to each member.
For the Commons the Speaker formally claims ‘their ancient and undoubted
rights and privileges’ at the beginning of each Parliament. These include
freedom of speech; freedom from arrest in civil actions; exemption from serving
on juries, attending as witnesses or serving as sheriffs; and the right of access to
the Crown, a collective privilege of the House. Further privileges include the
rights of the House to control its own proceedings (so that it is able, for instance,
to exclude ‘strangers’ if it wishes), to pronounce upon legal disqualifications for
membership and to declare a seat vacant on such grounds; and to penalise for
breach of its privileges and for contempt.
The privileges of the House of Lords closely resemble those of the House of
Commons.
Attempts have been made by successive governments to find a means of
restoring devolved government to Northern Ireland (see p 15). In October 1982
elections were held for membership of a Northern Ireland Assembly, which first
met the following month, to provide a means for greater participation by the
people of Northern Ireland in the day-to-day government of the region and to
give them the opportunity to evolve for themselves an acceptable form of gov¬
ernment. It is composed of 78 members elected under the single transferable
vote system of proportional representation.
The main task of the Assembly is to make recommendations for a full or
partial devolution to it of responsibilities held by the Secretary of State. Recom¬
mendations which have the support of 70 per cent of the Assembly’s total
membership must be submitted by the Secretary of State to Parliament. The
Secretary of State also has discretion to lay before Parliament proposals which
command less than 70 per cent support but which, in his view, are acceptable to
both parts of the community in Northern Ireland. The essential criterion for
devolution is that the Government will not recommend any arrangements to
Parliament unless it believes them to be acceptable to both parts of the
community.
Prior to devolution the Assembly has important functions as a scrutinising,
deliberative and consultative body, monitoring the work of government in
Northern Ireland by means of statutory committees which shadow each of the
six government departments. The composition of the committees and the allo¬
cation of chairmanships and deputy chairmanships reflects, as far as possible,
the balance of parties in the Assembly.
Elections to the Assembly will be held every four years. The distribution of
seats at the end of September 1983 was as follows: Official Unionists 27,
Democratic Unionists 21, Social Democratic and Labour 13, Alliance 10, Sinn
Fein 5, and others 2. Neither the Social Democratic and Labour Party nor the
Sinn Fein members have taken their seats in the Assembly.
GOVERNMENT
45
Committees of
the Privy
Council
Composition
The Privy Council
Until the eighteenth century, the Sovereign in Council, or Privy Council, was
the chief source of executive power in the State. As the system of Cabinet gov¬
ernment developed, however, the Privy Council became less prominent. Many
powers were transferred to the Cabinet as an inner committee of the Council,
and much of its work was handed over to newly created government
departments, some of which were originally committees of the Privy Council.
Nowadays the main function of the Privy Council is to advise the Queen to
approve Orders in Council (those made under prerogative powers, such as
Orders approving the grant of royal charters of incorporation; and those made
under statutory powers). Members of the Privy Council attending meetings at
which Orders are made do not thereby become personally responsible for the
policy upon which the Orders are based; this rests with the minister responsible
for the subject matter of the Order in question, whether or not he or she was
present at the meeting.
The Privy Council also advises the Crown on the issue of royal proclamations,
some of the most important of which relate to prerogative acts (such as
summoning or dissolving Parliament). The Council’s own statutory
responsibilities, which are independent of the powers of the Sovereign in
Council, include powers of supervision over the registering bodies for the
medical and allied professions.
Apart from Cabinet ministers, who must be Privy Counsellors and are sworn
in on first assuming office, membership of the Council (retained for life) is
accorded by the Sovereign on the recommendation of the Prime Minister to
eminent people in independent monarchical countries of the Commonwealth.
There are about 380 Privy Counsellors. A full Council is summoned only on the
death of the Sovereign or when the Sovereign announces his or her intention to
marry.
There are a number of advisory Privy Council committees whose meetings
differ from those of the Privy Council itself in that the Sovereign cannot consti¬
tutionally be present. These may be prerogative committees, such as those
dealing with legislative matters submitted by the legislatures of the Channel
Islands and the Isle of Man and with applications for charters of incorporation;
or they may be provided for by statute as are those for the universities of Oxford
and Cambridge and the Scottish universities.
The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council is the final court of appeal from
the courts of the United Kingdom dependencies, courts of independent
members of the Commonwealth which have not discontinued the appeal,
courts of the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man, and certain other courts, some
professional and disciplinary committees and ecclesiastical courts.
Administrative work is carried out in the Privy Council Office under the Lord
President of the Council, a Cabinet minister.
Her Majesty’s Government
Her Majesty’s Government is the body of ministers responsible for the admin¬
istration of national affairs.
The Prime Minister is appointed by the Queen, and all other ministers are
appointed by the Queen on the recommendation of the Prime Minister.
The majority of ministers are members of the Commons, although the Gov¬
ernment is also fully represented by ministers in the Lords. The Lord Chancel¬
lor is always a member of the House of Lords.
The composition of the Government can vary both in the number of ministers
and in the titles of some offices. The creation of a paid ministerial office with
46
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
entirely new functions, the abolition of an office, the transfer of functions from
one minister to another, or a change in the designation of a minister may be
effected by Order in Council.
Prime Minister The Prime Minister is also, by tradition, First Lord of the Treasury and Minister
for the Civil Service. The head of the Government became known as the Prime
Minister during the eighteenth century. The Prime Minister’s unique position of
authority derives from majority support in Parliament and from the power to
choose ministers and to obtain their resignation or dismissal individually. By
modern convention, the Prime Minister always sits in the House of Commons.
The Prime Minister informs the Queen of the general business of the
Government, presides over the Cabinet, and is responsible for the allocation of
functions among ministers.
The Prime Minister’s other responsibilities include recommending to the
Queen a number of appointments. These include: Church of England
archbishops, bishops and deans and some 200 other clergy in Crown ‘livings’;
high judicial offices, such as the Lord Chief Justice, Lords of Appeal in Ordinary,
and the Lords Justices of Appeal; Privy Counsellors, Lords-Lieutenant and
certain civil appointments, such as Lord High Commissioner to the General
Assembly of the Church of Scotland, Poet Laureate, Constable of the Tower, and
some university posts; and appointments to various public boards and
institutions, such as the British Broadcasting Corporation, as well as various
royal and statutory commissions. Recommendations are likewise made for the
award of many civil honours and distinctions and of Civil List pensions (to
people who have achieved eminence in science and the arts and are in some
financial need). The Prime Minister also selects the trustees of certain national
museums and institutions.
The Prime Minister’s Office at 10 Downing Street (the official residence in
central London) has a staff of civil servants who attend to the day-to-day dis¬
charge of the Prime Minister’s numerous responsibilities. The Prime Minister
may also appoint special advisers to the Office from time to time to assist in the
formation of policies.
Departmental Ministers in charge of government departments, who are usually in the Cabinet,
Ministers are known as ‘Secretary of State’ or ‘Minister’, or may have a special title, as in
the case of the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
Non-
Departmental
Ministers
The holders of various traditional offices, namely the Lord President of the
Council, the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, the Lord Privy Seal (and from
time to time Ministers without Portfolio), may have few or no departmental
duties and Eire thus available to perform any special duties the Prime Minister
may wish to give them. The Lord President of the Council, for example,
co-ordinates the presentation of information on government policies.
Lord Chancellor The Lord Chancellor holds a special position, being a minister with depart-
andLaw Officers mental functions and also head of the judiciary. The four Law Officers of the
Crown are: for England and Wales, the Attorney General and the Solicitor
General; for Scotland, the Lord Advocate and the Solicitor General for Scotland.
Ministers of Ministers of State usually work with ministers in charge of departments with
State responsibility for specific functions, and are sometimes given courtesy titles
which reflect these particular functions. More than one may work in a depart¬
ment. A Minister of State can be given a seat in the Cabinet and paid
accordingly.
GOVERNMENT
47
Junior Ministers
Ministerial
Salaries
The Cabinet
Cabinet
Meetings
Junior Ministers (generally Parliamentary Under-Secretaries of State or, where
the senior minister is not a Secretary of State, simply Parliamentary Secreta¬
ries) share in parliamentary and departmental duties. They may also be given
responsibility, directly under the departmental minister, for specific aspects of
the department’s work. The Parliamentary Secretary to the Treasury and other
Lords Commissioners of the Treasury are in a different category as Government
Whips (see p 38).
The salaries of ministers in the House of Commons range from £26,780 a year
(from January 1984) for junior ministers to £40,930 for Cabinet ministers. The
Prime Minister receives £51,050 and the Lord Chancellor £62,000.
Ministers in the Commons, including the Prime Minister, receive a parlia¬
mentary salary of £10,6261 a year (which is included in the above figures) in
recognition of their constituency responsibilities and are entitled to claim the
other allowances which are paid to all MPs.2
The Cabinet is composed of about 20 ministers chosen by the Prime Minister
and may include departmental and non-departmental ministers. Its origins can
be traced back to the informal conferences which the Sovereign held with
leading ministers, independently of the Privy Council, during the seventeenth
century. After the Sovereign’s withdrawal from an active role in politics in the
eighteenth century, and the development of organised political parties stimu¬
lated by successive extensions of the franchise from 1832 onwards, the Cabinet
assumed its modern form.
The functions of the Cabinet are: the final determination of policies, the
supreme control of government and the co-ordination of government depart¬
ments. The exercise of these functions is vitally affected by the fact that the
Cabinet is a group of party representatives, depending upon majority support in
the House of Commons.
The Cabinet meets in private and its proceedings are confidential. Its members
are bound by their oath as Privy Counsellors not to disclose information about
its proceedings. The Official Secrets Acts forbid the publication of Cabinet as
well as other state papers (although after they have been in existence for 30
years they may be made available for inspection in the Public Record Office) and
a resigning minister wishing to make a statement involving disclosure of
Cabinet discussions should first obtain permission through the Prime Minister.
Diaries published by several former ministers have given the public an insight
into Cabinet procedures in recent times.
Normally the Cabinet meets for a few hours once or twice a week during
parliamentary sittings, and rather less often when Parliament is not sitting. To
keep the amount of work coming before the Cabinet within manageable limits, a
great deal of work is carried on through the committee system, which involves
the reference of any issue either to a standing Cabinet committee or to an ad hoc
committee composed of the ministers primarily concerned. The committee
then considers the matter in detail and either disposes of it or reports upon it to
the Cabinet with recommendations for action. The present Cabinet has four
standing committees: a defence and overseas policy committee and an
economic strategy committee both under the chairmanship of the Prime
Minister: and a home and social affairs committee and a legislation committee,
1 These figures show the salaries to which the holders are entitled; however the Prime Minister
and the Lord Chancellor of the present Government have decided to draw no more than the
salary payable to other Cabinet ministers.
2 The Leader of the Opposition in the Commons receives a salary for the post, as well as a parlia¬
mentary salary; the Leader of the Opposition in the Lords also receives a salary.
48
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Cabinet
Office
Ministerial
Responsibility
both under the chairmanship of the Lord President of the Council. Sub¬
committees of the standing committees may be established. Membership and
terms of reference of all Cabinet committees are confidential.
Non-Cabinet ministers may be invited to attend meetings on matters affect¬
ing their departments, and may be members of Cabinet committees. The Secre¬
tary of the Cabinet and other senior officials of the Cabinet Office also attend
meetings of the Cabinet and its committees as appropriate.
The Cabinet Office, headed by the Secretary of the Cabinet, under the direction
of the Prime Minister, comprises the Cabinet Secretariat, the Central Statistical
Office and the Historical Section.
The Cabinet Secretariat serves ministers collectively in the conduct of
Cabinet business and operates as an instrument in the co-ordination of policy at
the highest level.
The Central Statistical Office is concerned with the preparation and interpre¬
tation of the statistics necessary to support economic and social policies and
management, and co-ordinates the statistical work of other departments.
The Historical Section of the Cabinet Office is in the process of completing the
official histories of the second world war, and is responsible for the preparation
of official histories of certain peacetime events.
‘Ministerial responsibility’ refers both to the collective responsibility which
ministers share for government policy and actions and to ministers’ individual
responsibility to Parliament for their departments’ work.
The doctrine of collective responsibility means that the Cabinet acts unani¬
mously even when Cabinet ministers do not all agree on a subject. The policy of
departmental ministers must be consistent with the policy of the Government
as a whole. Once the Government’s policy on a matter has been decided, each
minister is expected to support it or resign. On rare occasions, ministers have
been allowed free votes in Parliament on government policies involving impor¬
tant issues of principle.
The individual responsibility of a minister for the work of his or her depart¬
ment means that, as political head of that department, he or she is answerable
for all its acts and omissions and must bear the consequences of any defect of
administration, any injustice to an individual or any aspect of policy which may
be criticised in Parliament, whether personally responsible or not. Since most
ministers are members of the House of Commons, they must answer questions
and defend themselves against criticism in person. Departmental ministers in
the House of Lords are represented in the Commons by someone qualified to
speak on their behalf, usually a junior minister.
Departmental ministers normally decide all matters within their
responsibility, although on important political matters they usually consult
their colleagues collectively, through the Cabinet or a Cabinet committee. A
decision by a departmental minister binds the Government as a whole.
The responsibility of ministers for their departments is an effective way of
keeping government under public control, for the knowledge that any depart¬
mental action may be reported to and examined in Parliament discourages the
taking of arbitrary and ill-considered decisions.
On assuming office ministers must resign directorships in private and public
companies, and must order their affairs so that there is no conflict between
public duties and private interests.
Government Departments
Government departments are the main instruments for giving effect to govern¬
ment policy when Parliament has passed the necessary legislation, and for
GOVERNMENT
49
Non-
Departmental
Public Bodies
Advisory
Bodies
advising ministers. They may, and frequently do, work with and through local
authorities, statutory boards, and government-sponsored organisations oper¬
ating under various degrees of government control.
A change of government does not necessarily affect the number or general
functions of government departments, although a radical change in policy may
be accompanied by some organisational change.
The work of some departments (for instance, the Ministry of Defence) covers
the United Kingdom as a whole. Other departments (like the Department of
Employment) cover England, Wales and Scotland, but not Northern Ireland.
Others, such as the Department of the Environment, are mainly concerned with
affairs in England.
Some departments, such as the Department of Trade and Industry, maintain
a regional organisation, and some which have direct contact with the public
throughout the country (for example, the Department of Employment) also
have local offices.
A department is usually headed by a minister. Certain departments in which
questions of policy do not normally arise are headed by a permanent official,
and a minister with other duties is responsible for them to Parliament. For
instance, ministers in the Treasury are responsible for the Central Office of
Information, Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, the Customs and Excise, the
Inland Revenue, the Paymaster General’s Office and a number of small depart¬
ments including the Treasury Solicitor’s Department, the Royal Mint, and the
National Debt Office. Departments generally receive their funds directly out of
money provided by Parliament and are staffed by the Civil Service.
A number of bodies with a role in the process of government are neither govern¬
ment departments nor part of a department. Known as non-departmental
public bodies, but often popularly described as ‘quangos’ (which is often taken
to stand for ‘quasi-autonomous non-governmental organisations’, although
there is no precise definition of the term), they are of three kinds: executive
bodies, advisory bodies and tribunals. Executive bodies generally employ staff
and spend money on their own account; advisory bodies and tribunals do not
normally employ staff or spend money themselves, but their expenses are paid
by government departments concerned. Many of the more important executive
bodies are mentioned in this Handbook; a note on advisory bodies is set out
below; and the position of tribunals is dealt with on p 114.
As a result of a review of non-departmental public bodies undertaken by the
Government in 1979, several hundred have been woundup, and others reduced
in scale or scope; scrutiny of these bodies continues.
Many government departments are assisted by advisory councils or
committees which undertake research and collect information, mainly to give
ministers access to informed opinion before coming to a decision involving a
legislative or executive act. In some cases a minister must consult a standing
committee, but usually advisory bodies are appointed at the discretion of the
minister because of the need for their advice.
The membership of the advisory councils and committees varies according to
the nature of the work involved, and may include civil servants and representa¬
tives of varying interests and professions.
In addition to these standing advisory bodies, there are committees set up by
the Government to examine and make recommendations on specific matters.
For certain important inquiries Royal Commissions, whose members are
chosen for their wide experience and diverse knowledge, may be appointed.
Royal Commissions examine written and oral evidence from government
departments, interested organisations and individuals, and submit recommen-
50
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
dations. The Government may accept the recommendations in whole or in part,
or may decide to take no further action or to delay action. Inquiries may also be
undertaken by departmental committees.
Distribution of An outline of the principal functions of the main government departments is
Functions given below. Departments are arranged in alphabetical order, except for the
Scottish and Northern Ireland departments which are grouped at the end of the
section. Further information on the work of some departments is given in later
chapters under the relevant subject headings.
DEPARTMENT Main areas of responsibility
Ministry of
Agriculture,
Fisheries and
Food
Office of
Arts and
Libraries
Board of
Customs and
Excise
Ministry of
Defence
Department of
Education and
Science
Department of
Employment
Department of
Energy
Department of
the
Environment
The work of many departments listed below covers the United Kingdom as a
whole. Where this is not the case, the following abbreviations are used: (GB) for
functions covering England, Wales and Scotland: (E, W & NI) for those covering
England, Wales and Northern Ireland; (E & W) for those covering England and
Wales; and (E) for those concerned only with England.
Policies for agriculture, forestry, horticulture and fishing (E); food policies.
General promotion of arts (GB); library and information services (E with advice
to W and NI); national museums (E); public libraries and local museums (E),
British Library (E); national heritage.
Collecting and accounting for revenues of Customs and Excise, including value
added tax; agency functions including controlling certain imports and exports
and compiling overseas trade statistics.
Defence policy and control and administration of the armed services.
General promotion of education (E); the Government’s relations with universi¬
ties (GB); fostering civil science in Britain and internationally.
Manpower policies, labour legislation, payment of unemployment benefit
through local offices and issue of work permits to workers from overseas (GB);
Race Relations Employment Advisory Service and policy for the Careers
Service (E); international representation on employment matters.
Policies for all forms of energy, including its conservation and the development
of new sources; the Government’s relations with the nationalised energy
industries, the Atomic Energy Authority and the British National Oil
Corporation.
Policies for planning, local government, new towns, housing, construction,
inner city matters, environmental protection, water, the countryside, sport and
recreation, conservation, historic buildings and ancient monuments, and
Property Services Agency (E).
GOVERNMENT
51
DEPARTMENT
Export Credits
Guarantee
Department
Foreign and
Commonwealth
Office
Department of
Health and
Social Security
Home Office
Central Office
of Information
Board of Inland
Revenue
The Law
Officers’
Department
The Lord
Chancellor’s
Department
Management
and Personnel
Office
Ordnance
Survey
Overseas
Development
Administration
Parliamentary
Counsel Office
Paymaster
General’s Office
Main areas of responsibility
Provision of insurance for exporters against risk of not being paid for goods and
services, and access to bank finance for exports; insurance cover for new invest¬
ment overseas.
Conduct of Britain’s overseas relations.
National Health Service, personal social services provided by local authorities,
and certain aspects of public health, including hygiene (E & W); the social
security system (GB).
Administration of law and order including criminal justice, police service,
prisons and probation services; conduct of elections; civil defence; fire services;
licensing laws; approval of local authority by-laws; regulation of firearms and
dangerous drugs (E&W). Gaming and lotteries (GB). Policies for immigration
and nationality, race relations, broadcasting and sex discrimination. Responsi¬
bilities related to the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man.
Provision of publicity material and of publicity and information services
required by other government departments.
Administration of the tax laws.
Provision of advice to the Government on English law and representation of the
Crown in appropriate domestic and international cases, both civil and criminal,
by the Law Officers of the Crown for England and Wales — the Attorney General
and the Solicitor General (E & W). The Attorney General is also Attorney
General for Northern Ireland.
Administration of the courts and the law (E, W & NI). (The Home Office has
important responsibilities for the criminal law.)
Organisation, management and efficiency of the Civil Service (GB).
The surveying and mapping of Great Britain, including geodetic surveys and
associated scientific work and topographic surveys (GB).
Administration of financial aid to, and technical co-operation in, developing
countries.
Drafting of Government Bills (except those relating exclusively to Scotland);
advising departments on parliamentary procedure (E, W & NI).
Provision of banking services for government departments other than the
Boards of Inland Revenue and Customs and Excise, and the payment of public
service pensions.
52
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
DEPARTMENT
Office of
Population
Censuses and
Surveys
Procurator
General and
Treasury
Solicitor’s
Department
Her Majesty’s
Stationery
Office
Department of
Trade and
Industry
Department of
Transport
Treasury
Welsh Office
Main areas of responsibility
Administration of the Marriage Acts and local registration of births, marriages
and deaths; population estimates and projections; compilation of health statis¬
tics; censuses (E & W). Surveys for other government departments (GB).
Provision of a common legal service for a large number of government depart¬
ments. Duties include instructing Parliamentary Counsel on Bills and drafting
subordinate legislation; providing litigation and conveyancing services; and
giving general advice on the interpretation and application of the law (E & W).
Publication of parliamentary and government papers; procurement of office
supplies.
Overseas trade policy and commercial relations; export promotion; consumer
protection and safety; competition policy; companies legislation; insolvency;
the insurance industry; printing and publishing; patents; trade marks and
copyright; policies for quality and standards; tourism, films, distributive trades
and other service industries. Radio regulatory matters (transferred from Home
Office in June 1983); industrial policy (GB); financial assistance to industry
other than through the tax system (GB); sponsorship of private and state-owned
manufacturing industries (GB).
In June 1983 the former Departments of Trade and of Industry were combined
to form a single department.
Policies for the main transport industries (GB); responsibility for the planning
and maintenance of motorways and trunk roads, for local transport, road and
vehicle safety(E), and for vehicle and driver licensing (GB).
Civil and international aviation, marine and shipping policy (transferred
from Department of Trade in June 1983).
Broad economic strategy with particular responsibilities for public finance and
expenditure, including control of manpower and pay in the Civil Service.
Many aspects of Welsh affairs including health and personal social services;
education, except for terms and conditions of service, student awards and the
University of Wales; the Welsh language and culture; local government;
housing; water and sewerage; environmental protection; sport; agriculture and
fisheries; forestry; land use, including town and country planning; countryside
and nature conservation; new towns, ancient monuments and historic
buildings; roads; tourism; a range of matters affecting the careers service and
the activities of the Manpower Services Commission in Wales; selective finan¬
cial assistance to industry; the urban programme in Wales; the operation of the
European Regional Development Fund in Wales and other European Com¬
munity matters; non-departmental public bodies; civil emergencies; all finan¬
cial aspects of these matters including Welsh rate support grant; and oversight
responsibilities for economic affairs and regional planning in Wales.
GOVERNMENT
53
SCOTLAND Scotland has its own system of law and wide administrative autonomy. The
Secretary of State for Scotland, a Cabinet minister, has responsibility in Scot¬
land (with some exceptions) both for formulating and carrying out policy relat¬
ing to agriculture and fisheries, education, law and order, local government and
environmental services, social work, health, housing, roads and certain aspects
of shipping and road transport services.
The Secretary of State also has a major role in the planning and development
of the Scottish economy, and important functions relating to industrial
development, with responsibility for selective financial assistance to industry,
for the Scottish Development Agency, and the Highlands and Islands
Development Board and for the work of the Manpower Services Commission
and the careers service. The Secretary of State plays a full part in determining
energy policy, particularly in relation to responsibility for the electricity supply
industry in Scotland.
On many domestic matters, the distinctively Scottish features and the differ¬
ent conditions and needs of the country and its people are reflected in separate
legislation relating wholly to Scotland, or else in sections of special application
to Scotland only inserted in Acts which otherwise apply to the United Kingdom
generally. The Secretary of State is also responsible for the government interest
in a range of other functions from fire services to sport and tourism.
The United Kingdom Government’s administrative functions arising from
these responsibilities are carried out principally by five Scottish departments
supported by Central Services, based in Edinburgh (although with some staff
dispersed over Scotland and with an office in London), known collectively as the
Scottish Office. The Scottish Office Management Group, whose membership
consists of the head of each of the departments and the Deputy Secretary,
Central Services, under the chairmanship of the Permanent Under-Secretary of
State, advises the Secretary of State, particularly on questions such as the allo¬
cation of resources and forward planning, with which more than one of the Scot¬
tish departments are concerned.
United Kingdom government departments with significant Scottish
responsibilities have offices in Scotland with delegated powers and work closely
with the Scottish Office.
An outline of the main functions of the Scottish departments is given below.
DEPARTMENT Functions
Department of Promotion of the agriculture and fishing industries.
Agriculture and
Fisheries for
Scotland
Scottish Town and country planning; housing; roads; building control; water supplies
Development and sewerage; pollution control; general policy relating to local government
Department organisation; ancient monuments and historic buildings; certain transport
functions.
Scottish Industrial and regional economic development matters; energy. (From Novem-
Economic ber 1983 this department will be renamed the Industry Department for
Planning Scotland.)
Department
54
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
DEPARTMENT Functions
Scottish
Education
Department
Education (excluding universities); student awards; libraries; museums and
galleries; sport and recreation; the arts; social work services.
Scottish Home Central administration of law and order (including police service, criminal
and Health justice, legal aid and penal institutions); the National Health Service; fire, home
Department defence and civil emergency services.
Central Services to the five Scottish departments. These include the Office of the Solici-
Services tor to the Secretary of State, the Scottish Information Office, and Finance
Divisions.
Lord Advocate’s Provision of legal advice to the Government on issues affecting Scotland and the
Department and principal representation of the Crown for litigation in Scotland by the Law
Crown Office Officers of the Crown for Scotland (the Lord Advocate and the Solicitor General
for Scotland); control of all prosecution in Scotland.
Scottish Courts Organisation, administration and staffing of the courts and court offices; juris-
Administration diction and procedure of civil courts; enforcement of judgments; and pro¬
gramme of Scottish Law Commission.
Other
Administrative
Departments
Department of the Registrar General for Scotland; Scottish Record Office;
Department of the Registers of Scotland.
NORTHERN With the introduction of direct rule in 1972 (see p 15), the Secretary of State for
IRELAND Northern Ireland, a Cabinet minister, was appointed to be responsible for the
government of Northern Ireland. Through the Northern Ireland Office he has
direct responsibility for constitutional developments, law and order and
security, and electoral matters. The work of the Northern Ireland departments,
the functions of which are listed below, is also subject to the direction and
control of the Secretary of State.
DEPARTMENT Functions
Department of Development of agricultural, forestry and fishing industries; administration of
Agriculture agricultural grant schemes; advisory service to farmers; agricultural research,
education and training.
Department Development of industry and commerce, and administration of schemes of
of Economic assistance to industry, especially through the Industrial Development Board for
Development Northern Ireland; administration of employment service and labour training
scheme.
Department Central policy, co-ordination, legislation, oversight, and financial control of the
of Education five education and library boards and education as a whole from nursery to
higher and continuing education; sport, recreational, community and cultural
activities.
GOVERNMENT
55
DEPARTMENT
Department of
the
Environment
Department of
Finance and
Personnel
Department of
Health and
Social Services
The Northern
Ireland Civil
Service
Functions
Housing (policy, programmes and finance); planning (regional strategy,
development plans, development control and comprehensive development);
construction and maintenance of roads, transport and traffic management,
motor taxation; water and sewerage; environmental protection; ordnance
survey; historic monuments and buildings; maintenance of public records and
certain controls over local government.
Control of public expenditure; liaison with the United Kingdom Treasury and
the Northern Ireland Office on financial matters, economic and social planning
and research; general management and control of the Northern Ireland Civil
Service; valuation.
Health, personal social services and social security.
The Civil Service
The Civil Service is concerned with the conduct of the whole range of govern¬
ment activities as they affect the community, ranging from policy formulation
to executing the day-to-day duties that public administration demands.
Civil servants are servants of the Crown. They are responsible to the minister
in whose department they work for the execution of his or her policies. Ministers
alone are answerable to Parliament for their policies and the actions of their
staff. A change of minister, for whatever reason, does not involve a change of
staff. (Ministers sometimes appoint special policy advisers from outside the
Civil Service; the advisers are paid from public funds, but their appointments
come to an end when the Government’s term of office finishes.)
Including part-time staff (two part-time officers being reckoned as equivalent
to one full-time), in January 1983 there were 652,500 civil servants (nearly half
of them women), roughly 326,000 of whom were engaged in the provision of
public services, such as paying sickness benefits and pensions, collecting taxes
and contributions, running employment services, staffing prisons, and provid¬
ing services to industry and agriculture. About 210,000 were employed in the
Ministry of Defence, including the Royal Ordnance factories and Royal Dock¬
yards. The rest were divided between: central administrative and policy duties;
service-wide support services, such as accommodation, printing and informa¬
tion; and largely financially self-supporting services, for instance, those pro¬
vided by the Department for National Savings and the Royal Mint.
Over three-quarters of civil servants work outside London. As part of its policy
of controlling the cost and size of the Civil Service and to improve its efficiency,
the Government plans to reduce the number of civil servants to 630,000 by
1984, a total smaller than at any time since the end of the second world war. (By
October 1983 the total had fallen to 636,300, resulting in the smallest Civil
Service for about 40 years.)
The total number includes about 132,200 ‘industrial’ civil servants, mainly
manual workers in government industrial establishments.
The Northern Ireland Civil Service is modelled on its counterpart in Great
Britain, and has its own Civil Service Commission. Interchange of staff between
the two Civil Services occurs to a minor extent only.
56
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Structure
The Diplomatic
Service
Recruitment
and Training
At the top levels of the Home Civil Service there is an open and unified structure
which, with very few exceptions, covers all posts whatever the nature of their
duties. It comprises three grades — permanent secretary, deputy secretary and
under-secretary. It is proposed to extend the unified structure to the assistant
secretary and senior principal grades in 1983-84. The official head of the Home
Civil Service is the secretary of the Cabinet.
At other levels the structure of the non-industrial Civil Service is based on a
system of categories and occupational groups, which are the basic groupings of
staff for the purposes of pay, recruitment and personnel management. These
include the General Category (covering the Administration, Economist,
Statistician, Information Officer and Librarian groups), the Science Category,
the Professional and Technology Category (including architects, surveyors,
electrical and mechanical engineers, graphics officers and marine services
staff), and the Training, Legal, Police, Secretarial, Data Processing, Research
Officer, Social Security, Security and Museum Categories. These 12 categories
account for some 75 per cent of non-industrial staff. Work requiring specialist
skill is always done by appropriately qualified individuals.
Personnel management policies encourage the flexible deployment of staff so
that talent can be used to the best advantage, and, with higher posts open to
people of outstanding ability (whatever their specialist background or original
method of entry into the Service) ensure that people with the necessary quali¬
ties gain suitably wide experience to fit them for posts at the highest levels.
The Diplomatic Service, a separate service of some 5,400 or so people, provides
the staff for the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and at United Kingdom
diplomatic missions and consular posts abroad. Its functions include advising
on policy, negotiating with overseas governments and conducting business in
international organisations; promoting British exports and trade generally,
administering aid, presenting ideas, policies and objectives to the people of
overseas countries; and protecting British interests abroad.
The Service has its own grade structure, linked for salary purposes with that
of the Home Civil Service, and conditions of work are in many ways comparable
while taking into account the special demands of the Service, particularly of
postings overseas. Members of the Home Civil Service and the armed forces,
and individuals from the private sector, may serve in the Foreign and Common¬
wealth Office and at overseas posts on loan or attachment.
Recruitment of staff to the middle and higher levels of the Home Civil Service
and the Diplomatic Service is the responsibility of the Civil Service Commission
which, in conjunction with departments, ensures that staff are selected solely
on merit through fair and open competition. The selection of junior staff, such
as those engaged in clerical and manual work, is undertaken by the depart¬
ments themselves.
For the Administration Group, the central part of the Home Civil Service,
entry is at three levels relating broadly to the academic achievements of: a
second class honours degree, or better; GCE Advanced level; and GCE Ordinary
level. The selection procedure for the highest of these levels (the Administration
Trainee entry) comprises qualifying tests, followed by tests and interviews at
the Civil Service Selection Board and an interview by the Final Selection Board.
For the next level (the Executive Officer entry) selection involves qualifying
tests. For the lower level (the clerical entry) selection is normally by interview of
those holding the prescribed educational qualifications.
Entry to the professional and technical grades usually requires appropriate
qualifications, and selection is on the basis of past record and by interview.
GOVERNMENT
57
Promotion and
Conditions of
Service
Political and
Private
Activities
Most government departments employ full-time training officers and tutors
to help to identify staff training needs and to organise training by the most
appropriate methods (for example, formal courses or self-instruction). The Civil
Service College provides that training which is most efficiently undertaken
centrally. Considerable use is also made of external institutions.
Civil servants under the age of 18 may continue their education by attending
appropriate courses usually for one day a week (‘day release’ schemes). Adult
staff may be entitled to financial assistance to undertake, mainly in their own
time, private studies leading to recognised educational or professional qualifi¬
cations in approved subjects. There are also opportunities for civil servants in
mid-career to obtain fellowships or to go on sabbatical leave to undertake
research in areas of interest to themselves and their departments.
Promotions are made partly through centrally conducted competitions and
partly by the departments themselves. Normally promotion is from grade to
grade, but there can be accelerated promotion for staff who show exceptional
promise. Promotion or appointment to the grades of permanent secretary and
deputy secretary and all transfers between departments at these levels are
approved by the Prime Minister, who is advised by the official head of the Home
Civil Service.
Civil servants are encouraged to join the trade union which represents the
grade to which they belong. The National Whitley Council (for non-industrial
grades) and the Joint Co-ordinating Committee for government industrial
establishments (for industrial grades) each consists of senior officials (the
Official Side) and representatives of the unions (the Trade Union Side). Each
discusses conditions of service of staff and provides a forum for consultation.
There are Whitley committees in all government departments. Pay negotia¬
tions are conducted directly with the individual unions or with the Trade Union
Side of the National Whitley Council or of the Joint Co-ordinating Committee.
An independent inquiry (the Megaw Inquiry) into future arrangements for the
determination of non-industrial civil service pay reported in mid-1982. Its
recommendations are the subject of consultations with the unions.
Civil servants are expected to serve loyally the Government of the day,
regardless of its political composition. To maintain their reputation for political
impartiality, some restrictions are placed on their freedom to participate in poli¬
tical activities. No civil servant may be a member of Parliament, or (with certain
exceptions corresponding to the ‘politically free’ group shown below) be
adopted as a parliamentary candidate.
Civil Service rules place staff in three groups for the purpose of political activi¬
ties: (1) the ‘politically free’ group, consisting of industrial and non-office grades,
who are free to engage in any political activity including standing for Parlia¬
ment (although they would have to resign from the Service if elected); (2) the
‘politically restricted’ group, consisting of all staff above executive officer level,
together with those executive officers and certain related grades such as
information officers, who are debarred from national political activities but may
apply for permission to take part in local political activities; and (3) the ‘inter¬
mediate’ group, comprising all other staff (mainly clerical and typing grades)
who may apply for permission to take part in national or local political activity
apart from adoption as a parliamentary candidate.
Where required, permission is granted to the maximum extent consistent
with the reputation of the Civil Service for political impartiality and the
avoidance of any conflict with official duties. It is granted subject to a code of
discretion requiring moderation and the avoidance of embarrassment to
ministers.
58
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Security
Principal Types
of Local
Authority
Generally, there are no restrictions on the private activities of civil servants,
provided that these do not bring discredit on the Civil Service, and that there is
no possibility of conflict with official duties. For instance, a civil servant is
required to seek permission before taking part in any outside activity which
involves the use of official experience, or before accepting a directorship in any
company holding a contract with his or her department.
As a general rule the political views of civil servants are not a matter of official
concern. However, no one whose loyalty is in doubt may be employed on work
vital to the security of the State. For this reason certain posts are not open to
anyone known to be a member of a Communist or Fascist organisation, or
associated with such an organisation in a way that raises legitimate doubts
about his or her reliability, or to anyone whose reliability may be in doubt for
any other reason.
Each department is responsible for its own internal security, advised as
necessary by the Security Service. The Security Commission, if requested to do
so by the Prime Minister after consultation with the Leader of the Opposition,
may investigate any report on breaches of security in the public service and
advise on changes in security procedure.
Local Government
A wide range of public services is provided by democratically elected local
authorities throughout the United Kingdom. The gradual expansion of local
authority services, particularly in the period between the late 1940s and
mid-1970s, has inevitably led to a steady rise in local government expenditure
and in its support from central funds. In recent years central government has
sought to check this growth as part of a general policy of reducing public
expenditure, and at local level sections of the electorate have protested at
having to meet considerable annual increases in ‘rates’ (local property taxes —
see p 63). The Government has emphasised the need to achieve substantial
reductions in public expenditure in order to redress the balance between the
public and private sectors of the national economy and has asked local authori¬
ties to reduce their expenditure in line with reductions being made in its own
spending. In particular, since manpower forms such a significant part of
expenditure, they have been urged to reduce staff levels.
The specific powers and duties of local authorities are conferred on them by
Parliament, or by measures made under its authority. The actual
administration, and the exercise of discretion within statutory limits, are the
responsibility of the local authority. In the case of certain services, however,
ministers have powers to secure a measure of national uniformity in the stand¬
ard of a service provided, to safeguard public health, or to protect the rights of
individual citizens. For some services the minister concerned has wide powers
of supervision; for others there are strictly limited powers.
The main links between local authorities and the central government are: in
England, the Department of the Environment, although other departments are
concerned with various local government functions; in Scotland, the Scottish
Office; in Wales, the Welsh Office; and in Northern Ireland, the Department of
the Environment for Northern Ireland.
England and Wales (outside Greater London) is divided into 53 large county
authorities, within which there are 369 smaller district authorities. Both types
of authority have independent, locally elected councils, and have separate func¬
tions to perform. County authorities normally provide the large-scale local gov¬
ernment services, while the districts are responsible for the more local ones (see
pp 60-61). However, in six of the English counties, which are heavily populated
GOVERNMENT
59
Election of
Councils
and known as ‘metropolitan’ counties, responsibility for some large-scale ser¬
vices rests with the district authorities. The local government system in Wales
closely resembles that in non-metropolitan areas in England. English parish
councils or meetings are focuses for local opinion as bodies with limited powers
of local interest. In Wales community councils have similar functions.
Greater London (an administrative area of about 1,580 square km (610 square
miles) and a population of some 7 million) is administered by the Greater
London Council, the councils of 32 London boroughs and the Corporation of the
City of London.
The Government has announced proposals to create a more effective and
economical system of local government in Greater London and the six metropo¬
litan counties. Under these, the Greater London Council and the six metropoli¬
tan county councils would be abolished, and the borough and district councils
would become the sole principal tier of directly elected local government in
metropolitan areas. A small number of services (namely, the police and fire ser¬
vices and public transport in the metropolitan counties, the fire service in
London as a whole, and education in inner London) would require a statutory
authority over areas wider than the boroughs and districts; these services
would be run by joint boards composed of elected councillors nominated by the
borough or district councils. Legislation would be introduced in 1984-85 and
transfer of functions would take place in April 1986.
On the mainland of Scotland local government is on a two-tier basis: nine
regions are divided into 53 districts, each area having its own elected council.
There are three virtually all-purpose authorities for Orkney, Shetland and the
Western Isles. Provision is made for local community councils to be formed,
although they have no statutory functions and are not local authorities.
The areas and electoral arrangements of local authorities are kept under
review by the Local Government Boundary Commissions for England, Wales
and Scotland.
In Northern Ireland 26 district councils are responsible for local environ¬
mental and certain other services. Statutory bodies and local offices responsible
to central departments, administer major services such as housing, roads,
water, planning, education and health.
Local authority councils consist of a number of elected unpaid councillors pre¬
sided over by a chairman. They can claim a flat-rate attendance allowance or a
financial loss allowance for performing council business; they are also entitled
to travelling and subsistence allowances. Parish and community councillors
cannot claim expenses for duties within their own areas.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland each council annually elects a chair¬
man and vice-chairman. Some districts have the ceremonial title of borough, or
city, both granted by royal authority (in Northern Ireland by the Secretary of
State). In boroughs and cities the chairman is normally known as the Mayor (in
the City of London and certain other large cities, he or she is known as the Lord
Mayor). In Scotland the chairman of the district council of each of the four cities
is called the Lord Provost. No specific title is laid down for the chairmen of other
councils, but some are known as conveners, while others continue to use the old
title of‘provost’.
Elections for any form of local government normally take place every four
years. Metropolitan district elections are held for a third of the seats in each year
when there is no county council election. Non-metropolitan district councils
may adopt the same procedure or opt for whole council elections every four
years.
Anyone is entitled to vote at a local government election in Great Britain pro¬
vided that he or she is aged 18 years or over, is a British subject (including those
60
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Functions and
Services
with Commonwealth citizenship), or a citizen of the Irish Republic, is not
subject to any legal incapacity and is registered as a local government elector for
the area for which the election is held. To qualify for registration a person must
be resident in the council area on the qualifying date. In Northern Ireland there
are slightly different requirements.
A candidate for election as councillor normally stands as a representative of
one of the national political parties, or of some local interest, or as an indepen¬
dent. Candidates must be British subjects or citizens of the Irish Republic and
aged 21 or over. In addition, they must be registered as a local elector in the area
of the local authority to which they seek election; or have resided or occupied (as
owner or tenant) land or other premises in that area during the whole of the 12
months preceding the day on which they are nominated as candidates or, in
that 12 months, have had their principal or only place of work there. No one may
stand for election to a council of which he or she is an employee, and there are a
number of other disqualifications.
Local authority areas are generally divided into electoral areas for local
council elections. Administrative counties in England and Wales are divided
into electoral divisions. Districts in England, Wales and Northern Ireland are
divided into electoral ‘wards’, returning one councillor or more. In Scotland in
the regions and islands areas the electoral areas are called electoral divisions,
each returning a single member; the districts are divided into wards, similarly
returning a single member. For parish or community council elections in
England and Wales, each parish or community, or ward of a parish or com¬
munity (or, in some cases, a combination of parishes or communities), forms an
electoral area which returns one member or more. For elections to the Greater
London Council, Greater London is divided into electoral divisions, each
returning one councillor.
The procedure for local government voting in Great Britain is similar to that
for parliamentary elections, although postal voting is more restricted. There is
no postal voting for parish or community council elections. In Northern Ireland
local government elections are held on the basis of proportional representation
and electoral wards are grouped into district electoral areas.
Local authorities’ functions are far-reaching. Some are primarily duties, others
purely permissive.
Broadly speaking, functions in England and Wales are divided between
county and district councils on the basis that county councils are responsible
for matters requiring planning and administration over wide areas or requiring
the support of substantial resources. Within the metropolitan areas district
councils are responsible for functions needing substantial resources because
they have populations large enough to give such support. District councils as a
whole administer functions of more local significance. In London the division of
functions is slightly different.
English county councils are generally responsible for strategic planning,
transport planning, highways, traffic regulation, consumer protection, refuse
disposal, police and the fire service. Education, libraries and the personal social
services are functions of county councils in non-metropolitan areas and of dis¬
trict councils in metropolitan areas. All district councils are responsible, for
instance, for environmental health, housing, decisions on most planning
applications, and refuse collection. They may also provide off-street car parks
subject to the consent of the county council. Powers to operate some functions
— such as the provision of museums, art galleries and parks — are available at
both levels; arrangements depend on local agreement.
In Greater London the boroughs and the City Corporation are responsible for
the same range of functions as district councils in metropolitan areas (with the
GOVERNMENT
61
Internal
Organisation of
Local
Authorities
Officers and
Employees
addition of consumer protection). The Greater London Council (GLC) deals only
with services which require unified administration and control over the whole
area. In inner London education is administered by the Inner London Edu¬
cation Authority, an autonomous committee of the GLC. Responsibility for
highways in London is divided according to the type of road; the main strategic
road network is a matter for the GLC, while the boroughs look after other roads.
The boroughs have prime responsibility for the provision of housing. The GLC
has transferred its housing stock to the boroughs and surrounding districts and
concentrates on its strategic role focusing attention on areas of particular
housing need. London’s police force is directly responsible to the Home
Secretary.
In Wales the division of functions between county and district councils is
much the same as that between county and district councils in non¬
metropolitan areas of England.
Local authorities in England and Wales may arrange for any of their functions
to be carried out on their behalf by another local authority, other than functions
relating to education, police, the personal social services and national parks.
In Scotland the regional and district authorities discharge local government
functions in a way broadly similar to that of authorities in England and Wales.
Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles, because of their isolation from the
mainland, have single, virtually all-purpose authorities.
In Northern Ireland, local environmental and certain other services are
administered by the district councils, but responsibility for planning, roads,
water supply and sewerage services is exercised in each district by a local office
of the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland working closely
with the district council and its staff. Area boards, responsible to central
departments, administer locally education, public libraries and the health and
personal social services. The Northern Ireland Housing Executive, responsible
to the Department of the Environment, administers housing.
Local authorities have considerable freedom to make internal arrangements for
carrying out their duties. Most use the committee system, whereby policy and
principle are decided in full council, and committees administer the various
services. Parish and community councils in England and Wales are often able to
do their work efficiently in full session although they appoint committees from
time to time as necessary. Some councils have policy advisory or co-ordinating
committees with powers to originate policy, subject to the approval of the full
council. The powers and duties of local authority committees (which may be
advisory or executive) are usually laid down in the appointing council’s stand¬
ing orders.
A council is free to delegate all its powers to committees, except those in con¬
nection with raising loans, levying rates (see p 63), or making financial
demands on other authorities liable to contribute; these are legally reserved to
the council as a whole.
Local authorities can co-operate or share among themselves the discharge of
their functions.
The public and the press are admitted to all council and committee meetings
but may be excluded while a particular item is considered if the council or com¬
mittee decides that publicity would not be in the public interest.
Over 2 • 5 million people are employed by local authorities in Great Britain.
These include administrative, professional and technical staff, teachers and
manual workers. Nearly half of all local government workers are employed in
the education service.
62
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Local
Government
Finance
Government
Grants
Although a few appointments must be made by all the authorities responsible
for the functions concerned, councils are individually responsible within
national policy requirements for determining the size, composition and
deployment of their workforces. In Northern Ireland, each council must by law
appoint a clerk of the council as its chief officer.
As a general rule, employees are of three kinds: heads of departments or chief
officers: administrative, professional, clerical and technical staff; and manual
workers. Senior staff appointments are usually made on the recommendation of
the committee or committees particularly concerned: most junior
appointments are made by heads of departments, who are also responsible for
engaging manual workers. Appointments and engagements always conform to
the council’s set establishment, and committees are informed of appointments
which they have not made themselves.
Pay and conditions of service for local authority staff are a matter for each
council, although there are recommended scales.
Authorities differ in the degree to which they employ staff to carry out certain
functions (for example, building work, street cleaning or refuse collection) or
use private firms under contract. The Government’s policy of reducing public
service manpower is encouraging the use of private firms where there are resul¬
tant economies.
Local authority expenditure in the United Kingdom (on both current and capital
accounts) was about £33,000 million in 1982. A clear distinction is made
between capital and current expenditure. Capital expenditure is financed
partly from the current account surplus, partly from borrowing and the
remainder from grants and other income. Current expenditure is financed
mainly from central government grants and from local rates. Each local
authority is responsible for its own finance, although in a few cases several
authorities combine to provide a specialist service which it would be uneco¬
nomic for each to provide on its own.
Government ‘rate support grants’ to local authorities are paid in aid of revenues
generally. Grants are also paid towards the cost of specific services — either
towards current expenditure, such as on the police, or towards capital
expenditure, such as on the acquisition and clearance of derelict land. (In Wales
and Scotland approved schemes for acquiring and clearing derelict land are
financed by the Welsh and Scottish Development Agencies.) Annual subsidies
are paid for local authority housing.
Grants are also made towards the cost of rate rebates for people with low
incomes.
The system for the distribution of rate support grant in England and Wales
consists of a single block grant together with prescribed ceilings for the level of
total local authority capital expenditure. Authorities receive annual capital
amounts for housing, education, social services, transport and other services,
but are free to determine their own spending priorities by the transfer of
resources from one category to another. One of the effects of the system is to
ensure that high-spending authorities do not pre-empt even larger shares of
government money, reducing the amount available to those which observe
national financial guidelines.
In Scotland, the grant is distributed in three parts: the ‘needs’ element,
designed to give most help to authorities whose spending needs are greatest: the
‘resources’ element, used to supplement the rate income of authorities whose
rateable value per head of population falls below a standard figure, prescribed
for each year; and the ‘domestic’ element, which compensates authorities for
loss of rate income from reductions in rate poundage which they are required to
GOVERNMENT
63
Rates
Loans
give to householders. Excessive and unreasonable expenditure levels by local
authorities, however, are discouraged by central government which can make
selective grant and rate reductions in the case of individual authorities. Local
authority capital expenditure has been subject to central government control
since 1975.
In Northern Ireland district councils receive certain specific grants (for
example, for the acquisition of open space) and grants to compensate them for
loss of rate income arising from the statutory derating of premises. In addition,
councils whose rating resources are below a standard level receive a resources
grant to bring them up to that level.
Rates are local taxes paid by the occupiers of land and property (with certain
exceptions, see below) to meet part of the cost of local services. Each occupier’s
payment is calculated annually by the rating authority by multiplying the
rateable value of a property (broadly equivalent to its annual rental value) by the
rate poundage — an amount per £ of rateable value fixed by the authority accord¬
ing to its projected financial needs. Rateable values are assessed periodically,
and there is a system of appeals for disputed assessments. Crown (government)
property is not rateable but payments are made, based on values assessed by
the Treasury Valuer, in place of rates.
Government grants reduce domestic rates below the levels paid by commer¬
cial concerns, and provide rebates for people with low incomes. Rating relief is
available in certain circumstances on premises adapted for the use of the dis¬
abled. Agricultural land and buildings (apart from living accommodation) and
places of religious worship are exempted from rates. Charities pay half the full
rate on premises occupied for charitable purposes and may be given further
relief by rating authorities, who can also reduce or remit the rates for a wide
range of non-profit-making bodies. Rates may be levied on empty properties at
any percentage up to the full amount and in the case of empty commercial
property a surcharge may be payable.
In Scotland industrial (including freight transport) premises are rated at a half
of net annual value. There is empty property rating but no empty property
surcharge.
In Northern Ireland all industrial premises are fully derated as are commer¬
cial premises in Enterprise Zones. Certain other properties, such as freight
transport and recreational premises, are partially derated.
Local authorities may raise loans to finance capital expenditure under general
powers. For items of expenditure in key sectors (such as education, housing and
roads) those in England and Wales must seek prior central government
approval. For other capital expenditure, each authority receives an annual loan
authorisation within which it determines the sums to borrow and the projects to
undertake. The GLC applies annually for parliamentary sanction to raise the
money needed for capital expenditure while the City of London has ancient
charter powers to cover its borrowings. In Northern Ireland long-term borrow¬
ing by district councils is subject to central approval; in Scotland central
approval is given to capital expenditure, not to loans.
Local authorities may raise long-term loans by means of private mortgages,
issuing stock upon The Stock Exchange and bonds which may or may not be
quoted on The Stock Exchange. Local authorities also have right of access to the
Public Works Loan Board, financed by the Exchequer, or, in Northern Ireland,
to the Government Loans Fund, for long-term borrowing to finance a proportion
of their reckonable capital payments, and may borrow temporarily for a limited
proportion of their current outstanding loan debt.
64
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Control of
Finance
Local
Government
Complaints
System
Local councils normally have a finance committee to keep their financial policy
under constant review. They must have their accounts audited.
A complaints system for local government in England and Wales involves
independent statutory Commissions for Local Administration comprising local
commissioners (local government Ombudsmen). The English Commission
consists of three local commissioners and the Welsh of one. In Scotland the
statute provides for a single commissioner. All commissioners are responsible
in their particular area for investigating citizens’ complaints of maladminist¬
ration by local authorities. The commissioners help local authority councillors
to protect the interests of constituents.
In Northern Ireland a Commissioner for Complaints deals with complaints
alleging injustices suffered as a result of maladministration by district councils
and certain other public bodies.
The Fire Services
Every part of Britain is covered by a local fire service, which is subject to a
measure of central control. Other than in Northern Ireland, the cost is borne by
local authorities aided by central government through the rate support grant.
Each of the 64 fire authorities must by law make provision for fire-fighting,
and maintain a brigade of sufficient strength to meet all normal requirements
(in some parts of Scotland, authorities combine to provide fire cover). Other
fire-fighting organisations are maintained, for instance, by the Army and Air
Force Departments of the Ministry of Defence; by the Department of Trade and
Industry at certain establishments; and by some large industrial and commer¬
cial concerns.
The Home Secretary and the Secretary of State for Scotland have central
responsibility in England and Wales and in Scotland respectively. Central
control is directed mainly towards ensuring the operational efficiency of
brigades. Ministers have statutory powers to make regulations on such matters
as appointments and promotions, standards of training and equipment, pen¬
sions and disciplinary matters. Their approval is also required for reductions in
the operational establishments of fire brigades. Each minister is advised by a
Central Fire Brigades Advisory Council, consisting of officers of the respective
home departments, representatives of local authorities and of the associations
representing members of fire brigades and other people with special
qualifications, appointed by the minister concerned. Inspectorates of fire ser¬
vices advise on operational and technical matters. Most fire brigades include
part-time personnel to augment and support the full-time strength in return for
a retaining fee and call-out and attendance fee. Fire authorities also employ
people for duties in controls communications and mobilising and staff duties.
There are about 34,000 full-time and 16,000 part-time operational members of
fire brigades in Britain.
Every fire authority must buy appliances and equipment to meet all normal
fire-fighting requirements in its area. Certain equipment is standardised so that
there is complete interchangeability when a fire is attended by more than one
brigade. The principal types of fire-fighting appliances are bought by fire
authorities to specifications approved by central government on the advice of
the Central Fire Brigades Advisory Councils. The specifications ensure that
minimum standards are maintained, and allow sufficient freedom of design to
meet special circumstances and encourage further developments.
Each fire authority must appoint a Chief Fire Officer (Firemaster in Scotland)
who exercises central control from brigade headquarters. Divisional officers in
charge of the geographical divisions into which most brigade areas are divided
are responsible for mobilising forces to deal with outbreaks of fire. Constant
GOVERNMENT
65
Fire Prevention
Research
Special
Services
Fire Losses
Fire Casualties
communication is maintained between divisional and brigade headquarters
and, if a fire should be beyond the capabilities of a division, help is sent from one
or more neighbouring divisions, or even from another fire authority. The
nearest available force is sent to a fire, regardless of area boundaries.
Fire authorities are concerned in some way with fire precautions in most
buildings used by the public and have major responsibility for enforcing legis¬
lation concerning fire precautions. They must also make efficient arrange¬
ments for giving advice on fire prevention, restricting the spread of fires, and
means of escape. Courses in fire prevention are held at the Fire Service Techni¬
cal College for fire brigade officers. In addition to their enforcement and advi¬
sory duties, brigades are also involved in education and publicity to promote fire
safety, particularly in the home. The Government is advised on prevention by
the Joint Fire Prevention Committee of the Central Fire Brigades Advisory
Councils, representing the fire service and central and local authorities.
Research into health hazards to firemen, fire prevention and protection, fire
brigade organisation and fire-fighting equipment is conducted by the Home
Office with the help of the fire service under the auspices of the Joint Committee
on Fire Research of the Central Fire Brigades Advisory Councils. Individual
research projects are undertaken by the Home Office Scientific Research and
Development Branch or, under contract to the Home Office, by other govern¬
ment agencies, notably the Fire Research Station, which is part of the Building
Research Establishment of the Department of the Environment, or by private
consultants. The Fire Research Station is the principal organisation studying
and investigating technical aspects of fire.
Fire authorities have discretion to use their brigades and equipment, free of
charge, in a variety of non-fire emergencies (such as rail, road and aircraft
accidents, collapse of buildings, flooding of premises, leakage of harmful gas or
liquids and the rescue of people or animals from dangerous situations).
The direct cost of damage to buildings and goods destroyed by fires in Great
Britain in 1982 amounted to an estimated £390 • 7 million (consequential losses
from the interruption of business are not included in this total). Most fires
involving heavy losses occur when the premises are unattended; and fires are
more likely to start in storage areas than in production departments. Industries
which suffer most severely include engineering and electrical firms, textiles,
food, drink and tobacco, warehousing, chemical and allied industries, paper,
printing and publishing firms, and retailing.
About 1,000 people, particularly the elderly and young children, die in fires
every year (most of them at home) and a further 9,000 or so suffer injuries.
Among the chief causes of fatal fires are ignition of upholstery, bedding and
clothing by smokers’ materials and heaters.
3 Overseas
Relations
Britain’s overseas relations reflect both its traditional position as a major
trading and maritime power whose people have settled throughout the world,
and its present concern to help to maintain peace and to secure world-wide
economic and social progress through international co-operation. It has diplo¬
matic relations with some 150 countries, and with about 20 of these has
common security arrangements, principally through the North Atlantic Treaty
Organisation. Commercial activities have helped Britain to maintain its posi¬
tion as a world financial centre. It has considerable overseas investments and its
international trading pattern reflects its dependence on imports for over a third
of its food and more than half of its raw material requirements and the relatively
high proportion of its gross national product accounted for by exports (over a
quarter); for details of trade and payments, see Chapter 19. Britain provides
development assistance to some 120 independent countries as well as to its
remaining dependencies.
In an increasingly interdependent world, the attainment of overseas
objectives and the ability to exert influence in support of them are seen as best
achieved through co-operation with other nations on a regional or global basis.
Britain is now a member of some 120 international organisations ranging from
the world-wide United Nations concerned with problems of world peace, inter¬
national economic co-operation and social issues to regionally based and
technically orientated bodies. In particular, it is a member of the European
Community whose policies it helps to determine, and is increasingly co¬
ordinating its overseas policies through the Community’s political co-operation
mechanism (see p 70). As a member of the Commonwealth, Britain is a part of a
representative cross-section of the international community, which has
evolved from the British Empire (since 1945 Britain has progressively, and
largely peacefully, dismantled its Empire and prepared nearly 50 countries for
independence) and whose 48 members share a common language, common
technical standards, similar systems of law and close professional, academic
and commercial links.
Britain also has strong ties with the United States, including a common lan¬
guage and many common political and cultural traditions.
A long involvement in world affairs has given Britain both a vital interest and a
firm belief in the maintenance of international order governed by respect for a
generally accepted system of law. As a permanent member of the United
Nations Security Council it makes support for the United Nations a central
feature of its foreign policy.
Administration Although responsibilities of many government departments have a significant
overseas dimension, the general conduct of overseas relations is the responsi¬
bility of the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs acting
through the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and British diplomatic posts
overseas. The latter comprise embassies and high commissions in over 130
countries,1 together with subordinate consulates general and consulates, and
missions at ten multilateral organisations. These posts, like the Foreign and
1 A few embassies are accredited to more than one country; for example, the embassy at Dakar in
Senegal is also accredited to Mauretania, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Mali and Cape Verde.
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
67
The British
Council
Commonwealth Office, are staffed by members of the Diplomatic Service
and locally engaged staff. Excluding supporting administrative and communi¬
cations services, the staff are employed on political and economic work, export
promotion and other commercial matters, consular and immigration work, aid
administration, and information and cultural work. Other departments which
have a primary concern with overseas relations include the Ministry of
Defence, the Department of Trade and Industry, the Treasury and the Overseas
Development Administration which is part of the Foreign and Commonwealth
Office; but the involvement of most has increased in recent years with the
growing dependence of domestic economic policy on international decisions
and with Britain’s membership of the European Community.
Where questions of overseas policy involve matters within the responsibility
of other departments, the Foreign and Commonwealth Office formulates policy
in consultation with the departments concerned. The balance of responsibili¬
ties is a matter of constant adjustment, and the department with the predomi¬
nant functional interest, even though it may be primarily domestic, takes the
lead. This is particularly so in policy concerning the European Community and
international monetary matters. In the case of policy towards the Community,
the Foreign and Commonwealth Office exercises its co-ordinating role at
official level through the machinery of the Cabinet Office.
Other bodies whose work has an overseas dimension include the British
Overseas Trade Board and the Export Credits Guarantee Department which
provide export services for industry; the Crown Agents for Oversea
Governments and Administrations which helps to arrange purchases from
British aid funds and appointments under technical co-operation programmes;
and the British Council.
The British Council, which celebrates its fiftieth anniversary in 1984, was
founded in 1934 to promote a wider knowledge of Britain and the English lan¬
guage abroad and to develop closer cultural relations between Britain and other
countries. (For Britain’s international scientific relations, see p 344.) The acti¬
vities of the Council, which has staff in over 80 countries, include the teaching
of English and the recruitment of British teachers for posts overseas, adminis¬
tering the Government’s educational assistance and technical co-operation
training programmes; fostering personal contacts between British and overseas
people, especially in the educational, professional and scientific areas;
running, or helping to maintain, libraries of British books and periodicals over¬
seas and providing information through touring exhibitions and bibliographi¬
cal services; and presenting overseas the best of British arts. In Britain, the
Council is concerned mainly with arranging programmes for professional
visitors and with the placing, administration and welfare of overseas students.
A basic principle is that the Council’s work should be of benefit both to Britain
and to the receiving country.
About 7 7 per cent of the Council’s budget, which totalled some £155-6 million
in 1983-84, is provided by the Foreign and Commonwealth Office (including
funds from the Overseas Development Administration) and on its behalf the
Council is responsible for the implementation of more than 30 cultural
agreements with other countries. Overseas it acts as education adviser to
Britain’s diplomatic missions and is responsible for educational assistance in
developing countries in which it is represented. Increasingly, the Council is
undertaking education projects paid for by overseas clients and is providing
English classes abroad; these activities are expected to produce about 23 per
cent (some £35 • 8 million) of its income in 1983-84.
The Council’s role in Britain’s educational aid programme has increased con¬
siderably in recent years and since 1980-81 it has had responsibility for all links
and exchanges in higher education which require official support.
68
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Britain’s
Accession
Community
Institutions
Membership of the
European Community
Britain joined the European Community on 1 January 1973 and its membership
was endorsed in a national referendum in 1975. The other members are
Belgium, France, the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, Luxembourg and the
Netherlands, the original six members; Denmark and the Irish Republic which
j oined with Britain in 1973; and Greece which became a member in 1981. With
its partners, Britain seeks to develop the Community in the interests of all its
members. It supports the membership applications of Portugal and Spain,
seeing enlargement as a means of strengthening democracy in Europe.
The European Community consists of three communities set up by separate
treaties: the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC), the European
Economic Community (EEC) and the European Atomic Energy Community
(Euratom). The Community is the world’s largest trading block, accounting for
about a third of world trade. Designed to lay the foundations for a closer union
between the peoples of Europe and to promote economic expansion by means
of a common market and the gradual approximation of member states’
economic policies, the Community has moved towards these objectives by
abolishing internal tariffs and certain other trade barriers, establishing a
common customs tariff, and making provision for the free movement of labour,
capital and services. An increasing proportion of British trade is with the other
member states (exports having grown from £3,000 million to £23,000 million
between 1972 and 1982, that is from 30 • 6 per cent to 41 • 6 per cent of total
exports). There are also common policies for agriculture and for fisheries. Over¬
seas countries having special links with Community member states are
accorded preferential treatment in aid and the development of trade.
A common market for coal and steel is designed to ensure an orderly supply
of these commodities to member states. The Coal and Steel Community’s
funds are raised by a levy on production, and investment grants are given to
encourage the modernisation of the industries, for research, and for social
measures to help to re-deploy coal and steel workers. Loans are also raised
which promote workers’ housing and aid capital investment.
One of the Community’s aims is to co-ordinate member states’ nuclear
energy industries and their other peaceful nuclear activities. Since 1959 there
has been a common market for all nuclear materials and a common control
system prevents their diversion to purposes other than those declared. There is
also a co-ordinated research programme in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
By the Treaty of Accession, signed in January 1972, Britain became a party to
the two treaties of Rome establishing the EEC and Euratom. Accession to the
ECSC was effected by a decision of the Council of Ministers. The European
Communities Act 1972 made the legislative changes necessary for Britain to
comply with the obligations entailed by membership of the Community and to
exercise the rights of membership.
In 1977, following a transitional period during which tariffs on trade in
industrial products between Britain and the original six members were pro¬
gressively reduced, the internal tariffs were abolished and the phased introduc¬
tion of the common customs tariff on British imports from countries neither
members of the Community, nor having any special arrangements with it, was
completed. Britain also adopted, progressively, the Community system of agri¬
cultural support under the Common Agricultural Policy. The period of
adjustment for payments to the Community budget ended in 1979.
The separate institutions established by the treaties for each of the three
communities were merged in 1967. Each state has one representative on the
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
69
Membership of the European Community
Council of Ministers; in the other institutions Britain’s representation is in line
with that of the other large member states (France, the Federal Republic of
Germany and Italy). English is one of the Community’s official languages.
The Council of Ministers is the principal decision-making body for all major
Community questions, member states being represented on it by foreign or
other ministers as appropriate to the subject under discussion. The presidency
of the Council changes at six-monthly intervals. Most Council decisions are
taken on the basis of a proposal by the Commission. Some issues may be
decided by majority, or qualified majority, with votes weighted according to
provisions in the Treaty of Accession. Where very important interests of
member states are involved, however, the Council usually proceeds on the
basis of unanimity. Britain strongly supports the retention of this arrangement
as the basis for Community decision-making on major issues.
The Committee of Permanent Representatives (COREPER), composed of
member states’ ambassadors to the Community, assists the Council by prepar¬
ing its meetings and co-ordinating the work of other subordinate bodies and
groups.
The Commission formulates policy proposals for submission to the Council
of Ministers, promotes the Community interests, attempts to reconcile
national viewpoints and implements the provisions of the treaties and Com¬
munity measures. Certain executive powers of decision are delegated to it, for
example, in the areas of agriculture and trade and competition policy. It is com¬
posed of 14 commissioners nominated by member governments; two are from
Britain. Each of the commissioners is responsible for one or more of the main
Community activities. The Commission is pledged to act independently of
national or sectional interests and to formulate its proposals and administer
policy in the interests of the Community as a whole. Its proposals are made only
70
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
after extensive consultation with officials of the national governments and
with producers, trade unions, employers’ associations and many others.
The Court of Justice interprets and adjudicates on the meaning of the treaties
and of any measures taken by the Council of Ministers and Commission under
them, hears complaints and appeals brought by or against Community
institutions, member states or individuals and gives preliminary rulings on
questions referred to it by courts in the member states. As a court of final
appeal, its procedure in such cases is broadly similar to that of the highest
courts in member states; its rulings are binding on member countries, Com¬
munity institutions and individuals. The Court consists of 11 judges assisted by
five advocates-general who make reasoned submissions concerning cases
brought before the Court to help it in its interpretation of Community law.
The European Parliament is composed of 434 members, 81 elected from
Britain, who sit according to party affiliation and not nationality. Direct elec¬
tions to the Parliament, first held in June 1979, are held every five years, and
the next will take place in June 1984. The Parliament is consulted on and
debates all major policy issues of the Community. Members may question the
Council of Ministers and Commission, and have the power on a two-thirds
majority to dismiss the Commission. The Parliament can also reject in its
entirety the draft annual budget as presented by the Commission and
approved by the Council. A formal conciliation procedure has been adopted for
use in the event of disagreement between the Parliament and the Council of
Ministers on matters with major budgetary or financial implications.
The European Court of Auditors examines all Community revenue and
expenditure to see that it has been legally received and spent, and to ensure
sound financial management. It draws up an annual report, and may also
submit observations on specific questions at the request of the Community
institutions.
The Economic and Social Committee is a consultative body representing a
cross-section of economic interests. Its members (representing employers’
organisations, trade unions and other interests) are consulted by the Council
of Ministers and the Commission during the formulation of policy. Britain is
entitled to send 24 members out of a total of 156.
In addition to, and separately from, the institutions operating within the
Community framework established by treaty, the member states have set up
machinery under which they consult each other before taking up final posi¬
tions on important questions of foreign policy. Known as political co-operation,
these consultations include regular meetings of foreign ministers, monthly
meetings of senior officials, and contacts at working level among those con¬
cerned with particular questions. In addition, the ten foreign ministries are
linked by a secure communications system. Representatives of member states
serving in other countries and international organisations maintain regular
contact.
The Community’s heads of State or of Government meet at least three times
a year as the European Council which operates outside the treaty framework
and considers both Community matters and those arising in the context of
political co-operation. It discusses issues unresolved in the Council of Ministers
as well as general Community problems and lays down guidelines and political
direction for future work.
Community policies are implemented by regulations, which are legally
binding and directly applicable in all member countries; directives, which are
binding, as to the result to be achieved, on member states to which they are
addressed but allow national authorities to decide on means of implemen¬
tation; decisions, which are binding on those to whom they are addressed (for
example, member states, firms, or individuals); and recommendations and
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
71
Community
Policies1
External
Relations
opinions, which have no binding force. The Council can also indicate a general
policy direction through resolutions.
The member governments discuss a wide range of foreign policy issues and,
where possible, reach common positions. At the United Nations their policies
are closely co-ordinated, and they vote together on most major issues. They
adopted a common strategy at the 1975 Helsinki Conference on Security and
Co-operation in Europe and they also worked closely at both the
Belgrade (1977-78) and Madrid (1980-83) review conferences. They condem¬
ned the 1981 imposition of martial law in Poland and the suppression of the
independent trade union, Solidarity, as a violation of the principles agreed
upon at Helsinki, and instituted a number of economic sanctions against
Poland and the Soviet Union. Following the European Council’s Venice Declar¬
ation in June 1980, which set out the member governments’ views on the prin¬
ciples on which a comprehensive settlement of the Arab—Israeli conflict should
be based, representatives of the member states have visited the area to discuss
their ideas with the parties concerned. Four member governments (including
Britain) are participating in a peacekeeping force in Sinai following the 1982
withdrawal from the area by Israel. After Israel’s invasion of Lebanon in 1982
Britain and two other member states contributed to the multinational force
deployed there from late 1982. The member governments have adopted a code
of conduct on employment practices for those of their companies operating in
South Africa and are supporting the efforts of a ‘contact group’ of five Western
states (including Britain, France and the Federal Republic of Germany) to
promote an internationally acceptable solution to the problem of Namibia. In
pursuit of a British initiative the member governments proposed an interna¬
tional conference, to meet in two stages, with a view to ending Soviet interven¬
tion in Afghanistan and restoring that country’s independence and
non-aligned status. During the 1982 Falklands crisis they introduced economic
sanctions and an arms embargo against Argentina.
On most international trade matters the Council of Ministers agree a
common position before negotiations and the Commission speaks, and where
necessary negotiates, on behalf of the Community (for example, in the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and under the Multi-Fibre Arrangement).
Commercial co-operation agreements have been concluded with most coun¬
tries in the Mediterranean basin, and some countries in the South Asian sub¬
continent, Latin America and other areas, as well as with the Association of
South East Asian Nations. Discussions covering trade and other matters have
taken place with regional groupings of Latin American, Arab and South-East
Asian countries.
The Community has also improved progressively its generalised scheme of
preferences, which covers manufactures and semi-manufactures exported by
developing countries, with the aim in particular of benefiting the poorest of
them (see p 87). The latest scheme started in 1981 and runs for ten years.
The second Lome Convention, which governs aid, trade and co-operation
between the Community and 63 developing countries in Africa, the Caribbean
and the Pacific (AGP), came into operation in 1981; over half the AGP countries
are members of the Commonwealth. The Convention provides for aid and
European Investment Bank lending of about £3,250 million, industrial and
agricultural co-operation, a scheme designed to stabilise the commodity
export earnings of the ACP countries, assistance for ACP mineral producers
whose production and income suffer from temporary disruptions beyond their
1 Some details of Community policies as they affect British domestic affairs will be found in the
appropriate chapters.
72
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Finance
Internal Policies
control, and duty-free access to the Community for ACP countries’ exports of
all industrial and most agricultural goods, including improved access for
exports such as rum and beef. All British dependent territories (with the excep¬
tion of Bermuda, Gibraltar and Hong Kong), together with the overseas territo¬
ries of other Community members, are formally associated with the
Community as a whole under conditions parallel to those in the Lome Conven¬
tion and have similar aid and trade benefits. Negotiations for a third Lome
Convention, which would come into operation in 1985, began in autumn 1983.
Britain played a leading part in urging the Community to adopt an aid pro¬
gramme encompassing those developing countries (many of which are among
the world’s poorest) not covered by the Lome Convention or having any other
special relationship with the Community. The programme for these non-
associated states has grown steadily since 1976 and was worth £135 million in
1982. Priority is given to rural development and agricultural production in the
poorest countries. The Community also has a food aid programme, worth
about £330 million in 1983.
The Community budget is largely financed by an ‘own resources’ system of
levies on agricultural imports, customs duties and the product of a notional
rate of value added tax levied on a Community harmonised basis at a rate not
exceeding 1 per cent.
Britain’s ‘own resources’ contributions are much higher than its receipts
from Community policies. The main reason for this is that the Common Agri¬
cultural Policy absorbs the major share of Community spending, but Britain’s
agricultural sector is relatively small. This problem was foreseen during the
accession negotiations, and Britain was given an assurance that, if unaccep¬
table situations arose, the very survival of the Community would demand that
the institutions find equitable solutions. In May 1980 the Community agreed on
proposals providing for more equitable net budgetary contributions by Britain
for the years 1980 and 1981. It also agreed to review the development of Com¬
munity policies and to make structural changes with a view to preventing the
recurrence of such ‘unacceptable situations’ to any Community member.
Since this was not achieved in time arrangements were agreed to reduce
Britain’s net contribution in 1982 by a further refund of over £500 million. In
June 1983 memberstatesagreedarefund to Britain of£437 millionfor 1983 and
soon after began negotiations on the long-term reform of the Community’s
financing system.
In Britain’s view a lasting solution must involve greater control of agricultu¬
ral costs and arrangements to ensure a fairer distribution of the financial
burdens and benefits among member states, with proportionately greater
spending on industrial, regional, social and urban policies. (Expenditure on the
Common Agricultural Policy accounted for about 65 per cent of the 1983
budget, while regional policy took 5 • 6 per cent, social policy 5 • 7 per cent, aid
to developing countries 4 • 5 per cent, and projects concerned with research,
energy, industry and transport 2 • 4 per cent. Nearly 5 per cent was taken by
supplementary and special energy measures designed to reduce Britain’s
budgetary contribution.)
The Common Agricultural Policy is the main Community policy, established
in the 1960s to ensure food supplies at reasonable prices for consumers and a
reasonable standard of living for farmers (see p 261). In January 1983 the Com¬
munity agreed a common fisheries policy (see p 266). The European Social
Fund provides grants towards schemes of training, job creation and geographi¬
cal mobility of workers. The European Regional Development Fund (see p 199)
provides grants for industrial and infrastructure projects in the less-developed
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
73
or industrially declining regions of the Community with the aim of reducing
existing imbalances or preventing the creation of new ones. Britain has
received substantial grants from the two Funds, together with grants and loans
from the European Coal and Steel Community, the European Investment Bank
(see p 199) and the guidance section of the European Agricultural Guidance
and Guarantee Fund (see p 261).
Community industrial policy includes measures designed to deal with the
collapse of demand for steel; temporary mandatory production quotas have
been introduced in order to cut back production to the level of demand, thereby
allowing economic price levels to be obtained. Efforts are also being made to
restructure and modernise the industry so that it can become profitable
without governmental aid.
Other areas of action include energy, environment and transport policies.
The European Monetary System was established in 1979 to promote mone¬
tary stability in Europe. It consists of an exchange-rate mechanism, a mone¬
tary unit known as the European Currency Unit (ECU - based on a ‘basket’ of
national currencies including sterling, the value of which is recalculated daily)
which is used within the Community for budgetary and other purposes, and
enlarged Community short- and medium-term credit facilities. The member
states are also committed to the establishment of a European Monetary Fund.
Britain has participated in the system from the outset, although not in the
exchange-rate arrangements, and has deposited 20 per cent of its gold and
dollar currency reserves with the European Monetary Co-operation Fund in
exchange for ECUs. The Government intends that Britain should join the
exchange rate mechanism when conditions permit.
The Commonwealth
The Commonwealth is a voluntary association of 48 independent states with a
combined population of over 1,000 million, about a quarter of the world total.
Britain participates fully in all its activities and values it as a means of consult¬
ing and co-operating with peoples of widely differing cultures, thereby contri¬
buting to the promotion of international understanding and peace.
Commonwealth members are a representative cross- section of mankind in all
stages of social and economic development. Their peoples are drawn from
practically all the world’s main races and from all continents. As some of its
members are very rich and others very poor, the Commonwealth acts as a
bridge between rich and poor nations.
The members are Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, the Bahamas,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Botswana, Britain, Canada, Cyprus, Dominica,
Fiji, The Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guyana, India, Jamaica, Kenya, Kiribati,
Lesotho, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mauritius, Nauru, New Zealand,
Nigeria, Papua New Guinea, Saint Christopher and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Sri Lanka, Swaziland, Tanzania, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tuvalu, Uganda, Vanuatu, Western Samoa, Zambia and Zimbabwe. Maldives,
Nauru, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, and Tuvalu are special members
entitled to take part in all functional Commonwealth meetings and activities
but not meetings of heads of Government. Brunei, which is due to become fully
independent at the end of 1983, also participates in some functional Common¬
wealth meetings.1 The Queen is recognised as head of the Commonwealth; she
is also head of State in 18 countries (see p 29).
1 Under a Treaty of Friendship and Co-operation concluded in 1979 Britain is to relinquish its
responsibility for Brunei’s external affairs and its consultative commitment for Brunei’s
defence at the end of 1983.
Consultation
The Common¬
wealth
Secretariat
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The origin of the Commonwealth lies in the gradual granting of self-
government to the older-established British colonies (later known as the
Dominions) in Australia, Canada, New Zealand and South Africa1 where
European settlement had occurred on a large scale. Their fully independent
status in relation to Britain was legally formulated in the Statute of Westmin¬
ster of 1931. The main expansion in Commonwealth membership, however,
took place after the second world war following Britain’s decision to guide its
other dependent territories towards self-government and independence. This
process began in 1947 with the independence of India and Pakistan,2 and in
1957 Ghana became the first African dependency to become independent. By
the end of the 1960s nearly all the British dependencies in Africa had gained
their independence as had many in the Caribbean and in Asia.
As a member of the Commonwealth, Britain participates in a system of mutual
consultation and co-operation. The Commonwealth does not formulate
central policies on, say, economic or foreign affairs. Nevertheless the con¬
siderable consultation and co-operation is of benefit to member countries and
contributes to international understanding. It led, for instance, to the
Commonwealth playing a significant role in the events leading to Zimbabwe’s
independence in April 1980, and to Commonwealth involvement in Uganda
when a team observed the 1980 elections and when a military training team
was sent there in 1982.
Consultation takes place through diplomatic representatives known as High
Commissioners, meetings of heads of Government, specialised conferences of
other ministers and officials, expert groups, and discussions at international
conferences and the United Nations. Trade and cultural exhibitions and con¬
ferences of professional and unofficial medical, cultural, educational and
economic organisations are other ways in which frequent contacts are made.
Heads of Government usually meet every two years, most recently in Mel¬
bourne in 1981, with New Delhi the location for the meeting in November 1983.
Proceedings are normally in private which facilitates a frank and informal
exchange of views. On international affairs no formal decisions are taken and
no attempt is made to formulate specifically Commonwealth policies,
although, on occasion, common views on matters of major international
concern are formulated and reflected in the communiques issued at the end of
the meetings. Occasionally separate declarations are made on particular
issues, for instance, the 1971 declaration of Commonwealth principles, the 1977
statement which commits member governments to take every practical step
to discourage sporting contacts with South Africa, the 1979 Lusaka declaration
on racism and racial prejudice, and the 1981 Melbourne declaration on the
economic and other problems facing developing countries.
One of the most important Commonwealth activities is consultation and co¬
operation in economic affairs, and finance ministers meet annually to discuss
world economic problems. In recent years, they have paid particular attention
to the problems of development and the establishment of a fairer international
economic order. Other ministerial meetings include those of agriculture,
education, health and law ministers which take place every two or three years.
The Commonwealth Secretariat provides the central organisation for consul¬
tation and co-operation among member states. Established in London in 1965,
headed by a Secretary-General appointed by the heads of Government, and
financed by member governments, the Secretariat is responsible to Common¬
wealth governments collectively.
1 South Africa ceased to be a member of the Commonwealth in 1961.
2 Pakistan left the Commonwealth in 1972.
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
75
As the main agency for multilateral communication between governments,
the Secretariat promotes consultation, disseminates information on matters
of common concern, and organises meetings and conferences, including those
of heads of Government and of ministers. It co-ordinates many Common¬
wealth activities related to international economic, social and political affairs,
including food production and rural development, the role of women in
development, youth programmes, management development, science and
technology, law and health. The Secretariat also administers the Common¬
wealth Fund for Technical Co-operation.
Because of its neutral position the Secretariat has been able to make its good
offices available in cases of dispute, and has carried out, on request, special
assignments requiring demonstrable impartiality.
Commonwealth Britain plays an active part in the work of the Commonwealth Fund for Techni-
Fund for cal Co-operation established within the Commonwealth Secretariat to provide
Technical technical co-operation for economic and social development in Common-
Co-operation wealth developing countries. It is financed by contributions from developed
and developing states, Britain contributing about 30 per cent of its income.
The Fund provides experts to undertake advisory assignments or fill specific
posts and uses consultancy firms to make studies for governments. Its edu¬
cation and training programme is of particular help in raising levels of techni¬
cal and managerial skill, and makes wide use of training facilities within
developing member countries for the benefit of other developing countries. It
has a special programme to help countries develop their exports, another on
food production and rural development and a small technical assistance group
to give advice in key areas. An industrial development unit, the main executive
agency of the Commonwealth Action Programme of Industrial Co-operation
established in 1979, investigates the feasibility of establishing new industries
in developing countries and helps to prepare agreed projects.
Other Technical Expenditure by Britain on technical co-operation with Commonwealth
Co-operation developing countries in 1982 was nearly £102 million, the greater part being
spent on financing staff for service for Commonwealth governments and in
financing training places in Britain for people from Commonwealth countries;
volunteers are also sent from Britain to serve overseas. Other help includes
consultancy services, the supply of training and research equipment and the
provision of advice by British scientific and technical institutions.
Britain is a major contributor to the Commonwealth Scholarship and
Fellowship Plan, a system of awards for people of high intellectual promise to
study in Commonwealth countries other than their own, and provides some
650 awards annually out of a total of over 1,000 within the scheme. Financial
disbursement of official development assistance to Commonwealth developing
countries totalled some £228 million in 1982; some also received investment
finance from the Commonwealth Development Corporation.
Commonwealth The Commonwealth Foundation was established in 1966 to promote closer pro-
Foundation fessional co-operation within the Commonwealth. Following a decision at the
1981 Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting, the Foundation has been
reconstructed as an international organisation retaining the objectives,
autonomous character and organisational arrangements in broadly the same
terms as approved earlier. The Foundation is financed by member
governments and administers a fund for promoting closer professional co¬
operation within the Commonwealth. It has assisted in the creation of 21 profes¬
sional associations and in the creation and growth of many national ones; it has
also created 16 multi-disciplinary professional centres.
76
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Other A large number of organisations are concerned with the Commonwealth. The
Organisations Commonwealth Institute, financed largely by the British Government, pro¬
motes knowledge about the Commonwealth through films, library services,
lecture tours by members of the staff and study conferences for students; its
headquarters in London has a permanent publicity exhibition depicting the
life of member states, each country financing its own stand. The Royal
Commonwealth Society, which is over 100 years old, is a centre for study and
discussion, its library in London having one of the largest collections on the
Commonwealth. The Society has branches, affiliated organisations and repre¬
sentatives in many countries.
In keeping with the fact that the Commonwealth is an association of peoples
as well as governments, many unofficial organisations, professional bodies
and voluntary societies provide machinery for co-operation. Professional
bodies include associations of architects, doctors, engineers, lawyers,
librarians, magistrates, museum curators, nurses, pharmacists, planners,
surveyors and veterinary surgeons. Other organisations include the Common¬
wealth Parliamentary Association which organises an annual conference of
parliamentarians, the Commonwealth Press Union, the Commonwealth
Broadcasting Association, the Commonwealth Youth Exchange Council, the
Commonwealth Games Federation and the Commonwealth Arts Association.
DEPENDENCIES There are 15 remaining British dependent territories: Anguilla, Bermuda,
British Antarctic Territory, British Indian Ocean Territory, British Virgin
Islands, Cayman Islands, Falkland Islands, Falklands Islands Dependencies,
Gibraltar, Hong Kong, Montserrat, Pitcairn Group of Islands, St Helena, St
Helena Dependencies (Ascension, Tristan de Cunha) and the Turks and Caicos
Islands. They have a combined population of 5 • 5 million, of which 5 • 3 million
live in Hong Kong. Few are rich in natural resources, and some are scattered
groups of islands. There are no permanent inhabitants in the British Antarctic
Territory or British Indian Ocean Territory.
Most dependencies have considerable self-government with their own legis¬
lature and civil service. Britain is generally responsible, through a Governor, for
defence, internal security and foreign affairs.
It is Britain’s policy to give independence to those dependencies that want it,
and not to force it on those which do not. The Falkland Islands and Gibraltar are
the subject of territorial claims by Argentina and Spain respectively. In both
cases the inhabitants wish to retain the link with Britain, which does not accept
that British sovereignty is in doubt. The Government is therefore pledged not to
grant any transfer of sovereignty against their wishes since this would be con¬
trary to the principle of self-determination. It was in fulfilment of this responsi¬
bility, and in exercise of its right to self-defence under the United Nations
Charter, that Britain, after diplomatic efforts had failed, resorted to military
force to restore British administration in the Falkland Islands and the Falkland
Islands Dependencies following their illegal invasion and occupation by Argen¬
tina in April 1982. Argentina and Chile have claims to territory which overlaps
part of the British Antarctic Territory. Claims to territorial sovereignty in the
Antarctic, however, are suspended by the provisions of the 1959 Antarctic
Treaty.
International Peace and Security
Britain is concerned to protect its territorial integrity and political
independence, as well as the interests of its dependencies and of its allies and
pursues these objectives through a national security policy in which defence is
coupled with strenuous efforts towards removing or alleviating the causes of
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
77
East-West
Relations
international tension and achieving balanced and verifiable international
arms control and disarmament.
British defence policy (see Chapter 4) is based on the North Atlantic Treaty
Organisation (NATO)1 which member countries regard as their guarantor of
security, freedom and well-being, and as an important contribution to interna¬
tional peace and stability. The purpose of NATO is to enable its member coun¬
tries to maintain peace with freedom. It pursues a strategy of deterrence,
designed to convince any potential aggressor that the use of force, or the threat
of it, carries risks far outweighing any likely advantage. At the same time
NATO countries are engaged in a number of negotiations aimed at reducing
the level of nuclear and conventional forces.
Although Britain’s defence resources are concentrated on key NATO tasks,
its defence policy is also designed to help, whenever possible, its own and more
general Western interests outside the NATO area. There are specific national
defence commitments, including the defence of dependent territories, and
Britain also supports United Nations and other peacekeeping efforts. In addi¬
tion it provides military assistance and training to a number of friendly coun¬
tries and carries out peacetime exercises and deployment in many different
parts of the world.
Britain favours genuine improvements in East-West relations based on undi¬
minished security and a process of dialogue. The basic prerequisite is that both
sides should avoid policies which risk provoking confrontation, aiming
instead for mutual accommodation and co-operation while exercising
restraint in the conduct of international relations in both Europe and the rest of
the world. This is explicitly recognised in the Final Act of the 1975 Helsinki
Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe which states that
European security has to be considered in the broader context of world
security and that the pursuit of security should extend to other parts of the
world.
The Soviet Union’s invasion of Afghanistan in December 1979 and its
occupation of that country represents a major obstacle to improved
East-West relations. A wide range of countries, led by non-aligned and Islamic
states, have urged the Soviet Union to take positive action, principally a with¬
drawal from Afghanistan, to help to restore mutual confidence. In 1981 the
European Community, on Britain’s initiative, proposed a two-stage interna¬
tional conference to reach agreement on Soviet withdrawal and a restoration of
Afghanistan’s non-aligned status. The Soviet Union has rejected these propo¬
sals as ‘unrealistic’ and has also ignored resolutions of the UN General
Assembly, passed with large majorities, calling for complete withdrawal of
foreign troops, self-determination for the Afghan people, preservation of Afg¬
hanistan’s independence and non-aligned status, and the just return of
refugees.
Britain attaches great importance to the full and balanced implementation
by all participants of the provisions of the 1975 Helsinki Final Act for increased
stability in Europe and improved co-operation between the 35 European and
North American signatory states. While not a legally binding document, the
Final Act is a charter and code of conduct of behaviour for what the partici¬
pants hope will in time become a more normal and open relationship between
both governments and peoples in East and West. To this end it contains under-
1 NATO’s 16 member countries are Belgium, Britain, Canada, Denmark, France, the Federal
Republic of Germany, Greece, Iceland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal,
Spain, Turkey and the United States. France does not participate in NATO’s integrated military
structure. Negotiations on the inclusion of Spain in NATO’s integrated military structure have
been frozen pending a referendum in Spain.
78
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Arms Control
and
Disarmament
takings about security, human rights, and co-operation in economic, humani¬
tarian and other matters. Follow-up meetings took place in Belgrade (1977-78)
and Madrid (1980-83). At the Madrid meeting the participants agreed that
renewed efforts should be made to give full effect to the Final Act. They, also
agreed that a Conference on Confidence and Security-Building Measures
should be convened in Stockholm in January 1984. It is hoped that such
measures, which would be militarily significant, binding, verifiable and appli¬
cable to the whole of Europe, would complement arms control negotiations by
reducing tension and the dangers of surprise attack through increased open¬
ness about military behaviour.
Hopes that the Madrid meeting would, through securing greater respect in
practice for the Helsinki principles, restore a secure political foundation for the
peaceful and co-operative management of East-West relations were adversely
affected by the imposition of martial law in Poland in December 1981. Both this,
and the sustained campaign of Soviet pressure on the Polish authorities which
preceded it, have been condemned by Britain and its allies as incompatible
with the Final Act’s principles, particularly those on respect for human rights
and freedom, non-intervention in another state’s affairs and freedom of
communication; and as damaging to the process of peaceful change towards
greater openness, tolerance and humanity which the Act symbolises.
Together with France, the United States and the Soviet Union, Britain is a
signatory to the 1972 Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin which reaffirms the
four countries’ rights and responsibilities in Berlin, and provides for greatly
improved travel and communications facilities between Berlin and both the
Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic, and for
the maintenance and development of the ties between West Berlin and the
Federal Republic.
Britain has played a prominent part in all the major multilateral disarmament
negotiations and is a party to all, and a depository government for most, of the
treaties concluded as a result. It participates in the Committee on Dis¬
armament and in the arms control and disarmament work of the United
Nations. Britain played an active part in preparations for the 1982 United
Nations Special Session on Disarmament, emphasising the need for a realistic
approach to arms control and for agreements to include adequate verification
provisions if they are to enhance security and build up confidence between
states. Britain also considers regional agreements to be particularly useful.
A nuclear weapon state, Britain is committed to negotiating in good faith to
halt the nuclear arms race and to move towards nuclear disarmament. The
negotiation of a comprehensive test ban treaty, which in Britain’s view would
help to curb the development of new types of nuclear weapons, is a British goal,
and Britain has supported the establishment of a sub-group of the United
Nations Committee on Disarmament to examine the verification and
compliance problems relating to a comprehensive ban.
Britain strongly supports the efforts of the United States and the Soviet
Union at the negotiations in Geneva to limit and reduce the levels of their stra¬
tegic and intermediate-range nuclear weapons. The British Government wel¬
comed the major new United States proposal put forward at the beginning of
the strategic arms reduction talks (START) in June 1982 for major reductions in
the numbers of nuclear warheads on strategic ballistic missiles. It plays an
active part in formulating the NATO position for the negotiations on
intermediate-range nuclear forces, through which the United States, on behalf
of all the Allies, is seeking an agreement which would provide for equal limits
on the warheads of United States and Soviet intermediate-range nuclear
missiles.
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
79
Believing that it is possible to improve international access to the benefits of
peaceful uses of nuclear energy while minimising the risk of the spread of
nuclear weapons technology, Britain has played a leading part in strengthen¬
ing the regime of non-proliferation through the International Atomic Energy
Agency and other organisations. Britain is a party to the 1968 Non-Proliferation
Treaty which is designed to stop the spread of nuclear weapons and provides
an assurance, through international safeguards, that nuclear facilities of non¬
nuclear weapons states will not be used for making such weapons. Britain reaf¬
firmed its full support for the Treaty at a review conference in 1980. It has also
undertaken not to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon states
which have internationally binding commitments not to manufacture or
acquire nuclear explosive devices (except in the case of an attack on British
interests by such a state in association with a nuclear-weapon state). Britain
believes that limiting the security assurances to these states provides further
support for nuclear non-proliferation.
The establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones in different parts of the
world can contribute to non-proliferation and regional security, and Britain
supports proposals for such zones where nuclear weapons do not play a part in
existing security arrangements. It was the first nuclear-weapon state to ratify
the protocols to the 1967 Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin
America (the Treaty of Tlatelolco).
As a result of a British initiative, another category of weapons of mass
destruction, biological weapons, is the subject of the 1972 Convention on Pro¬
hibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological
(Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on their Destruction. Britain took an
active part in a conference in 1980 which reviewed the operation of the Conven-
tion. Britain, which has no chemical weapons, has also encouraged efforts to
agree on a ban on them, and in 1976 put forward a draft convention on the
prohibition of their development, production and stock-piling which has
served as a focus of discussion. In 1982, Britain tabled a working paper on
verification, the main subject of contention, and in March 1983 presented a
plan for the inspection of civil chemical plants to ensure that commercial
chemicals are not diverted to military use.
Conventional weapons are by far the largest component of national
armouries, and Britain is participating in a study by the United Nations on
ways to halt the world wide build-up which it believes increases regional
tension. In particular it believes in the value of regional agreements as a means
of facilitating this. In the talks on Mutual and Balanced Force Reductions,
Britain, together with its NATO allies, is working for an agreement with the
Warsaw Pact participants which would contribute to a more stable rela¬
tionship and strengthen peace and security in Europe. This requires an
approximate parity between NATO and Warsaw Pact forces in central Europe
where the Warsaw Pact troops currently outnumber those of NATO by over
150,000. The Western participants have also proposed associated confidence¬
building measures designed to facilitate verification of an agreement. In July
1982 they put forward a new proposal for a single agreement (in place of the
previous two-phase approach) designed to break the deadlock in the
negotiations.
Britain played a key role in securing agreement in 1980 on a UN Convention
establishing a legal framework for prohibitions and restrictions on the use of
particularly inhumane and injurious weapons together with protocols restrict¬
ing the use of mines, booby traps and incendiary weapons and prohibiting the
use of weapons which cause injury by fragments not detectable by X-ray.
Britain was among the first to sign the Convention when it opened for signa¬
ture in April 1981.
80
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Keeping the
Peace
Human Rights
Concerned about the rising scale of military expenditure in the world,
Britain has supported proposals at the United Nations for a multilateral, bal¬
anced and verifiable reduction of military budgets, and called for a standard
method of reporting military expenditure to be adopted. British experts have
taken part in United Nations studies on the relationship between disarmament
and development and on disarmament initiatives and are participating in
studies on military research and development and on nuclear-weapon-free
zones.
Britain and the United Nations
Support for the United Nations (UN) and the purposes and principles of its
Charter has been a cornerstone of British policy since 1945, for Britain sees a
strong and effective United Nations as the best framework for pursuing and
achieving many of its foreign policy objectives (the peaceful resolution of
disputes, disarmament and arms control, the protection of human rights, the
promotion of the rule of law) designed to contribute both to its own well-being
and security and to the development of a more harmonious international
community.
The United Nations and its various agencies also provide an important
framework for discussing such issues as disaster relief, the sea-bed, terrorism,
the world environment, energy development and world resources.
The maintenance of international peace and security was the primary purpose
envisaged for the United Nations at the time of its establishment. Britain
believes that it is appropriate for the United Nations, as the only forum in which
almost the whole international community is represented, to seek to resolve
disputes which threaten peace and stability whether on a regional or world
scale. With other members, it has worked to strengthen and make more
effective the machinery of the Security Council, the organ with primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and for preventing
and settling disputes. As a permanent member of the Security Council, Britain
has a particular interest in and responsibility for questions of international
peace and security, and plays an active role in the Council’s work. It has sought
to develop and improve the United Nations’ role in the peaceful settlement of
disputes.
Another British concern is that the United Nations should have an effective
peacekeeping capacity. It contributes to the UN force in Cyprus and provides
logistic support for the UN Interim Force in Lebanon.
Britain has supported the UN’s Universal Declaration of Human Rights since
its adoption by the General Assembly in 1948. While not legally binding, the
Declaration has inspired many other international instruments designed to
secure the observance of its provisions. These include the two international
covenants adopted by the General Assembly in 1966 which impose legal
obligations on those who ratify them: the Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights and the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Both came into
force, and were ratified by Britain, in 1976. Under the latter Britain also recog¬
nises the competence of the UN Human Rights Committee (set up by the Cove¬
nant to monitor the implementation of the human rights protected by it) to
receive and consider state-to-state complaints.
Britain is also a party to conventions aimed at implementing particular
rights contained in the Universal Declaration, including those on the elimi¬
nation of racial discrimination, on the status of refugees and stateless persons
and on slavery.
The adoption of conventions and covenants in itself is insufficient to secure
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
81
the protection of human rights, and Britain believes it is necessary to develop
effective procedures to ensure the implementation of such agreements. It also
believes that the practice of the United Nations has established human rights
as a legitimate matter for international concern and that the UN Charter
imposes on member governments an obligation to pursue policies which
observe human rights and to co-operate with the United Nations to that end.
The Economic and Social Council has general responsibility within the
United Nations for human rights activities. The bodies directly concerned are
the Commission on Human Rights, its Sub-Commission on Prevention of Dis¬
crimination and Protection of Minorities, and the Commission on the Status of
Women. Britain is represented on all these bodies and is active in their work.
Economic and The Charter states that ‘the promotion of the economic and social
Social Affairs advancement of all peoples’ is one of the principal aims of the United Nations,
and an estimated 90 per cent of the organisation’s efforts, in terms of resources
and personnel, is now employed to this end. With the growing concern for the
problems of development, the main emphasis has become increasingly the
provision of direct assistance for member states. The UN system is now the
largest single source of technical assistance for developing countries, as well as
providing considerable emergency and relief aid and assistance for refugees.
(The provision of capital assistance has been generally confined to the World
Bank group and regional development banks, see p 85, whose operations are
usually considered separately from those of the rest of the UN system.)
Successive British governments have affirmed their support for the func¬
tional and developmental work of the United Nations. Britain is the sixth
largest contributor to the UN’s regular budget, providing some £16-2 million,
4 • 46 per cent of the total, in 1982. In addition, it contributed some £4 • 3 million
to the World Health Organisation, £2 • 9 million to the International Labour
Organisation, £5 • 6 million to the Food and Agriculture Organisation and £4 • 9
million to the UN Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation. Britain
provides a considerably larger proportion of the UN’s voluntary funds,
donating an estimated £42-7 million in 1982 including £18-5 million for the UN
Development Programme, £4 million for the UN Relief and Works Agency for
Palestinian Refugees (together with £1 million in food aid), £5 • 9 million for the
UN Children’s Fund, £2 • 7 million for the UN Fund for Population Activities,
and about £5 • 4 million for the World Food Programme.
In the deliberations of the governing bodies of the various agencies and
programmes, Britain encourages the deployment of resources towards the
poorest countries and the poorest communities in the developing world. It also
seeks to promote the most efficient use of UN development resources and
improvements in the co-ordination, control and effectiveness of the system, in
order to avoid unnecessary duplication by the various agencies.
Other International
Organisations
Britain is a member of many other international organisations, including
those concerned with the management of the world economy. It is a founder
member of the International Monetary Fund, established in 1945 (along with
the World Bank, see p 85) to regulate the international financial system and to
provide a source of credit for states facing balance of payments problems, and
has welcomed the creation by the Fund of facilities to provide special assis¬
tance to developing countries experiencing financial or trading difficulties. It is
a strong supporter of efforts under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
to liberalise further, and promote the growth of world trade, and to improve
the developing countries’ participation in it (see pp 68 and 330).
82
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Official and
Other Flows
Britain is also a member of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD). An instrument for intergovernmental co-operation
among 24 industrialised countries, the OECD’s aims are to promote policies
designed to achieve the highest sustainable economic growth and
employment, and a rising standard of living in member countries while main¬
taining financial stability, and thus to contribute to the development of the
world economy; to assist developing countries; and to contribute to the expan¬
sion of world trade on a multilateral, non-discriminatory basis in accordance
with international obligations.
Other organisations to which Britain belongs or extends support are more
restricted in their operations and include the regional development banks in
Africa, the Americas and Asia and specialist technical, agricultural and
medical institutions.
With 20 other nations Britain is a member of the Council of Europe which
aims to provide the widest possible European forum for the discussion of
political, economic, social and scientific issues with a view to achieving greater
unity between its members. Membership is open to any European parlia¬
mentary democracy which accepts the principles of the rule of law and the
protection of human rights. The Council was responsible for the adoption in
1950 of the European Convention on Human Rights, to which Britain is a party.
Development Co-operation
The basic objective of Britain’s aid programme is to help developing countries’
efforts to raise their living standards, the emphasis being on assisting the
poorest countries and the poorest communities within them. It is these coun¬
tries which find it most difficult to generate investment funds domestically or
attract external private flows. Britain’s ability to support development over¬
seas is dependent on the state of its own economy, and alongside development
objectives, due weight is given to political, commercial and industrial con¬
siderations in the deployment of aid resources. Increasingly, the aid pro¬
gramme is being used in ways which will benefit both the developing countries
and Britain.
Official aid is only one aspect of Britain’s support for overseas development.
Private investment is a much larger component and one which has benefited
from the abolition of exchange controls in 1979. Britain is the world’s second
largest overseas investor, with over a fifth of its overseas assets located in
developing countries. Similarly, trade is important, developing countries pro¬
viding nearly a fifth of Britain’s imports in 1982. Aid is also provided by private
voluntary societies which concentrate their activities in the poorest countries.
In 1982 official aid flows amounted to some £1,123 million, of which £1,024
million represented official development assistance1 and £99 million other
official flows. Of the former, bilateral aid accounted for £538 million including
technical co-operation funds of £209 million; some £487 million was provided
through multilateral agencies. Repayments of capital and payments of inter¬
est on loans came to £63 million and £24 million respectively; another £19
million of capital repayments and £3 million of interest were cancelled.
Aid performance is commonly measured as a proportion of gross national
product (GNP), particularly with reference to the two United Nations targets for
resource transfers to developing countries; that net official development assis¬
tance equals 0 • 7 per cent of GNP and that combined private and official flows
1 Official development assistance, the international basis for reporting aid performance, is
defined as official flows for development purposes with a grant (concessional) element of 25 per
cent or more.
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
83
Bilateral Aid
Financial Aid
equal 1 per cent of GNP. Britain accepts in principle the first of these but is not
committed to a timetable for reaching it. Successive governments have made it
clear that progress must depend on Britain’s economic condition and upon
other calls on its resources. In 1982 net official development assistance amoun¬
ted to £1,024 million, 0 • 37 per cent of GNP. The average for donor countries
belonging to the Development Assistance Committee of the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development was 0 • 38 per cent. The 1 per cent
target has never received the publicity accorded to the 0 • 7 per cent target. For
many years, however, Britain has far exceeded it, and in 1982 total net financial
flows from Britain to developing countries amounted to £3,483 million, 1 • 27 per
cent of GNP.
Britain's aid programme began as part of the discharge of its responsibilities
towards dependent territories, and the main emphasis remains on the
Commonwealth which includes among its members some of the world’s
poorest countries. In 1982, £330 million (57 per cent) of direct bilateral official
development assistance allocated went to Commonwealth countries. Of this,
£22 million went to Britain’s remaining dependencies, which are a first charge
on the aid programme. The regional disbursement pattern is shown on p84.
The country receiving the largest amount (£54 million) was India. Other
major recipients included Bangladesh, Sudan, Kenya, Tanzania, Sri Lanka,
Mexico and Zimbabwe. In line with the policy of concentrating aid on the
poorest countries, £332 million (58 per cent) of gross bilateral aid went to the
poorest 50 developing countries, as defined by the World Bank (excluding
states with a population under 10,000 and dependencies).
Bilateral financial aid in 1982 totalled £430 million. Aid for individual projects
totalled £308 million, the principal sectors supported being manufacturing (£71
million), energy (£100 million), transport and communications (£39 million),
social and community services (£21 million), and renewable natural resources
(£38 million). Non-project aid totalled £122 million, of which nearly £71 million
was for import financing, £ 12 million for food aid, £26 million for debt relief, £ 11
million for budgetary support and £2 million for emergency relief (funds for
which are channelled through the ODA’s Disaster Unit which provides
immediate assistance in disaster relief operations). About 77 per cent of finan¬
cial aid was provided in grants and the rest in concessionary loans. Most
development aid, and all provided to the poorest countries (which include
India, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and many African countries), is in grant form
only. In 1982 loan commitments, excluding investments by the Common¬
wealth Development Corporation (see p84), totalled £38 million. Where loans
bear interest it is at fixed concessionary rates ranging from 2 per cent to 6 per
cent, and nearly all loans carry from three to seven years’ grace periods for
repayments of capital. The average maturity of loans is 25 years. Britain has
more than fulfilled the 1972 and 1978 recommendations of the OECD’s
Development Assistance Committee on easing the terms of financial aid.
Britain has concluded agreements to remove the burden of past aid loans
worth over £1,100 million from 19 of the poorest countries.
Loans and grants are normally tied to the purchase of goods, equipment and
services from Britain, although there may be an element for local costs and a
foreign content in contracts financed from tied aid in appropriate cases. New
loan commitments can be untied, if the recipient agrees, to the extent that
goods can be purchased either from the poorest developing countries or from
Britain.
The Commonwealth Development Corporation plays an important role in
development assistance by investing in most Commonwealth countries and,
84
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Technical
Co-operation
Regional Distribution of Bilateral Aid 1982
Americas and
Caribbean
total 85
Oceania Europe Unspecified
total 22 total 9 total 68
million
million
million million
with British Government approval, in some other countries, By the end of 1982
some £467 million had been invested out of a total commitment of £703 million.
Of the latter, £166 million was in Asia, £77 million in the Pacific, £101 million in
the Caribbean and virtually all of the remainder in Africa. Commitments
approved in 1982 totalled over £102 million.
Technical co-operation, the transfer of specialised knowledge and skills from
country to country, complements financial aid, expertise often being essential
to the success of a programme of financial aid or investment. Expenditure on it
has increased in recent years and was £211 million, 31 per cent of bilateral aid, in
1982. Of this, £78 million was for the provision of expert personnel, including
volunteers, £44 million for students and trainees in Britain and overseas, £16
million for research services and projects, £18 million for consultancy services,
and £55 million in support of various British institutions and for the provision of
equipment and supplies.
At the end of 1982 there were 2,836 people financed by Britain (other than
volunteers) working in developing countries, of whom some 1,123 were engaged
in the field of education, 475 in agriculture and allied fields, and 193 in health
services. In addition, under the British Volunteer Programme there were 909
volunteers, mainly graduates or otherwise qualified, working in developing
countries, the majority of them teaching. Recruitment, training and placing
overseas is undertaken by four voluntary bodies (Catholic Institute for Interna¬
tional Relations, International Voluntary Service, United Nations Association
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
85
Multilateral
Aid
Voluntary
Agencies
International Service and Voluntary Service Overseas), 90 per cent of their
costs being met by the British Government.
Britain receives large numbers of students and trainees from developing
countries. Over 11,800 were financed in Britain in 1982 under regional program¬
mes of technical co-operation, by awards under the Commonwealth Scho¬
larship and Fellowship Plan, and under British Council schemes. Britain also
financed another 642 students attending courses outside Britain. In early 1983
the Government decided to make an additional £46 million available over the
next three years for the support of overseas students.
To support development overseas, the Government maintains three
specialist scientific organisations (the Directorate of Overseas Surveys, the
Land Resources Development Centre, and the Tropical Development and
Research Institute) and provides support for many others. The latter includes
overseas units/divisions of the government-financed Transport and Road
Research Laboratory, the Building Research Establishment, and the Institute
of Geological Sciences, and of the Hydraulics Research Station Ltd. These
organisations provide specialist information, advice and experts for service
overseas, and undertake field and laboratory research investigations.
Britain is a major subscriber to the World Bank group of institutions—the Inter¬
national Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International
Development Association (IDA) and the International Finance Corporation. The
British commitment to the IDA’s Sixth Replenishment (July 1980 to June 1983)
is £555 million; a further £ 105 million is being given for the year July 1983 to June
1984, pending completion of the Sixth Replenishment, to allow the Seventh
Replenishment to start from July 1984 (the 1985 fiscal year). Britain contributes
to the resources of the Asian Development Bank, the Inter-American
Development Bank, the Caribbean Development Bank and the African
Development Bank. Its contribution to the United Nations Development Pro¬
gramme for 1982 was £18-5 million, and it is the largest source for expertise and
fellowships provided under the Programme. There is also a major British contri¬
bution to other UN agencies and programmes (see p 81) and an increasing pro¬
portion of British aid is now channelled through the European Community’s aid
programme. Britain’s contribution to the fifth European Development Fund
established by the second Lome Convention, covering the period from 1981 to
1985, is about £500 million.
Voluntary agencies provided an estimated £50 million for work in developing
countries in 1982, mainly on agriculture, health and nutrition, and education
projects and on emergency relief operations.
There are about 200 agencies in all, including church and missionary soci¬
eties; among the best known are Oxfam, Christian Aid, War on Want, the Save
the Children Fund, the British Red Cross Society and the Catholic Fund for
Overseas Development. The funds are raised largely through appeals in the
media, both on a regular basis and in response to specific emergencies; the
latter, in particular, meet with a good response. The Government co-operates
with the agencies in various ways, especially in immediate post-disaster relief
and rehabilitation operations and through its Joint Funding Scheme. Under
this it meets half the cost of selected development projects undertaken by the
agencies and aimed at helping the poorest. Such projects include community
health, non-formal education, the improvement of food supplies, agricultural
training, water supply and irrigation. Expenditure on the Scheme in 1982 was
some £2.4 million.
Voluntary agencies’ work on behalf of refugees overseas also receives official
support.
86
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
THE NORTH-
SOUTH
DIALOGUE
The North-South dialogue, which embraces questions of development, trans¬
fer of resources, raw materials, trade and international monetary issues, is
being conducted between the industrialised nations and the developing coun¬
tries with a view to furthering the equitable evolution of the world economy.
Britain attaches importance to securing progress in the dialogue, and, in its
approach to the discussions involved, works in close association with its part¬
ners in the European Community.
The British Government recognises that the interests of developing and
industrialised countries are mutual and that all will benefit if the problems of
the world economy can be effectively tackled. Despite the recession Britain
seeks to defend the open trading system. Although domestic priorities have
obliged the Government to adopt restrictive measures in certain highly sensi¬
tive areas, it is conscious of their exceptional character. Moreover, a substantial
aid programme has been maintained and Britain shares the priority the interna¬
tional community attaches to providing special assistance to the poorest
developing countries. In addition, direct investment and private financial flows
to the developing world have been encouraged.
Britain favours the continuing evolution of the existing world economic
system with its free flow of trade and capital, and has defended the indepen¬
dence of efficient international institutions like the International Monetary
Fund, the World Bank and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. As
constituted these institutions serve the vital interests of all nations and their
work reflects the growing interdependence of developed and developing
countries.
Britain also supports the important role of the International Monetary Fund in
providing financial assistance, the level of which has recently been substan¬
tially increased, to help developing countries to carry out adjustment measures
to overcome balance of payments difficulties.
Britain has long recognised the importance of commodities to the economies
of many developing countries and has played a full part, in company with other
European Community member states, in negotiating the commodities
agreements called for by the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development in its 1976 resolution establishing the Integrated Programme for
Commodities (IPC). It is a member of agreements covering tin, rubber, cocoa
and coffee, the purpose of which is to stabilise prices and supplies at levels fair
and remunerative both to producers and consumers. Britain has also taken part
in negotiations for a new type of agreement for jute. As a member of the Com¬
munity Britain belongs to agreements covering wheat and olive oil designed to
improve market conditions by consultations between producers and
consumers, and has consistently urged Community membership of the Inter¬
national Sugar Organisation. It has also ratified the Common Fund for
Commodities, a key element of the IPC, and has agreed to contribute to the
voluntary as well as to the obligatory part of its work. A substantial British con¬
tribution is made to the Stabex scheme operated by the Community which
compensates commodity-producing Lome Convention countries (see p 71) for
shortfalls in commodity revenue.
In 1964 Britain was the first major developed country to support the idea of
extending tariff preferences to all developing countries on a non-reciprocal and
non-discriminatory basis. This led to a generalised system of preferences oper¬
ated by the European Community and the other developed countries. It also
strongly supported the objectives of the last round of multilateral trade negotia¬
tions. Set out in the 1973 Tokyo Declaration, these were the further liberali¬
sation of world trade through the progressive dismantling of tariff and non-tariff
barriers, and within this, the provision of special and more favourable
treatment for the developing countries where possible.
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
87
Community trade arrangements are among the most liberal applied by
industrial nations, and Britain has played a significant role in determining their
nature. It took a major part in the negotiations for the first Lome Convention,
both to safeguard the trading interests of Commonwealth developing countries
and to ensure that reciprocal preferences would not be demanded from the
developing countries, as had been the case with previous Community arrange¬
ments. Britain also contributed to the successful conclusion of the second Lome
Convention. In addition, Britain has supported improvements to the Com¬
munity’s Generalised System of Preferences scheme, especially with regard to
more liberal access into the Community for imports of manufactured and pro¬
cessed agricultural products and in its application to the poorest developed
countries, particularly those in South Asia. Before entering the Community,
Britain secured a commitment to expand and reinforce Community trade rela¬
tions with the Commonwealth countries of Asia, and this has led to the conclu¬
sion of commercial co-operation agreements with India, Sri Lanka and
Bangladesh.
4 Defence
Britain’s defence policy is based on the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation
(NATO—see also pp 76-80) whose collective defence provides each of its
members with far greater security than any could achieve alone. Britain is fully
committed to NATO and its strategy of deterrence and, in assigning the greater
part of its military forces to it, makes a major contribution to the full range of the
North Atlantic Alliance’s deterrent capabilities, the only European nation to do
so.1 It also plays a full part in the Alliance’s efforts, complementary to its defence
preparations, to negotiate balanced and verifiable arms control agreements and
to reduce tension so as to achieve a more just and lasting peaceful order in
Europe.
Despite its economic difficulties, Britain is determined to play its full part in
meeting NATO’s requirements, and, using the most economical means
available, is increasing its defence efforts to the level required to provide the
best possible guarantee of safety. Britain is committed to the NATO target of
securing real increases in defence spending in the region of 3 per cent annually.
The defence budget for 1983-84, approximately £15,700 million, makes provi¬
sion for such an increase, and further increases of 3 per cent are planned for
each of the years to 1985-86, implementing in full the NATO target. In 1982
Britain contributed 5 • 1 per cent of its gross domestic product to defence
spending, fourth in NATO after the United States, Greece, and Turkey; the
average for NATO’s European members was about 3 • 8 per cent. Britain has
consistently spent a higher proportion of its defence budget on new equipment
than any other NATO member.
Defence Review In 1981 the Government reviewed Britain’s defence programme in order to
establish how best to exploit the substantial planned increases in defence
expenditure and to ensure that these resources would be spent most effectively
in pursuit of its commitment to the North Atlantic Alliance and to Western
security.2 In the light of rising equipment costs and advancing technology, the
review identified the need for, and ways of achieving, a better balance between
the various elements of the defence forces which would improve the combat
effectiveness of the front line forces, thus enhancing Britain’s already major
contribution to NATO, and, within the NATO framework, be sufficiently bal¬
anced and flexible to enable Britain to respond to challenges to its interests at
home and overseas. Britain’s response to the Argentine invasion of the Falkland
Islands in April 1982 shows that the force structure is sufficiently adaptable to
permit such an effective response. The Government, while noting the lessons of
the Falklands operations,3 believes that the main threat to Britain’s security,
which the defence programme is designed to meet, remains the nuclear and
conventional forces of the Warsaw Pact.
1 France, which also has nuclear forces, does not participate fully in NATO’s integrated military
structure.
2 The United Kingdom Defence Programme: The Way Forward. Cmnd 8288, HMSO.
ISBN 0 10 182882 0.
3 The Falklands Campaign: The Lessons. Cmnd 8758, HMSO. ISBN 0 10 187580 0.
DEFENCE
89
NATO’s
Strategy
Britain’s
NATO
Contribution
NATO’s strategy is based on the principle that peace and stability can be main¬
tained only if a potential aggressor is convinced that it would lose far more than
it could ever hope to gain by the use of force. NATO neither needs nor intends to
match the Warsaw Pact weapon for weapon, but seeks to deter aggression by
having enough forces to respond effectively to an attack at any level and, if
necessary, to raise the level of conflict to make clear the Alliance’s ability and
determination to go on resisting. For this it needs a wide range of conventional
and nuclear forces, these being closely linked to provide a chain of options from
which to choose the appropriate method of countering aggression. This concept
of flexible response is complemented by that of forward defence, the stationing
of members’ forces well forward in Europe to emphasise their collective deter¬
mination and commitment to defend the whole of NATO territory.
It is to maintain the Alliance’s defence and deterrent capacity in the face of the
build-up in Warsaw Pact military strength that NATO members have agreed to
aim to secure real increases in defence expenditure in the region of 3 per cent
annually. NATO’s intermediate theatre nuclear forces are also being modern¬
ised. Britain is actively involved in these measures, and is also updating its own
strategic nuclear capability. In addition, in the Eurogroup, Britain and 11 other
European members are working to improve the effectiveness of their contri¬
bution to the Alliance and to achieve better co-ordination, thereby making the
best possible use of the available resources.
NATO is concerned to deter Soviet exploitation of instability outside Europe,
and to demonstrate its resolve to defend essential interests, but, at the same
time, to recognise the rights and views of regional countries and their primary
responsibility for their own defence. In Britain’s view these requirements can be
best reconciled through the provision of military aid, including the sale of arms,
the periodic deployment of NATO forces in strategically important areas, and
the maintenance of a capability to intervene militarily where necessary. With
these measures in mind, Britain welcomed the establishment of the United
States’ rapid deployment force which became operational in January 1983.
Britain’s contribution to NATO is concentrated in areas where it can best help to
maintain Alliance security, principally NATO’s strategic nuclear deterrent and
the defence of the Central Region of Europe, the Eastern Atlantic and English
Channel, and the British ‘home’ base and its immediate approaches.
Britain’s Polaris strategic force with its improved Chevaline missile (to be
replaced by a Trident force in the 1990s—see p 92) represents a unique
European contribution to NATO’s nuclear deterrent, providing a second and
independent centre of decision-making within the Alliance. At a time of stra¬
tegic parity, this provides an important assurance against any Soviet miscon¬
ception that the United States would not be prepared to use its nuclear forces in
Europe’s defence. Britain’s theatre nuclear systems are also committed to
NATO, and it has agreed to provide bases for 160 of the 464 ground-launched
cruise missiles which, with 108 Pershing II missiles, the United States is to
deploy in Europe, beginning in December 1983, in order to modernise NATO’s
intermediate nuclear forces.
Britain’s decision in 1980 to update its strategic deterrent has led to increased
calls from some groups within the country for unilateral nuclear disarmament,
both on the grounds of cost and as an example to others. While the Government
understands the widespread concern regarding nuclear war, it believes such
apprehensions to be misplaced so long as the policy of nuclear deterrence and
efforts to relax East-West tensions, including the pursuit of arms control,
which have helped to maintain the peace for over 30 years, are maintained. It
also believes that unilateral nuclear disarmament by Britain would not signifi¬
cantly alter the views on arms control of other states which maintain, or may
90
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Outside the
NATO Area
Northern
Ireland
think of acquiring, nuclear weapons, and that such action would weaken
NATO’s ability to deter aggression in the face of the continuing Soviet nuclear
and conventional threat.
Virtually all of the Royal Navy, the largest NATO navy in Western Europe, is
earmarked for assignment to the Alliance and permanent contributions are
made to its two standing naval forces, in the Atlantic and the Channel, and to its
Mediterranean force when activated. The British Army of the Rhine (BAOR) and
Royal Air Force (RAF) Germany are stationed in the Federal Republic of
Germany. (Britain’s Field Force in Berlin is not committed to NATO.) BAOR’s
combat element has been reorganised into three stronger divisions, two
comprising three armoured brigades each and a third made up of two armoured
brigades and an infantry brigade. A reinforcing division, comprising one
regular and two Territorial Army brigades, is located in Britain. On mobili¬
sation, BAOR’s peacetime strength of around 55,000 would be more than
doubled by reinforcements from Britain and up to 70 per cent of the Army would
be in Central Europe in wartime. Nearly all the RAF’s combat and support
aircraft are assigned to NATO. RAF Germany’s 13 squadrons (two of helicopters)
are equipped for strike/attack, reconnaissance, close support, air defence and
air transport roles, while RAF Strike Command, which is based in Britain, pro¬
vides forces for these and for the maritime patrol and anti-submarine warfare
roles.
Britain also provides important elements to NATO’s specialist reinforcement
forces, including ground and air units for the United Kingdom Mobile Force and
for its contribution to the Allied Command Europe Mobile Force, four squa¬
drons for NATO’s Strategic Air Reserve, and naval and marine units for a
British-Netherlands amphibious force.
Forces from all three Services are stationed at Gibraltar, which, positioned at
the western entry to the Mediterranean, is an important base for NATO.
In support of other defence commitments, and with a view to playing a part in
collective responses by the West to threats to its world-wide interests, Britain is
maintaining its ability to operate outside the NATO area without diminishing
its central commitment to the Alliance. Britain’s ability to deploy forces world¬
wide, both quickly and effectively, was shown when, after diplomatic efforts
had failed, Britain sent a task force to expel Argentine forces and restore British
administration to the Falkland Islands in May-June 1982 (see p 76). Following
the expulsion of the Argentine forces, a garrison of ships, aircraft and land
forces has been established in the Islands to deter further aggression, and plans
to construct a permanent airfield, which would improve the ability to reinforce
the garrison in an emergency, have been announced. Britain also provides mili¬
tary aid to friendly countries and deploys its forces on visits and exercises in
important areas.
In Cyprus British forces provide for the security of Britain’s Sovereign Base
Areas and contribute the largest component of the United Nations force in the
Republic. All three Services contribute to the garrison in Hong Kong, while that
in Belize is provided by the Army and the RAF with the Royal Navy deploying a
warship in the Caribbean as a guardship. A Gurkha battalion is stationed in
Brunei.
Britain is also participating in the multinational force and the con¬
tingent of observers deployed along the Israel-Egypt border following Israel’s
withdrawal from Sinai in 1982, and in the multinational force deployed in
Lebanon.
The armed services assist the civil authorities in Northern Ireland in maintain¬
ing law and order and in countering terrorism (see p 15).
DEFENCE
91
THE ARMED
FORCES
Personnel
Reserve Forces
The total strength of the armed forces, all volunteers, was about 321,000 on 1
April 1983: nearly 72,000 in the Royal Navy and the Royal Marines, 159,300 in
the Army and 89,900 in the Royal Air Force. The Ministry of Defence employed
about 209,000 civilians in Britain on 1 April 1983.
The three women’s Services, with a combined strength of 15,400, are integral
parts of the armed forces, and servicewomen serve alongside servicemen in
Britain and overseas, mainly in support roles. Their importance is increasing,
however, and some are trained to bear arms for defensive purposes.
Engagements for non-commissioned ranks range from 3 to 22 years, with a
wide freedom of choice on the length and terms of service. Subject to a
minimum period of service (varying from three to nine years, excluding
training), entrants may leave at any time, at 18 months’ notice. Discharge may
also be granted on compassionate grounds, by purchase, or on grounds of con¬
science. Commissions, either by promotion from the ranks or by direct entry
based on educational and other qualifications, are granted for short, medium
and log terms. All three Services have schemes for school, university and
college sponsorships.
Non-commissioned personnel receive basic training supplemented by
further and specialist training throughout their careers. Study for educational
qualifications is encouraged and Service trade and technical training, highly
valued by industry, leads to nationally recognised qualifications for large
numbers of Service personnel.
Commissioned ranks receive initial training at the Britannia Royal Naval
College, Dartmouth, the Royal Military Academy, Sandhurst, or the Royal Air
Force College, Cranwell. This is followed by specialist training, often including
degree courses at university or Service establishments. Higher or advanced
training for officers is provided by the Royal Naval College, Greenwich, the
Army Staff College at Camberley, and the Royal Air Force Staff College at
Bracknell. Selected senior officers and civilian officials from Britain and other
countries attend the Joint Services Defence College, Greenwich, and the Royal
College of Defence Studies, London, which provides the wider background
necessary for those destined to fill higher appointments.
Operational training includes joint-Service and inter-allied exercises.
Training is provided for the armed forces of allied, Commonwealth and other
countries.
Reserve and auxiliary forces are an integral part of the armed forces. In addition
to supplementing the regular forces on mobilisation with trained personnel
able immediately to take their places either as formed units or as individual
reinforcements, they form an important link between the Services and the civil
community. Some have a reserve liability following a period of regular service
(regular reserve); others are volunteers who train in their spare time. The latter
include the Territorial Army whose role is to reinforce the ground forces com¬
mitted to NATO and help to maintain a secure home base in the United
Kingdom; its strength is being increased to 86,000 over the remainder of the
decade. A Home Service Force, linked to the Territorial Army and with a
strength of up to 4,500, is being established to assist in guarding important
civilian and military installations on mobilisation. Other volunteer forces
include the Royal Naval Reserve, the Royal Marines Reserve, the Royal Auxili¬
ary Air Force and the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve. There is also the Ulster
Defence Regiment which is a locally recruited and largely part-time force which
supports the police and the Army in Northern Ireland. On 1 April 1983 regular
reserves totalled 193,400, and volunteer reserves and auxiliary forces 87,300.
Cadet forces, which make a significant contribution to recruitment to the
regular forces, totalled 142,000.
92
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
COMBAT
FORCES
Strategic
Nuclear Forces
Royal Navy
General
Purpose
Combat Forces
Army Combat
Forces
The Royal Navy’s Polaris force comprises four nuclear submarines, each of
which can remain on underwater patrol for long periods and is equipped with 16
nuclear-armed Polaris missiles. Improved (‘Chevaline’) Polaris missiles,
designed to maintain the force’s effectiveness until its replacement in the 1990s
by a Trident nuclear submarine force, entered service in 1982. The Trident pro¬
gramme is expected to cost about £7,500 million; over the period of its
procurement it will absorb on average some 3 per cent of planned defence
expenditure, reaching perhaps 5 to 6 per cent at its peak.
Britain’s naval forces, while capable of operating throughout the world when
required, are concentrated in the Eastern Atlantic and English Channel where
they constitute the majority of forces immediately available to NATO. They
include two new Invincible class anti-submarine warfare carriers (with a third
due to enter service in 1985), equipped with the Sea King anti-submarine heli¬
copters and the Sea Harrier maritime vertical short take-off and landing
(V/STOL) aircraft for air defence and anti-surface ship operations; 11 nuclear-
powered attack submarines (with another due to become operational in 1984),
equipped with the anti-ship missile Sub-Harpoon, and 15 diesel-powered
submarines; 13 guided missile destroyers; and over 45 general purpose and
anti-submarine warfare frigates. Most of the destroyers and frigates have
weapon-carrying helicopters (the Lynx, Wasp or Wessex), and armaments
installed include the Exocet surface-to-surface. Sea Wolf point air defence and
Sea Dart area air defence missile systems, and the Ikara anti-submarine guided
weapons system. There is also an amphibious capability comprising two
assault ships, Fearless and Intrepid, and the Royal Marines while the anti¬
submarine warfare carrier Hermes retains a secondary role as a commando
ship. Other ships include 39 mine counter-measures vessels and a new class of
offshore patrol vessels for protecting fishing interests and oil and gas
installations.
In coming years Britain’s contribution to NATO’s maritime defence will be
based increasingly on an enhanced anti-submarine warfare element made up
principally of nuclear-powered attack submarines whose numbers are planned
to build up to 17, a newly designed general purpose frigate with a strong anti¬
submarine warfare capability, the Type 23, and Nimrod maritime patrol
aircraft. These apart, the surface fleet is being renewed through a major con¬
struction programme involving the third Invincible class carrier, 3 Type 42
destroyers, 8 Type 22 frigates (including 4 as replacements for losses in the
Falklands conflict) increasing the number to 14, and 6 Hunt class mine counter¬
measures vessels. The destroyer/frigate element committed to NATO will be
reduced to about 50 ships by the mid-1980s as older and more manpower¬
intensive ships are disposed of. New weapon programmes include the Sting Ray
lightweight torpedo for ships, aircraft and helicopters, a heavyweight torpedo
(Spearfish) for submarines, and the Sea Eagle anti-ship missile.
Most of the Army’s combat forces, consisting of BAOR and the forces stationed
in Britain, have primary roles in support of NATO. Others are stationed overseas
in support of treaty commitments.
Armoured regiments in BAOR are equipped with the Chieftain main battle
tank, mounting a fully stabilised 120-mm gun, which will be joined in the
mid-1980s by the Challenger, a new tank fitted with Chobham armour, which
provides greater protection than conventional steel or aluminium armour, and
a more powerful diesel engine. Enough Challengers are being bought to equip
four regiments. Tracked combat reconnaissance vehicles include Scorpion, a
light tank with a 76-mm gun; Scimitar, a reconnaissance vehicle with a 30-mm
cannon; and Striker which mounts the Swingfire long-range anti-tank missile.
The primary tracked armoured personnel carrier for mechanised infantry units
DEFENCE
93
Royal Air
Force General
Purpose Forces
is the FV 432, but steps to improve the mobility of both mechanised and non-
mechanised infantry will include the introduction of the Saxon (a four wheeled
armoured personnel carrier) and later in the decade the mechanised combat
vehicle, MCV80. The crew-portable Milan anti-tank missile system is widely
deployed with BAOR infantry units and will be joined in a few years by the
man-portable light anti-tank weapon, LAW80. Lynx helicopters are being fitted
with the TOW long-range anti-tank weapon. Artillery units have been strength¬
ened by the introduction of the towed howitzer, FH70, and the purchase of
additional M109 self-propelled guns, both of which fire 155-mm ammunition.
Another 155-mm gun, the SP70, will enter service later in the decade, as will the
Multiple Launch Rocket System. Tactical nuclear support is provided by the
Lance missile and dual capable artillery. Integral air defence is based on the
Rapier missile system, a tracked version of which is being introduced, and the
Blowpipe man-portable missile. Both systems are undergoing qualitative
improvement.
Royal Air Force aircraft fulfil several operational roles. In addition RAF Regi¬
ment squadrons provide anti-aircraft and ground defence.
Phantom and Lightning aircraft, together with Rapier and Bloodhound
surface-to-air missiles, are employed in air defence. Radar warning is provided
by Shackleton airborne early warning aircraft and by the ground radars and
control and reporting centres of the United Kingdom Air Defence Ground
Environment system. Tornado GRls are progressively replacing Buccaneers
and some Jaguars in the strike/attack role; Jaguars and Canberras are
employed for reconnaissance; Harrier V/STOL aircraft provide close air
support (with some aircraft also having a tactical reconnaissance capability);
Nimrods make a substantial contribution to anti-submarine warfare capability
and are also used for long-range maritime patrol and offshore surveillance and
fishery protection duties; and Buccaneers, to be equipped with the Sea Eagle
missile, operate in the anti-surface ship role. Phantoms also contribute to mari¬
time air defence. Victor tankers, supported by some converted Vulcans and
Hercules, are used for in-flight refuelling. Transport support is provided by Her¬
cules and VC 10 aircraft for medium ranges and by Wessex, Puma, and Chinook
helicopters for short-range tasks. Weapons in service include the Sky Flash,
Sparrow, and Sidewinder air-to-air missiles, the Martel anti-ship missile, and
anti-armour weapons.
The Royal Air Force is undergoing a comprehensive re-equipment pro¬
gramme. Improvements to Britain’s air defences include the replacement from
the mid-1980s of the Lightning and some of the Phantom squadrons with the air
defence version of the Tornado (of which 165 aircraft have been ordered); the
entry into service in 1984 of the Nimrod airborne early warning aircraft which
will form Britain’s contribution to NATO’s integrated airborne early warning
force; and modernisation of the radars and command, control and communi¬
cations systems for the United Kingdom Air Defence Ground Environment. In
addition, 72 Hawk trainer aircraft are being equipped with air-to-air missiles
and cannon for local air defence. An increased air-to-air refuelling capability
will be achieved with the introduction into service of converted VC 10s and
Tristars in the tanker role. The offensive power of the Royal Air Force will be
substantially enhanced by the Tornado GR1 (of which 220 have been ordered),
which is now entering service, and the procurement of 60 Harrier GR5s, an
Anglo-American improved version of the existing aircraft, which will be
delivered in the late 1980s. All strike/attack and offensive support aircraft will
be installed with advanced electronic warfare equipment to increase their
survivability, and the Tornado GR1 will carry the British JP233 airfield attack
weapon and an anti-radiation missile.
94
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Civil Defence
Civil defence arrangements are based on the extended and adapted use of the
peacetime resources of government departments, local authorities, the
emergency services and nationalised industries, supplemented by the efforts of
voluntary organisations and individual volunteers.
Following a review of existing arrangements by the Home Office in 1980,
expenditure on civil defence has been growing steadily and reached £68.6
million in 1983-84. This is being used to improve the quality and readiness of
central and local government planning; increase training opportunities
arranged by the Home Office on staff college lines at the Civil Defence College,
Easingwold; help local authorities to plan for better community involvement in
civil defence; and improve the emergency system for decentralised government
control and communications. Improvements are also being made in the
communications, equipment and administrative facilities of the United
Kingdom Warning and Monitoring Organisation. This includes the civilian
Royal Observer Corps, which is organised to provide public warning of an
attack, of the location and strength of nuclear explosions, and of the distribu¬
tion and level of radioactive fall-out.
Defence Procurement
Responsibility for the planning of research, development and production of
defence equipment, which will take almost half of the defence budget in
1983-84, lies with the Ministry of Defence’s Procurement Executive. The Exe¬
cutive works with the Service users and industry to achieve cost-effectiveness
in equipment procurement.
Research and Most research is undertaken by the Ministry’s research and development estab-
development lishments, which have a very wide technological capability, but in addition the
Ministry sponsors a substantial amount of research by industry and the uni¬
versities. The establishments also monitor contractors’ progress during the
development stages and help with testing programmes and solving technical I
problems.
The development of modern defence equipment requires a high initial invest¬
ment; the cost of British equipment research and development in 1983-84 is
estimated at over £1,905 million, of which £329 million will be devoted to
research. The search for a more efficient use of resources has encouraged colla¬
boration within NATO, one of the principal aims of the Alliance’s Conference of
National Armaments Directors in which Britain plays a full part. Nevertheless,
the importance of maintaining a sound national industrial base for defence
procurement is recognised, and there is close consultation between
government and industry both in the National Defence Industries Council and
through other specialised bodies.
Collaboration between Britain and its European allies is encouraged through
the work of the independent European Programme Group which, consisting of
all the European members of NATO except Iceland, promotes co-operation in
defence equipment procurement. Successful projects involving European
countries include the Anglo-French Jaguar aircraft, the Martel air-to-surface
missile. Lynx, Puma and Gazelle helicopters, and the Anglo-Belgian family of
armoured combat reconnaissance vehicles. Britain is collaborating with the
Federal Republic of Germany and Italy in the Tornado multi-role combat
aircraft and the FH70/SP70 medium artillery programmes, with Italy in the
development of a successor to the Sea King helicopter, and with France and
the Federal Republic of Germany on new anti-tank guided weapon projects.
Britain also favours increased transatlantic co-operation and, with
DEFENCE
95
Production
Defence Sales
other European countries, is collaborating with the United States in the
procurement of a multiple launch rocket system and development of an
advanced version, and the co-ordinated development of a new generation of
air-to-air missiles.
National projects in all the main categories of equipment are under develop¬
ment. The main ones already mentioned include a light man-portable anti¬
armour weapon (LAW80): a lightweight torpedo (Sting Ray) equipped with
advanced homing devices for anti-submarine warfare; and a new heavyweight
torpedo (Spearfish). Work is also in progress on an improved Rapier system,
electronic counter-measures equipment for surface ships and a new anti-radar
missile (ALARM).
Equipment is manufactured by private firms and publicly owned industries,
including the Royal Ordnance Factories. Alternatively, procurement may be
undertaken on a collaborative basis or by purchase from overseas. Servicing
and repairs are carried out by industries as well as in Ministry-owned facilities
such as the Royal Dock Yards.
Sales of British defence equipment enable allies and friendly governments to
take advantage of Britain’s extensive research and development programmes
to improve their own defensive capabilities. The Defence Sales Organisation of
the Ministry of Defence provides advice and assistance on equipment
procurement and defence infrastructure. It also formulates assistance pack¬
ages containing equipment, construction work, training, support and other
services and involving contributions from government and from industry.
These are often handled by International Military Services Ltd, the Organi¬
sation’s commercial arm. Sales in 1983-84 will amount to an estimated £2,400
million.
5 Justice and the
Law
The Law
Although the United Kingdom is a unitary state, England and Wales, Scotland
and Northern Ireland each have their own legal systems and law courts. There
is substantial similarity on many points, but considerable differences remain in
law, organisation and practice. In Northern Ireland procedure closely resem¬
bles that of England and Wales but there are often differences in enacted law.
However, a large volume of modern legislation applies throughout the United
Kingdom and there is a common distinction between criminal law concerned
with wrongful acts harmful to the community and civil law concerned with
individuals’ rights, duties and obligations towards one another.
The main sources of law are legislation, common law and European Com¬
munity law. Legislation consists of Acts of Parliament, orders (rules and regula¬
tions made by ministers under the authority of an Act of Parliament) and
by-laws made by local government or other authorities exercising powers con¬
ferred by Parliament. Common law, the ancient law of the land deduced from
custom and interpreted in court cases by the judges, has never been precisely
defined or codified but forms the basis of the law except when superseded by
legislation. European Community law is confined mainly to economic and
social matters; in certain circumstances it takes precedence over domestic law.
It is normally applied by the domestic courts, but the most authoritative rulings
are given by the European Court of Justice (see p 70).
Criminal Justice
There are four distinct stages in British criminal justice: making laws which
define prohibited acts and provide for the treatment of offenders; preventing
crime and enforcing the law — largely matters for the police; determining in the
courts the guilt or innocence of people accused of crimes, and sentencing the
guilty; and dealing with convicted offenders.
The Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure .which reported in 1981, made
recommendations for placing on a consistent and statutory footing the powers
of the police in England and Wales, the rights of suspects and the arrangements
for prosecuting offenders, which are being considered by the Government. A
separate review in Scotland led to recommendations which have been largely
implemented by recent legislation.
With continuing concern in Britain, as in many other countries, over rising
crime rates, public expenditure on the law and order programme reflects the
special priority given by the Government to these services. Recent increases
have been made to cover, in particular, greater police manpower and extra
spending on prison building. More than two-thirds of total expenditure is ini¬
tially incurred by local authorities (with the help of central government grants),
mainly on the police service.
The Criminal The criminal law, like the law generally, undergoes constant reform in the
Law courts but substantial changes are matters for Parliament. In practice most
legislation affecting criminal law is government-sponsored, but there is usually
consultation between government departments and the legal profession, the
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
97
police, the probation service (in Scotland, the prison service), and voluntary
bodies.
Crime Statistics Chief constables in England and Wales must supply statistics relating to
offences, offenders, criminal proceedings and the state of crime in their areas.
Crime statistics are published annually by the Home Office and further
information about crime trends (as well as about police matters) is contained in
the annual reports of Her Majesty’s Chief Inspector of Constabulary and (for
London) the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis. Similar arrangements
operate in Scotland and Northern Ireland.
Differences in the legal systems, police recording practices and statistical
classifications in the countries of the United Kingdom make it impracticable to
analyse in detail trends in crime for the country as a whole. Nevertheless, it is
clear that, as in Western Europe generally, there has been a substantial increase
in crime since the early 1950s. However, official statistics cover only crime
recorded by the police and may thus be affected by changes in the proportion of
crimes which are undiscovered or unreported. The level of police manning and
deployment of the force may also affect recording.
Table 4 shows the rate of notifiable offences recorded by the police in 1982 in
England and Wales. While a recent survey found that the incidence of crime was
much higher than the official statistics suggest, it also showed that the risks
which people in Britain face of being victims of serious crime are remarkably
small.
Table 4: Notifiable1 offences recorded by the police, per 100,000 popu¬
lation (England and Wales) 1982
Offence Group 1982
Homicide 1
Violence against the person (excluding homicide) 219
Sexual offences 40
Burglary 1,634
Robbery 46
Theft and handling stolen goods 3,539
Fraud and forgery 248
Criminal damage 491
Other offences 8
Source: Home Office
1 Previously known as ‘serious' offences recorded by the police.
The number of notifiable offences recorded by the police in England and
Wales in 1982 was 3,088,000. The number cleared up was 1,131,100 or 37 per
cent. The Scottish police recorded 435,100 crimes; the number cleared up
was 129,800, nearly 30 per cent of those recorded.
Criminological A wide range of research into criminal and social policies is carried out by the
Research Home Office and the Scottish Home and Health Department. Research is also
carried out in university departments, much of it financed by the Government.
The principal university criminological research establishment is the Institute
of Criminology at Cambridge.
98
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Criminal
Injuries
Compensation
Scheme
Measures to
Combat
Terrorism
THE POLICE
SERVICE
Forces
The Criminal Injuries Compensation Scheme provides ex gratia compensation
to victims of violent crimes, including violence within the family, and to people
hurt in attempting to arrest offenders and prevent offences. Compensation is
assessed on the basis of common law damages and usually takes the form of a
lump-sum payment. In 1981-82 17,350 awards were made and the total com¬
pensation was nearly £22 million.
In Northern Ireland there is separate, statutory provision in certain circum¬
stances for compensation from public funds for criminal injuries, and for mal¬
icious damage to property including losses of profits arising from the damage.
Various temporary measures to deal with terrorism in Northern Ireland have
affected some aspects of British criminal justice. The emergency powers
include: the right to search, arrest and detain suspected terrorists; the proscrip¬
tion of organisations engaged in terrorism connected with Northern Ireland
affairs and occurring in the United Kingdom; and the exclusion from Great
Britain and Northern Ireland of people involved in terrorism. There are also
controls at ports on passengers travelling between Great Britain and Ireland.
Trials in Northern Ireland criminal courts of terrorist offences are heard by a
judge without a jury to obviate the danger of intimidation of jurors.
The emergency laws are temporary and must be renewed regularly; they
have also been subject to independent examination. No one can be imprisoned
for political beliefs; all prisoners except those awaiting trial have been found
guilty in court of criminal offences. While acknowledging that the special
powers make inroads into civil liberties the Government believes they should
continue as long as a substantial terrorist threat remains. As a result of recom¬
mendations made in 1983 for further safeguards in the operation of the Preven¬
tion of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act 1976, both for the safety of the
public and for the rights of suspects, it is proposed to replace the Act by new
legislation with a limited life of five years which would contain powers for
dealing also with international terrorists.
The security forces in Northern Ireland are subject to the law and can be pros¬
ecuted for criminal offences. Procedures for handling complaints against the
police involve two independent elements: the Director of Public Prosecutions
where allegations of criminal conduct are made; and the Police Complaints
Board for Northern Ireland where complaints relate only to disciplinary
offences.
The Criminal Jurisdiction Act 1975 makes it possible to try in the Province a
person accused of certain offences committed in the Irish Republic. It also
enables evidence to be obtained in N orthern Ireland for the trial of offences in the
Irish Republic. Reciprocal legislation is in force in the Irish Republic.
British police action in enforcing the law rests mainly upon common consent,
for there are only a small number of officers in relation to the population
(roughly one officer to every 400 or so people). Officers do not normally carry
firearms (their only weapon is a truncheon) and there are strict limitations on
police powers.
Each of Britain’s 52 police forces is responsible for law enforcement in its area,
but there is constant co-operation among them.
Outside London most counties (regions in Scotland) have their own police
forces, though in the interests of efficiency several have combined forces. The
policing of London is in the hands of the Metropolitan Police Force, with
headquarters at New Scotland Yard, and the City of London force. As part of the
Government’s commitment to the law and order services, the strength of the
regular police force in Great Britain has continued to grow, and is almost
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
99
Police
Authorities and
Chief
Constables
Central
Authorities
Status and
Duties
132,500 (including over 11,650 policewomen); in Northern Ireland the strength
is about 7,900. The size of individual police forces depends on the area and
population served. The strength of the Metropolitan Police Force, 26,500, is at
its highest ever.
Each regular police force is maintained by a police authority, a committee of
local councillors and, in England and Wales, magistrates. The police authority
for the Metropolitan Police Force is the Home Secretary. In Northern Ireland the
police authority is appointed by the Secretary of State.
The police authority’s primary duty is to provide an efficient police force for
its area. Its functions, some subject to ministerial approval, include appointing
the chief constable, deputy chief constable and assistant chief constables;
fixing the maximum permitted strength of the force; and providing buildings
and equipment. In the Metropolitan Police area the commissioner of police and
his immediate subordinates are appointed on the recommendation of the Home
Secretary. The police authorities are financed by central and local government.
Chief constables are responsible for the direction and control of police forces
and for the appointment, promotion and discipline of all ranks below assistant
chief constable. They are generally answerable to the police authorities on
matters of efficiency, and must submit a report every year.
The Home Secretary and the Secretaries of State for Scotland and Northern
Ireland are concerned with the organisation, administration and operation of
the police service. They approve the appointment of chief, deputy and assistant
chief constables, and may require a police authority to retire a chief constable in
the interests of efficiency, call for a report from a chief constable on matters
relating to local policing or institute a local inquiry. They can make regulations
covering such matters as police ranks; qualifications for appointment, pro¬
motion and retirement; discipline; hours of duty, leave, pay and allowances;
and uniform. Some of these regulations are first negotiable on the Police
Negotiating Board, which has an independent chairman and representatives of
the police authorities, police staff associations and the home departments.
Matters of a non-negotiable kind and general questions are discussed by the
Police Advisory Boards.
All police forces (except the Metropolitan Police for which the Home Secretary
is responsible) are subject to inspection by inspectors of constabulary reporting
to the Home Secretary, the Secretary of State for Scotland or the Secretary of
State for Northern Ireland. Inspectors also maintain close touch with forces
under their responsibility, and have advisory functions.
A British police officer is an agent of the law of the land, not of the police
authority nor of the Government, and may be sued or prosecuted for any
wrongful act committed in carrying out duties. Statutory procedures, normally
including an independent element, govern the way in which complaints are
handled.
Members of the police service may not belong to a trade union nor may they
withdraw their labour in furtherance of a trade dispute. All ranks, however,
have their own staff associations to represent their interests.
Police work ranges from the protection of people and property, road or street
patrolling (the trend in many places is increasingly away from the car patrol and
back to ‘community’ policing on foot) and traffic control to crime prevention,
criminal investigation and arresting offenders. In urban areas, particularly,
police officers have to deal with social problems and may bring in other social
agencies and expert help. The importance of consultation with local communi¬
ties is recognised, especially in areas with ethnic minorities, and efforts are
100
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Common
Services
Powers of
Arrest
being made to encourage members of the minorities to join the forces.
In England and Wales (but not in Scotland) the police also prosecute accused
people and may decide whether to grant bail before the court proceedings (see
p 101). The main departments in all forces are the uniform department, criminal
investigation department, traffic department and specialised departments,
including river or marine police, mounted police, and dog handlers.
In order to release as many uniformed police officers as possible for opera¬
tional duties, police authorities employ 38,000 civilians on administrative and
technical duties in England and Wales and 2,300 in Scotland. The number of
civilian support staff has been growing as forces secure economies by replacing
police officers with civilians where posts do not require police powers and
training. Traffic wardens (of whom there are nearly 4,700 in England and Wales
and about 570 in Scotland) carry out specified duties concerned with traffic and
parking. Wardens are under the control of the chief constable.
Each force has an attachment of volunteer special constables who perform
police duties in their spare time, without pay. In England and Wales they act as
auxiliaries to the regular force. In Scotland they are retained mainly for
emergency use. In Northern Ireland there is a part-time and full-time paid
reserve.
A number of common services are provided by central government depart¬
ments and by arrangements between forces. The most important are: training
services: a Forensic Science Service in England and Wales (the Metropolitan
Police maintains its own laboratory): telecommunications services which
provide police radio equipment; and central and provincial criminal records
available to all forces. Regional crime squad teams of detectives from several
forces investigate major crimes involving inquiries in more than one police
area. The Scottish Crime Squad assists forces in the investigation and preven¬
tion of crime.
Certain special services such as liaison with the International Criminal Police
Organisation (Interpol) are provided for other British forces by the Metropolitan
Police. The services of the Fraud Squad, run jointly by the Metropolitan Police
and City of London Police to investigate company frauds, are available in
England and Wales.
In all areas of police work the use of scientific aids is widespread. A national
police computer helps to rationalise records and speed up the dissemination of
information.
In England and Wales arrests may be made with or without a warrant issued by
a magistrate. An arrested person is entitled to ask the police to notify a named
person, such as a relative or a solicitor, about the arrest. The police may delay
notification in the interests of the investigation, prevention of crime or appre¬
hension of offenders and may question an arrested person in custody, so long as
he or she has not been charged with the offence or informed that he or she may
be prosecuted for it. Answers to such questions are admissible as evidence in
any subsequent proceedings, provided that they have been given voluntarily.
Guidance on the questioning of arrested persons is contained in the Judges’
Rules and Administrative Directions to the Police; although these do not have
the force of law, the police are required to comply with them.
The Judges’ Rules also require the police to caution an arrested person before
charging him or her. Once a person has been charged with an offence, the police
may not ask further questions, except in exceptional circumstances, to prevent
or minimise harm or loss to some other person or to the public or to clear up an
ambiguity in a previous answer or statement.
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
101
CRIMINAL
COURTS
If the police decide not to charge the arrested person (for example, because of
insufficient evidence) he or she may be released immediately. Alternatively, the
police may decide to release the person and proceed by way of summons, or to
issue a caution (reprimand). If the police need to make further inquiries they
may release the arrested person on bail (after he or she has found sureties) to
return to the police station where the person may be charged on reappearance.
Anyone arrested without a warrant must be released by the police on bail if he
or she cannot be brought before a magistrates’ court within 24 hours, unless the
alleged offence is serious. If detained in custody, the defendant must be brought
before a magistrates’ court as soon as practicable. On appearance before a
magistrates’ court, a defendant charged with an imprisonable offence may be
refused bail in certain specified circumstances only, the most important being
substantial grounds for believing that he or she might abscond, commit further
offences or otherwise interfere with the course of justice. If bail is refused, the
defendant can apply to a judge of the High Court and, if committed to the Crown
Court, may apply for bail to that court. The majority of people remanded by
magistrates are given bail.
A person who thinks that the grounds for detention are unlawful1 may apply
to the High Court for a writ of habeas corpus against the person who detained
him or her, requiring the person to appear before the court to justify the deten¬
tion. An application for this writ is normally made by the person detained or by
someone acting on his or her behalf. Similar procedures apply in Northern
Ireland.
In Scotland, the police may detain and question a suspected person for a
period of up to six hours. Thereafter the person must either be released or
charged. Police powers of arrest are similar to those in England and Wales but
an arrest must be accompanied by a criminal charge. Once a person has been
charged there is little scope for questioning and only voluntary statements will
normally be allowed in evidence at the trial. The court will reject statements
unless satisfied that they have been fairly obtained. Anyone arrested must be
brought before a court with the least possible delay. Where a prosecution on
indictment is intended (that is, where an accusation of a more serious offence is
to be made), the accused is brought before the sheriff to be committed, either for
further examination or until liberated in due course of law. A judicial examin¬
ation may take place. Eight days may elapse between commitment for further
examination and commitment until liberated in due course of law. Anyone
accused of a crime, except murder or treason, is entitled to apply for release on
bail. Money bail has been virtually abolished and the courts, or the Lord
Advocate, may release an accused person on conditions.
Breach of any of the conditions without reasonable excuse is a separate
offence. There is a right of appeal to the High Court by the accused person
against the refusal of bail, or by the prosecutor against the granting of bail, or by
either party against the conditions imposed. The writ of habeas corpus does not
apply in Scotland but if a person is to be prosecuted on indictment and has been
kept in custody pending trial, the trial must begin within 110 days of the date of
full committal. The trial of a person charged with a summary offence and held in
custody must begin within 40 days.
The decision to prosecute normally rests, in England and Wales, with the police
and in Scotland with public prosecutors. In Northern Ireland there is a Director
of Public Prosecutions. In England and Wales (and exceptionally in Scotland) a
1 Detention is lawful in pursuance of criminal justice, for contempt of court or of either House of
Parliament and when expressly authorised by Parliament. It is also sometimes lawful in the case
of the mentally disordered.
102
England and
Wales
Scotland
Northern
Ireland
Courts in
England and
Wales
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
private person may institute criminal proceedings. Police may issue cautions
and in Scotland the public prosecutor may warn, instead of prosecuting.
In England and Wales some offences can be prosecuted only with the consent of
the Attorney General, others only with his consent or by, or with the consent of,
the Director of Public Prosecutions, who acts under his superintendence. Such
crimes as bribery and corruption of officials, and the use and possession of
explosives, are offences requiring the Attorney General’s consent; in the case of
incest, for example, the Director’s consent is sufficient. The Director always
prosecutes crimes such as treason and murder. The police must report to the
Director’s office a further list of offences, including serious offences against the
person, sedition, criminal offences by police officers, and offences relating to
obscene or indecent publications. The Director does not necessarily prosecute
all such cases but may do so in any that appear to be important or where inter¬
vention is thought necessary; otherwise proceedings are conducted by solici¬
tors employed by the police. The Director also considers whether proceedings
should be taken in cases reported by government departments, and advises the
police and others concerned with administration of the criminal law.
When cases go for trial, barristers in private practice appear on the Director’s
behalf; at the Central Criminal Court in London they are drawn from a panel of
‘Treasury Counsel’ appointed by the Attorney General.
The prosecution process in Scotland is different from that in the rest of the
United Kingdom. The Lord Advocate (see p 115) is responsible for the pro¬
secution of all crimes but delegates most of the work to the Solicitor General (see
p 115), to ten advocates depute and to procurators fiscal. The permanent
adviser to the Lord Advocate on prosecution matters is the Crown Agent who is
head of the procurator fiscal service and is assisted by a staff of civil servants
with legal qualifications known as the Crown Office. Prosecutions in the High
Court of Justiciary are prepared by the Crown Office while crimes tried before
the sheriff and district courts are prosecuted by the procurators fiscal who are
lawyers and full-time civil servants and who operate from offices within the
various sheriff court districts. The police investigate offences and report to the
procurator fiscal who decides whether to prosecute, subject to the directions of
the Crown Office.
The Director of Public Prosecutions for Northern Ireland, who is responsible to
the Attorney General, prosecutes all offences tried on indictment, and may do
so in summary cases of a serious nature. Other summary offences are pros¬
ecuted by the police.
Magistrates’ courts deal with nearly all criminal cases in England and Wales,
and conduct preliminary investigations into more serious offences. The Crown
Court, situated in a number of towns and cities, takes all criminal work above
the level of magistrates’ courts and trials are held before a jury.
Magistrates’ courts hear charges against people accused of ‘summary
offences’, those that can be legally disposed of by magistrates sitting without a
jury. There are some 700 courts and some 23,000 magistrates (‘justices of the
peace’, JPs) who are advised on points of law and procedure by a clerk to the
justices (or an assistant) who is normally legally qualified and is also in charge of
the court’s administrative arrangements. Each court normally consists of three
unpaid lay magistrates who ascertain the facts of a case and apply the law to
them. Magistrates are appointed by the Lord Chancellor. In inner London and
other large urban areas where work is heavy, professional ‘stipendiary’
magistrates, full-time, salaried and legally qualified, usually preside alone.
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
103
Appeals
Scotland
Magistrates must as a rule sit in open court, but when they make preliminary
inquiries into a serious case to see whether there is evidence to justify committal
for trial in the Crown Court the proceedings must not be reported in the press at
the time except at the defendant’s request, unless the person is discharged.
Magistrates cannot usually impose a sentence of more than six months’
imprisonment or a fine exceeding £1,000. If an offence carries a higher
maximum penalty, they may commit the offender for sentence at the Crown
Court if they consider their own power inadequate.
Cases involving people under 17 are heard in juvenile courts, specially consti¬
tuted magistrates’ courts which sit apart from other courts, or at a different
time; only limited publicity is allowed. If a young person under 17 is charged
jointly with someone of 17 or over, the case is heard in the ordinary magistrates’
court. If the young person is found guilty, the court may transfer the case to a
juvenile court, unless it wishes to pass sentence itself.
The Crown Court deals with trials of the more serious cases, the sentencing of
offenders committed for sentence by magistrates’ courts, and appeals from
magistrates’ courts. It has about 90 centres and is presided over by High Court
judges, full-time ‘circuit judges’ and part-time recorders. All contested trials
take place before a jury. A High Court judge sits alone for the most serious cases.
A circuit judge or recorder sits with between two and four magistrates for
appeals and committals for sentence from magistrates’ courts and may sit with
magistrates to try the less important cases.
The Crown Court may impose a fine of any amount on a convicted offender
and, within the maximum penalty determined for the offence by Parliament,
any other custodial or non-custodial penalty.
A person convicted by a magistrates’ court may appeal to the Crown Court
against the sentence and, if contesting a finding of guilt, against the conviction
itself. Where the appeal is on a point of law, either the prosecutor or the defend¬
ant may appeal from the magistrates’ court to the High Court (see p 112). Appeals
from the Crown Court, either against conviction or against sentence, are
usually made to the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division). A further appeal from
the Court of Appeal to the House of Lords can be brought if the court certifies
that a point of law of general public importance is involved and it appears to the
court or the Lords that the point is one that ought to be considered by the House.
A prosecutor or defendant may appeal to the Lords from a decision of the High
Court in a criminal case.
The Attorney General may seek the opinion of the Court of Appeal on a point
of law which has arisen in a case where a person tried on indictment is
acquitted; the court has power to refer the point to the House of Lords if neces¬
sary. The acquittal in the original case is not affected, nor is the identity of the
acquitted person revealed without his or her consent.
In Scotland the High Court of Justiciary tries such crimes as murder, treason
and rape; the sheriff court is concerned with less serious offences and the dis¬
trict court with minor offences. Criminal cases are heard either under solemn
procedure, when proceedings are taken on indictment and the judge sits with a
jury of 15 members, or under summary procedure, when the judge sits without a
jury. All cases in the High Court and the more serious ones in sheriff courts are
tried by a judge and jury. Summary procedure is used in the less serious cases in
the sheriff courts, and in all cases in the district courts. District courts are the
administrative responsibility of the district and the islands local government
authorities. The judges are lay justices of the peace including up to one-quarter
of the elected members of the authorities appointed as ex-officio justices. In
Glasgow there are three stipendiary magistrates who are full-time salaried
104
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Northern
Ireland
Trial
lawyers. Children under 16 who have committed an offence or are considered to
need compulsory care may be brought before an informal children’s hearing
comprising three members of the local community (see p 110).
Scotland’s six sheriffdoms are further divided into sheriff court districts, each
of which has a sheriff or sheriffs, who are the judges of the court.
The High Court of Justiciary, Scotland’s supreme criminal court, is both a
trial and an appeal court. Any of the following judges is entitled to try cases in
the High Court: the Lord Justice General (the head of the court), the Lord
Justice Clerk (the judge next in seniority) or one of the Lord Commissioners of
Justiciary. The main seat of the court is in Edinburgh, although the High Court
on circuit also tries cases in other towns.
All appeals are dealt with by the High Court in Edinburgh. In both solemn and
summary procedure, an appeal may be brought against conviction, or
sentence, or both. The Court may authorise a retrial if it sets aside a conviction.
There is no further appeal to the House of Lords.
The structure of Northern Ireland courts is broadly similar to that of England
and Wales. The day-to-day work of dealing summarily with minor cases is
carried out by magistrates’ courts presided over by a full-time, legally qualified
resident magistrate. Young offenders under 17 and young people under 17 who
need care, protection and control are dealt with by juvenile courts consisting of
the resident magistrate and two lay members (at least one of whom must be a
woman) specially qualified to deal with juveniles. Appeals from magistrates’
courts are heard by the county court.
The Crown Court deals with criminal trials on indictment. It is served by High
Court and county court judges. Proceedings are heard before a single judge, and
all contested cases, other than those involving offences specified under
emergency legislation, take place before a jury. Appeals from the Crown Court
against conviction or sentence are heard by the Northern Ireland Court of
Appeal. Procedures for a further appeal to the House of Lords are similar to those
in England and Wales.
Criminal trials in the United Kingdom take the form of a contest between the
prosecution and the defence. Since the law presumes the innocence of an
accused person until guilt has been proved, the prosecution is not granted any
advantage, apparent or real, over the defence. A defendant has the right to
employ a legal adviser and may be granted legal aid from public funds. If reman¬
ded in custody, the person may be visited by a legal adviser to ensure a properly
prepared defence. In England, Wales and Northern Ireland during the prepar¬
ation of the case, the prosecution usually tells the defence of relevant docu¬
ments which it is not proposed to put in evidence and discloses them if asked to
do so. The prosecution should also inform the defence of witnesses whose evi¬
dence may help the accused and whom the prosecution does not propose to call.
The defence or prosecution may suggest that the defendant’s mental state
renders him or her unfit to be tried. If the jury decides that this is so, the defend¬
ant is admitted to a specified hospital.
Criminal trials are normally in open court and rules of evidence (concerned
with the proof of facts) are rigorously applied. If evidence is illegally admitted, a
conviction can be quashed on appeal. During the trial the defendant has the
right to hear and cross-examine witnesses for the prosecution, normally
through a lawyer; to call his or her own witnesses who, if they will not attend
voluntarily may be legally compelled to attend; and to address the court in
person or through a lawyer, the defence having the right to the last speech at the
trial. The defendant cannot be questioned without consenting to be sworn as a
witness in his or her own defence. When he or she does testify, cross-
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
105
The Jury
Scotland
Coroners’
Courts
examination about character or other conduct may be made only in exceptional
circumstances and generally the prosecution may not introduce evidence of
such matters.
Injury trials the judge decides questions of law, sums up the evidence for the
jury, and discharges the accused or passes sentence. Only the jury decides
whether the defendant is guilty or not guilty. If the jury cannot reach a unani¬
mous verdict, the judge may direct it to bring in a majority verdict provided
that, in the normal jury of 12 people, there are not more than two dissentients. If
the jury returns a verdict of ‘not guilty’, the prosecution has no right of appeal
and the defendant cannot be tried again for the same offence. If ‘guilty’ the
defendant has a right of appeal to the appropriate court. A jury is completely
independent of the judiciary. Once members are sworn in, they are protected
from all interference. Both the prosecution and the defence can object to parti¬
cular jurors. People between the ages of 18 and 65 whose names appear on the
electoral register, with certain exceptions, are liable for jury service and their
names are chosen at random. Ineligible persons include senior court officials,
people who have within the previous ten years been members of the legal pro¬
fession or of the police, prison and probation services, priests and certain suffer¬
ers from mental illness.
At summary trials in Scotland accused people are asked to plead to the charge at
the first calling of the case and, if they plead guilty, the court may dispose of the
case. Where the plea is ‘not guilty’, the court appoints a date for the trial.
In indictment cases, unless the accused is pleading guilty, a diet (date on
which a person must appear in court) will be fixed for trial in the High Court or
the Sheriff Court. Any special pleas or matters to be dealt with which may affect
the trial can be disposed of beforehand at a preliminary diet.
The accused may plead guilty at the trial diet and be dealt with there and then.
In the case of a plea of not guilty, trial is before a judge of the High Court or the
sheriff and 15 jurors. Evidence is presented without opening speeches, and there
are closing speeches for the prosecution and for the defence, followed by the
judge’s charge to the jury. The jury may return a verdict of ‘not guilty’ or ‘not
proven’, both of which result in acquittal, or it may find the accused ‘guilty’, in
which case the court delivers sentence. The verdict may be reached by a simple
majority. With a few minor exceptions, no person may be convicted without the
evidence of at least two independent witnesses, or corroboration of one witness
by facts and circumstances which clearly implicate the accused. Where the
accused has given prior notice of a plea of guilty an early diet will be arranged,
and there will be no trial. The judge or sheriff will sit alone to deal with the
matter.
Coroners’ courts investigate violent and unnatural deaths or sudden deaths
where the cause is unknown. Cases may be brought before the local coroner (a
senior lawyer or doctor) by doctors, the police, various public authorities or
members of the public, and it is the coroner’s duty to hold an inquiry into how,
when and where the deceased died. If the death is sudden and the cause
unknown, the coroner need not hold an inquest in court, but may order a post¬
mortem examination to determine cause of death. Where there is reason to
believe that the deceased died a violent or unnatural death or died in prison or in
other specified circumstances the coroner must hold an inquest. In Scotland the
office of coroner does not exist. The local procurator fiscal inquires privately
into all sudden and suspicious deaths and may report the findings to the Crown
Agent. In a minority of cases a fatal accident inquiry may be held before the
sheriff.
106
TREATMENT
OF
OFFENDERS
Sentencing
Non-custodial
Treatment
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland a person who has not previously served
a custodial sentence of a particular kind may not be sentenced to custodial
treatment of that kind unless he or she is legally represented or has chosen not
to be, and unless the court is satisfied that no other sentence will suffice. In
England and Wales, extended sentences longer than the normal maximum
term may be imposed on persistent offenders. In the case of murder there is a
mandatory penalty of life imprisonment. This is the maximum penalty for a
number of serious offences such as robbery, rape, arson and manslaughter.
Although the death penalty may still, in theory, be imposed for certain offences,
such as treason, it is no longer used.
In Scotland, unless the sentence is limited by statute, the maximum penalty
is determined by the status of the court trying the accused. In trials on
indictment, the High Court may impose a sentence of imprisonment for any
term up to life, and the sheriff court any term up to two years but may send any
person to the High Court for sentence if he feels his powers are insufficient. In
summary cases, the sheriff may impose up to six months’ imprisonment except
in certain cases where his powers are extended by statute.
Non-custodial treatment includes fines, probation and absolute discharge. In
England, Wales and Northern Ireland the court may impose conditional dis¬
charge when it considers there is no need to impose punishment; and ‘binding
over’ where the offender pledges money, with or without sureties, to keep the
peace and be of good behaviour.
Offenders aged 16 or over convicted of imprisonable offences can, with their
consent, be given community service orders. The court may order between 40
and 240 hours’ unpaid service to be completed within 12 months. Examples of
work done include decorating the houses of old or disabled people and building
adventure playgrounds.
The sentence imposed on an offender in England, Wales and Northern Ireland
may also, with his or her consent, be deferred for up to six months to enable a
court to take into account conduct after some expected change in circum¬
stances. In Scotland sentence may also be deferred with or without the
offender’s consent.
The courts in England, Wales and Northern Ireland may order an offender to
pay compensation for personal injury, loss or damage resulting from an offence.
Where the loss amounts to £15,000 or more they may make a criminal
bankruptcy order against an offender. In Scotland there is also a system of com¬
pensation by offenders.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland a judge is free to pass a suspended
sentence of not more than two years. The sentence is not served unless the
offender is convicted of a further offence punishable with imprisonment; in that
event the suspended sentence normally takes effect and another sentence may
be imposed for the new offence. An offender receiving a suspended sentence of
more than six months may be placed under the supervision of a probation
officer for all or part of the period. Courts in England and Wales have the power,
when passing a sentence of between three months’ and two years’
imprisonment, to order that part should be served and the rest held in suspense.
In certain circumstances courts may order forfeiture of property involved in
the commission of crime. An offender convicted of a serious crime may be dis¬
qualified from driving if a motor vehicle was used in its commission.
In most circumstances, after a rehabilitation period of from six months to ten
years depending on the nature of the sentence imposed, a person convicted of a
criminal offence need not disclose it, and the offence will not be held against him
or her. This does not apply to those with a prison sentence of more than 2j years.
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
107
Prob ation
Prisons
Remission of
Sentence and
Parole
Probation is designed to rehabilitate an offender, who continues to live an ordi¬
nary life with the supervision, advice and assistance of a probation officer.
Before making a probation order which lasts between six months (12 months in
Scotland) and three years, the court must explain its effects and make sure that
the probationer understands that failure to comply with it will make him or her
liable to be dealt with again for the original offence. An order can be made only if
the offender is aged 17 years (16 years in Scotland) or over and has given consent,
and usually requires the probationer to keep in regular touch with the probation
officer, and to be of good behaviour. In Northern Ireland an order can be made
for anyone over the age of criminal responsibility (ten years), but consent is
required where the offender is aged 14 or over. It may require the offender to live
in a specified place (such as an approved hostel), or receive psychiatric
treatment.
In England and Wales the probation service is administered locally by pro¬
bation and after-care committees of local magistrates and co-opted members
with legal and specialist interests. In Scotland it is administered by social work
departments. In Northern Ireland it is administered by a probation board whose
membership is broadly based and representative of the community. Probation
officers are usually members of small teams, although each has much indepen¬
dence in undertaking casework.
Probation and after-care committees may provide and maintain day training
centres, bail hostels, probation hostels and other rehabilitation centres. The
service also administers the community service scheme.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland, the services of probation and after¬
care officers are available to every criminal court. In Scotland, local authority
staff are similarly available.
Although the courts have made less use of prison as a penalty for criminal
activity, there has been an increase in the prison population as a result of the
rise in crime. The daily average inmate population in 1982 in England and Wales
was over 43,700. On the basis of existing trends, the population is expected to
rise, perhaps to nearly 45,000 in 1984-85; it may, however, be affected by a
continuing move towards shorter sentences. In Scotland the average popu¬
lation in custody has remained fairly steady for the last decade at around 4,900.
Prisons to which offenders may be committed directly by a court are known as
‘local prisons’; all are closed. Other prisons, open or closed, receive prisoners on
transfer from local prisons (open prisons do not have physical barriers to
prevent escape). Sentenced prisoners are classified into groups for security pur¬
poses. There are separate prisons for women.
People awaiting trial are entitled to privileges not granted to convicted
prisoners and, as far as practicable, are separated from convicted prisoners.
Prisoners under 21 awaiting trial are separated from older prisoners.
Many British prisons were built during the nineteenth century and are now
unsatisfactory and overcrowded. A number of new prisons have been or are
being built and existing establishments redeveloped and modernised.
Most prisoners in Great Britain serving a sentence of more than five days are
eligible for remission of one-third of their sentence provided it does not reduce
the sentence to less than five days. However, people sentenced to life imprison¬
ment for certain categories of murder, including terrorist murders and the
murder of police officers, must serve a minimum of 20 years’ imprisonment.
Remission may be forfeited for serious misconduct. There is no remission for
prisoners serving sentences under civil law and those serving sentences of
unspecified length (for example, the criminally insane, whose release depends
upon improvement in their mental condition).
108
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Prison
Industries
and Education
Medical and
Psychological
Services
Privileges and
Discipline
Prisoners serving fixed sentences of more than 18 months become eligible for
release on parole after one-third of their sentence or 12 months, whichever
expires later, although there are proposals to discontinue this provision for
those serving longer sentences for violent and certain other offences. The parole
licence remains in force until the date on which the prisoner would have been
released but for the parole. It prescribes the conditions with which the offender
must comply. About 11-4 per cent of prisoners granted parole in England and
Wales and about 6 • 1 per cent ofthose in Scotland in 1982 were recalled to prison.
Prisoners serving life sentences are also eligible for release on licence; after
consideration by the Home Secretary or the Secretary of State for Scotland who
consults the judiciary, and on the recommendation of the appropriate Parole
Board. Those released remain on licence for the rest of their lives subject to
recall at any time should the circumstances warrant.
There are emergency powers to release offenders in England and Wales up to
six months early.
In Northern Ireland, where there is no parole scheme, prisoners may earn
one-half remission on determinate sentences, provided remission does not
reduce the sentence to below 31 days. For those serving over a year, a court can
order all or part of the outstanding balance of the remitted period to be served in
the event of reconviction in the remitted period for an imprisonable offence, in
addition to any penalty imposed for a further offence.
Prison industries aim to give inmates work experience which will assist them
when released and to secure a return which will reduce the cost of the prison
system. The main industries are clothing and textile manufacture,
engineering, woodwork, laundering, electro-mechanical production, farming
and horticulture. Most production caters for internal needs and for other public
services but much of it is for the commercial market. A few prisoners are
employed outside prison. Small payments are made for work; in some prisons,
incentive schemes provide an opportunity for higher earnings on the basis of
output and skill.
Education is financed by the prison service and provided by local education
authorities. Prison education officers are assisted by teams of teachers. Edu¬
cation is compulsory, full-time, for young offenders below school-leaving age
and, in England and Wales, part-time for those between 16 and 21. For older
offenders it is voluntary. Some prisoners study for public examinations (includ¬
ing those of the Open University). Within the resources available there is
teaching in recreational and leisure pursuits. Vocational training is provided
directly by the prison service. Physical education is voluntary but offenders
under 21 have to attend a certain number of classes. Many establishments lack
the proper facilities, although there have been recent improvements.
The prison medical service has a general responsibility for the physical and
mental health of all those in custody. Each establishment has accommodation
for sick people and patients can also be transferred to National Health Service
hospitals. Psychiatric care is available.
The work of psychologists includes evaluating treatment programmes,
studying management practices, contributing to the management and
treatment programmes of individuals and groups, taking part in advisory and
training work with staff and making assessments for treatment or allocation
purposes.
Prisoners are entitled to write and receive letters and to be visited by relatives
and friends. Privileges include a personal radio, books, periodicals and
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
109
Welfare
Discharge and
After-care
Children in
Trouble
England and
Wales
newspapers, and the right to make purchases from the canteen with money
earned in prison. Depending on facilities prisoners may be granted the further
privileges of dining and recreation in association and watching television.
Breaches of discipline are dealt with by the prison governor, or by the boards
of visitors (visiting committee in Scotland), who have power to order forfeiture
of remission and forfeiture of privileges. Boards of visitors (and visiting com¬
mittees) consist of lay people, two of whom must be magistrates.
The welfare of prisoners is the concern of all prison staff. Much of this work is the
responsibility of probation officers (in Scotland social workers) stationed in
prisons who help prisoners in their relations with individuals and agencies
outside and play a leading part in helping prisoners to make constructive
resettlement plans before their release. Prisoners may also receive visits
from specially appointed prison visitors whose work is voluntary.
Chaplains give spiritual help and advice to inmates and are increasingly
involved in management decisions affecting their needs and quality of life.
All prisons in England and Wales arrange pre-release preparations. Prisoners
serving four years or more are considered for outside employment before
release. For those selected, work is found outside the prison for about the last six
months of sentence; during the period prisoners may live in a separate part of
the prison or in a hostel outside. Normal wages are paid so that they can resume
support for their families. (In Scotland pre-release arrangements differ from
these in some respects.) Periods of home leave may be granted in the last nine
months of sentence to those serving two years or more to assist them with their
resettlement.
The aim of after-care, run by the probation and after-care service (in Scotland,
the local authority social work departments), is to assist offenders on return to
society. Compulsory supervision is given to most offenders under 21 when
released, adult offenders released on parole, and those released on licence from
a life sentence. A voluntary system is offered to others. After-care is also pro¬
vided by voluntary societies, most of which are members of the National
Association for the Care and Resettlement of Offenders. There is also a Scottish
Association for the Care and Resettlement of Offenders. Hostels and accommo¬
dation may be provided, often with government financial help.
In England and Wales no child under ten years can be held guilty of an offence. A
child aged 10 to 16 years who is alleged to have committed an offence may be the
subject of criminal proceedings or of‘care’ proceedings, both of which normally
take place in juvenile courts. In care proceedings the fact that a child is found
guilty of an offence is not in itself sufficient justification for making an order; the
court must also consider the child to need care or control which he or she is
unlikely to receive unless an order is made. In criminal proceedings a court may
make a care order without having to consider whether the child needs care or
control; this applies to a child found guilty of an offence (other than homicide)
punishable in the case of an adult by imprisonment.
A number of orders are available to courts in both care and criminal proceed¬
ings. Under a care order a local authority becomes responsible for deciding
where the child should be accommodated; whether, for example, to leave the
child at home under supervision or to place him with foster parents or in a com¬
munity home (see p 130). For children too severely disturbed or disruptive to be
treated in local authority homes, there are two special Youth Treatment
Centres. The authority must review each care order every six months and con¬
sider whether an application should be made to the court to end it; the order
normally expires when the child reaches 18 or 19. The courts have powers to
110
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Scotland
Northern
Ireland
make a residential care order when a child who is already under a care order as a
result of an offence commits a further offence (for which an adult could be pun¬
ished by imprisonment). This suspends for six months the local authority’s dis¬
cretion to place the child in his or her own home.
Under a supervision order (usually valid for three years or less) a child
normally remains at home under the supervision of a social worker or a pro¬
bation officer, but may have to live with a specified person or to comply with
directions of his or her supervisor. The child may have to undergo ‘intermediate
treatment’, a compromise between measures involving complete removal from
home and those which do not, and consisting of participation, under a
supervisor, in a variety of constructive and remedial activities through a short
residential course or, more usually, attendance at a day or evening centre.
Government finance is available to aid individuals, groups or organisations
willing to provide intermediate treatment facilities.
A court may also make an order requiring a parent or guardian to take proper
care of the child and to exercise proper control; the order may be made only with
the consent ofthe parent or guardian. In care proceedings, the court may order a
stay in hospital in accordance with the mental health legislation.
The courts may also order payments of compensation, or impose fines or
grant a conditional or absolute discharge. When a fine, compensation or costs
are awarded against a juvenile offender the courts generally order that the
parent or guardian should pay. Offenders, both male and female, may be
ordered to spend a total of up to 24 hours of their spare time on Saturdays at an
attendance centre (up to three hours on any one occasion). The centres which
provide physical education and instruction in practical subjects are for those
found guilty of offences for which older people could be sent to prison. Boys aged
14 to 16 may be sent to a junior detention centre, where the regime is similar to
that in senior detention centres (see p 111). Boys and girls aged 15 or 16 may also
be sentenced to a term of youth custody. In the case of a very serious crime,
detention in a place approved by the Home Secretary may be ordered.
In Scotland the age of criminal responsibility is eight years but prosecution of
children in the criminal courts is rare and can take place only on the instruc¬
tions of the Lord Advocate; court proceedings usually apply only to very serious
offences. Instead children under 16 who have committed an offence or need care
and protection may be brought before an informal children’s hearing which
determines whether compulsory measures of care are required and, if so, the
form they should take (see p 104). An official ‘reporter’ decides whether a child
should come before a hearing. If the grounds for referral are not accepted by the
child and parents, the case goes to the sheriff court for proof. It can then come
back to the hearing. The sheriff also decides appeals against a decision of a
children’s hearing.
The age of criminal responsibility in Northern Ireland is ten. Children under the
age of 17 charged with committing a criminal offence may be brought before a
juvenile court. If the child is found guilty of an offence punishable by imprison¬
ment if committed by an adult, he or she may be sent to a training school, placed
in the care of a ‘fit person’, possibly the area health and social services board, or
put under supervision. Alternatively the court can order a period at an atten¬
dance centre or a remand home, or impose a fine or compensation. A condi¬
tional or absolute discharge is also possible. Whatever other order it makes, a
juvenile court can also make an order requiring parents to ensure the child’s
good behaviour. Children brought before the courts in need of care and protec¬
tion may be placed in care locally.
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
111
Young Adult
Offenders
The Civil Law
CIVIL COURTS
England and
Wales
Offenders aged 17 to 20 years (16 to 21 years in Scotland) are recognised as
a category distinct from child and adult offenders. The custodial sentences
available in England and Wales are: detention centre orders for males for from
three weeks to four months and youth custody sentences for both sexes. The
senior detention centres are for young male offenders who need to be taught
respect for the law through some form of custody. Life in a centre demands high
standards of discipline. Training comprises a full working week, including an
hour a day of physical training, with considerable attention paid to education.
Young offenders are eligible for parole on a similar basis to adults and all are
supervised after discharge.
Courts may impose a custodial sentence only when no other measure is
appropriate: a number of alternatives to custody are open to the courts. Com¬
munity service orders (see p 106) are available from the age of 16 and courts may
order young offenders to give up Saturday afternoon leisure at attendance
centres. The courts may also attach conditions to probation orders on offenders.
In Scotland young offenders sentenced to detention serve their sentences
either in a detention centre or a young offenders’ institution, depending on the
length of the sentence. Remission of part of the sentence for good conduct,
release on parole, and supervision after release are available. In Northern
Ireland, no offender under 21 sentenced to three years or less may be sent to
prison. Such offenders would serve their sentences in a young offenders’ centre.
Civil Justice
The main sub-divisions of the civil law of England, Wales and Northern Ireland
are: family law, the law of property, the law of contract and the law of torts
(covering injuries suffered by one person at the hands of another irrespective of
any contract between them and including concepts such as negligence, defa¬
mation and trespass). Other branches of the civil law include constitutional and
administrative (particularly concerned with the use of executive power),
industrial, maritime and ecclesiastical law. Scottish civil law has its own, often
analogous, branches.
The limited civil jurisdiction of magistrates’ courts extends to matrimonial pro¬
ceedings for custody and maintenance orders, adoption orders and affiliation
and guardianship orders. The courts also have jurisdiction concerning nui¬
sances under the public health legislation and the recovery of rates. Com¬
mittees of magistrates license public houses, betting shops and clubs.
The jurisdiction of the 300 or so county courts covers actions founded upon
contract and tort (with minor exceptions); trust and mortgage cases; and
actions for the recovery of land. Cases involving claims exceeding set limits may
be tried in the county court by consent of the parties, or in certain circum¬
stances on transfer from the High Court.
Other matters dealt with by the county courts include hire purchase, the Rent
Acts, landlord and tenant and adoption cases. Undefended divorce cases are
determined in those courts designated as divorce county courts (defended cases
are transferred to the High Court) and outside London bankruptcies are dealt
with in certain county courts. The courts also deal with complaints of race and
sex discrimination. Where small claims are concerned (especially those involv¬
ing consumers), there are special arbitration facilities and simplified
procedures.
All judges of the Supreme Court (comprising the Court of Appeal, the Crown
Court and the High Court) and all circuit judges and recorders have power to sit
in the county courts, but each court has one or more circuit judges assigned to it
by the Lord Chancellor, and the regular sittings of the court are mostly taken by
112
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Appeals
Scotland
them. The judge normally sits alone, although on request the court may,
exceptionally, order a trial with a jury.
The High Court of Justice is divided into the Chancery Division, the Queen’s
Bench Division and the Family Division. Its jurisdiction is both original and
appellate and covers all civil and some criminal cases. In general, particular
types of work are assigned to a particular division. The Family Division, for
instance, is concerned with all jurisdiction affecting the family, including that
relating to adoption and guardianship. The Chancery Division deals with the
interpretation of wills and the administration of estates. Maritime and commer¬
cial law is the responsibility of admiralty and commercial courts of the Queen’s
Bench Division.
Each of the 80 or so judges of the High Court is attached to one division on
appointment but may be transferred to any other division while in office. The
Lord Chancellor is president of the Chancery Division, administered by the vice
president, the Vice-Chancellor. The Queen’s Bench Division is presided over by
the Lord Chief Justice of England, who ranks next to the Lord Chancellor in the
legal hierarchy, and the Family Division is headed by the President. Outside
London (where the High Court sits at the Royal Courts of Justice) sittings are
held at 24 Crown Court centres. For the hearing of cases at first instance, High
Court judges sit alone. Appeals in civil matters from lower courts are heard by
courts of two (or sometimes three) judges, or by single judges of the appropriate
division, nominated by the Lord Chancellor.
Appeals in matrimonial, adoption and guardianship proceedings heard by
magistrates’ courts go to a divisional court of the Family Division of the High
Court. Affiliation appeals are heard by the Crown Court, as are appeals from
decisions of the licensing committees of magistrates. Appeals from the High
Court and county courts are heard in the Court of Appeal (Civil Division) and
may go on to the House of Lords, the final court of appeal in civil cases.
The ex officio members of the Court of Appeal are the Lord Chancellor, the
Lord Chief Justice, the President of the Family Division and the Master of the
Rolls; the ordinary members are 18 Lords Justices of Appeal.
The judges in the House of Lords are the nine Lords of Appeal in Ordinary,
who must have a quorum of three, but usually sit as a group of five, and some¬
times even of seven. Lay peers do not attend the hearing of appeals (which
normally take place in a committee room and not in the legislative chamber),
but peers who hold or have held high judicial office may also sit. The president of
the House in its judicial capacity is the Lord Chancellor.
The main civil courts are the sheriff courts and the Court of Session. The civil
jurisdiction of the sheriff court extends to most kinds of action and is normally
unlimited by the value of the case. Much of the work is done by the sheriff,
against whose decisions an appeal may be made to the sheriff-principal or
directly to the Court of Session.
The Court of Session sits only in Edinburgh, and in general has jurisdiction to
deal with all kinds of action. The main exception is an action exclusive to the
sheriff court, where the value claimed is less than a set amount. The Court has
sole jurisdiction in divorce (until 1984, when the sheriff court will obtain juris¬
diction to deal with divorce) and certain other actions. It is divided into two
parts: the Outer House, a court of first instance, and the Inner House, mainly an
appeal court. The Inner House is divided into two divisions of equal status, each
consisting of four judges — the first division being presided over by the Lord
President and the second division by the Lord Justice Clerk. Appeals to the
Inner House may be made from the Outer House and from the sheriff court.
From the Inner House an appeal may go to the House of Lords. The judges of the
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
113
Northern
Ireland
Civil
Proceedings
Court of Session are the same as those of the High Court of Justiciary. The Lord
President of the Court holds the office of Lord Justice General in the High Court
(see p 104).
The Scottish Land Court, a special court dealing with agricultural tenancies
and similar matters, consists of a judge and four lay specialists in agriculture.
Minor civil cases in Northern Ireland are dealt with in county courts, though
magistrates’ courts also deal with certain classes of civil case. The superior civil
law court is the High Court of Justice from which an appeal may be made to the
Court of Appeal. These two courts, together with the Crown Court, comprise the
Supreme Court of Judicature of Northern Ireland and their practice and pro¬
cedure are similar to those in England. The House of Lords is the final civil
appeal court.
In England and Wales civil proceedings are instituted by the aggrieved person;
no preliminary inquiry on the authenticity of the grievance is required. An
action in a magistrates’ court is begun by a complaint on which the court may
serve the defendant with a summons. This contains details of the complaint and
the date on which it will be heard. Parties and witnesses give their evidence at
the court hearing. Domestic proceedings are heard by not more than three lay
justices including, where practicable, a woman; members of the public are not
allowed to be present. The court may order provision for the custody and super¬
vision of children, as well as maintenance payments for spouses and children.
Actions in the High Court are usually begun by a writ of summons served on the
defendant by the plaintiff, stating the nature of the claim. A defendant
intending to contest the claim informs the court. Documents setting out the
precise question in dispute (the pleadings) are then delivered to the court.
County court proceedings are initiated by a summons served on the defendant
by the court; subsequent procedure is simpler than in the High Court.
A decree of divorce must be pronounced in open court, but a procedure for
most undefended cases dispenses with the need to give evidence in court and
permits written evidence to be considered by the registrar.
Civil proceedings, as a private matter, can usually be abandoned or ended by
compromise at any time. Actions brought to court are usually tried without a
jury, except in defamation, false imprisonment, or malicious prosecution cases,
when either party may, except in certain special circumstances, insist on trial
by jury, or a fraud case, when the defendant may claim this right. The jury
decides questions of fact and damages awarded to the injured party; majority
verdicts may be accepted.
Judgments in civil cases are enforceable through the authority of the court.
Most are for sums of money and may be enforced, in cases of default, by seizure
of the debtor’s goods or by attachment of earnings (a court order requiring an
employer to make periodic payments to the court by deduction from the
debtor’s wages). Other judgments can take the form of an injunction restraining
someone from performing an illegal act. Refusal to obey judgment may result in
imprisonment for contempt of court. Arrest under an order of committal may be
effected only on a warrant.
The general rule is that the costs of the action (lawyers’ charges, court fees
and other payments) are within the discretion of the court. Normally, the court
orders them to be paid by the party losing the action, but in the case of family
law maintenance proceedings a magistrates’ court can order either party to pay
the whole or part of the other’s costs.
In Scotland proceedings in the Court of Session or ordinary actions in the
sheriff court are initiated by serving the defender with a summons (an initial
writ in the sheriff court). In Court of Session actions the next step is the publica-
114
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Restrictive
Practices Court
Administrative
Tribunals
GOVERNMENT
RESPONSI¬
BILITIES
tion of the action in the court lists. A defender who intends to contest the action
must inform the court; if he or she does not appear, the court grants a decree in
absence in favour of the pursuer. In ordinary actions in the sheriff court the
defender is simply required to give notice of intention to defend within a certain
number of days after service of the initial writ, and this is followed by a formal
appearance in court by the parties to the dispute or their solicitors.
In summary causes (involving small sums) in the sheriff court the procedure
is less formal. The statement of claim is incorporated in the summons. The
procedure is designed to enable most actions to be carried through without the
parties involved having to appear in court. Normally they (or their representa¬
tives) need appear only when an action is defended.
Proceedings in Northern Ireland are similar to those in England and Wales.
The Restrictive Practices Court is a specialised United Kingdom court which
deals with monopolies and restrictive trade practices. It comprises five judges
and up to ten other people with expertise in industry, commerce or public life.
Administrative tribunals consist of persons or bodies exercising judicial func¬
tions outside the ordinary hierarchy of the courts. As a rule, they are set up
under statutory powers which also govern their constitution, functions and pro¬
cedure. Their composition and procedures vary greatly. Compared with the
courts, they tend to be less expensive, less formal and more accessible; they also
have expert knowledge of their particular subjects. The expansion of the tribu¬
nal system is comparatively recent, most tribunals having been set up since
1945. Independently of the executive, tribunals decide the rights and obliga¬
tions of private citizens towards each other or towards a government depart¬
ment or other public authority. A number of important tribunals (notably the
rent and industrial tribunals) decide disputes between private citizens. Some
(such as those concerned with social security) resolve claims by private citizens
against public authorities. A further group (including tax tribunals) decide
disputed claims by public authorities against private citizens, and still others
decide issues in dispute which do not directly affect financial rights or liabilities,
such as entitlements to licences or the right to enter the United Kingdom. Tribu¬
nals usually consist of an uneven number of people so that a majority decision
can be reached; some consist of one person sitting alone. Members are normally
appointed by the minister concerned with the subject but other authorities
have the power of appointment in appropriate cases. The Lord Chancellor (or
the Lord President of the Court of Session in Scotland) makes most
appointments where a lawyer chairman or member is required.
Appeals on a point of law from all the more important tribunals may be made
in England and Wales to the High Court, in Scotland to the Court of Session and
in Northern Ireland to the Court of Appeal. In some cases an appeal may be
made to a specially constituted appeal tribunal, to a government minister or to
an independent referee. The Employment Appeal Tribunal, which hears
appeals on questions of law from decisions of industrial tribunals (see p 301),
has High Court and Court of Session status in Great Britain. The Council on
Tribunals (appointed by the Lord Chancellor and the Lord Advocate) exercises
general supervision over tribunals, advising on draft rules of procedure, moni¬
toring their activities and reporting on particular matters; those peculiar to
Scotland are dealt with by the Scottish Committee of the Council.
Administration of the Law
The United Kingdom judiciary is entirely independent of the Government and is
not subject to ministerial direction or control. There is no minister of justice.
Responsibility for the administration of justice rests with the Lord Chancellor,
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
115
England and
Wales
Scotland
the Home Secretary and the Secretaries of State for Scotland and Northern
Ireland. Also concerned is the Prime Minister who recommends the highest
judicial appointments to the Crown.
The Lord Chancellor is the head of the judiciary (and sometimes sits as a judge
in the House of Lords); he is concerned with court procedure, is responsible for
the administration of all courts other than magistrates’ courts, appoints
magistrates, and has general responsibility for the legal aid and advice scheme.
He is also responsible for the administration of civil law reform.
The Home Secretary is concerned with the criminal law (including law
reform), the police service, prisons, and the probation and after-care service;
and has general supervision over magistrates’ courts, together with some speci¬
fic responsibilities (such as approving the appointment of justices’ clerks). On
matters relating to crime prevention and the treatment of offenders, the Home
Secretary is advised by the Advisory Council on the Penal System. Prison policy
and the administration of custodial centres are functions of the Home Office
Prison Department, and the Home Secretary appoints to each centre a board of
visitors representing the local community to investigate and advise on the state
of prison premises, administration and treatment of inmates. The boards have
disciplinary powers in relation to serious breaches of discipline and hear appli¬
cations or complaints from inmates. The Home Secretary is advised by a special
Parole Board on the release of prisoners on licence.
Responsibility for the treatment of offenders under 17 is shared between the
Home Office and the Department of Health and Social Security. The Home
Secretary is also responsible for advising the Queen on the exercise of the royal
prerogative of mercy to pardon a person convicted of a crime or to cancel all or
part of a penalty imposed by a court.
The Secretary of State for the Environment is responsible for providing
accommodation for all the superior courts in England and Wales, except the
Central Criminal Court, which is the responsibility of the City of London.
The Attorney General and the Solicitor General (the Law Officers of the Crown
for England and Wales) are the Government’s principal advisers on English law,
and represent the Crown in appropriate domestic and international cases. They
are senior barristers, elected members of the House of Commons and hold
ministerial posts. The Attorney General is also Attorney General for Northern
Ireland.
As well as exercising various civil law functions, the Attorney General has
final responsibility for enforcing the criminal law; the Director of Public Pros¬
ecutions is subject to the Attorney General’s superintendence. The Attorney
General is concerned with instituting and prosecuting certain types of criminal
proceedings, but must exercise an independent discretion, and must not be
influenced by government colleagues. The Solicitor General is, in effect, the
deputy of the Attorney General.
The Secretary of State for Scotland recommends the appointment of all judges
other than the most senior ones, appoints the staff of the High Court of Justi¬
ciary and the Court of Session and is responsible for the composition, staffing
and organisation of the sheriff courts. District courts are staffed and admin¬
istered by the district and islands local authorities. The Secretary of State is also
responsible for crime prevention, and the police and the penal system, and is
advised on parole matters by the Parole Board for Scotland.
The Lord Advocate and the Solicitor General for Scotland are the chief legal
advisers to the Government on Scottish questions and the principal representa¬
tives of the Crown for the purposes of litigation in Scotland. The Lord Advocate
is closely concerned with questions of legal policy and administration and is
116
Northern
Ireland
THE
PERSONNEL
OF THE LAW
Judges
The Legal
Profession
LEGAL AID,
ADVICE AND
ASSISTANCE
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
also responsible for the Scottish parliamentary draftsmen, and for the public
prosecution of all major crimes.
In Northern Ireland the judiciary is appointed by the Queen on the advice of the
Lord Chancellor. The administration of all courts is the responsibility of the
Lord Chancellor, while the Northern Ireland Office, under the Secretary of
State, deals with the police and the penal system.
The courts of the United Kingdom are the Queen’s Courts since the Crown is the
historic source of all judicial power. The Queen, acting on the advice of
ministers, is responsible for all appointments to the judiciary.
Full-time judges do not engage in politics, except for the Lord Chancellor, who is
head of the judiciary, speaker of the House of Lords and a Cabinet minister. With
the exception of lay magistrates, judges are normally appointed from practising
barristers, advocates (in Scotland) or solicitors (see below). The judiciary is not a
career service as in many other countries. Lay magistrates in England and
Wales need no legal qualifications but on appointment undergo basic training
to give them sufficient knowledge of the law, including the rules of evidence,
and to enable them to understand the nature and purpose of sentencing. The
Scottish district court justices of the peace likewise need no legal qualifications.
In Northern Ireland lay magistrates serving on juvenile courts undertake
training courses; resident magistrates are drawn from practising solicitors or
barristers. In certain circumstances (for instance, in cases of misconduct or
proven incapacity) judges of the inferior courts may be removed from their posi¬
tions but, in order to safeguard the independence of the judiciary from the
executive, superior judges in England and Wales and Northern Ireland (other
than the Lord Chancellor who changes with the Government) are subject to
removal only by the Queen on an address presented by both Houses of Parlia¬
ment; in Scotland there is no statutory provision for removing judges of the
Court of Session or High Court of Justiciary from office and special legislation
would probably be needed to secure a dismissal.
The legal profession is divided into two branches: barristers (advocates in Scot¬
land) and solicitors. Barristers are known collectively as the ‘Bar’, and col¬
lectively and individually as ‘counsel’. Solicitors undertake legal business for
lay clients, while barristers advise on legal problems submitted through solici¬
tors and present cases in the higher courts; certain functions are common to
both. Although people are free to conduct their own cases, most people prefer to
be legally represented in the more serious cases.
The professional organisations for barristers are: the Senate of the Inns of
Court and the Bar (in England and Wales),1 the Faculty of Advocates (in Scot¬
land) and the General Council of the Bar of Northern Ireland. For solicitors they
are: the Law Society, the Law Society of Scotland and the Incorporated Law
Society of Northern Ireland.
A person in need may be entitled to help from public funds to meet the costs of
legal advice and legal representation in court. The State is entitled to be
reimbursed from contributions which assisted people may have to pay accord¬
ing to their means, and from costs and money or property recovered or pre¬
served in the legal proceedings.
1 In England and Wales every barrister and every student wishing to become a barrister must be a
member of one of the four Inns of Court in London (Lincoln’s Inn, Inner Temple, Middle Temple
and Gray’s Inn).
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
117
Advice and
Assistance
Law Centres
Aid in Civil
Proceedings
Aid in Criminal
Proceedings
People with moderate means may obtain help from a solicitor on any legal
matter concerning British law, either free or subject to a contribution. The
solicitor’s help includes giving advice, writing letters, drafting wills, obtaining
opinions from a barrister or advocate and, where specifically authorised by the
legal aid authorities, representing the client in certain civil proceedings in
magistrates’ courts. A solicitor may act for a client until costs and expenses
reach a total of £40 (£75 for divorce or judicial separation case in England and
Wales) after which the agreement of the legal aid authorities must be obtained.
A person seeking help must give details about income and savings, which must
be below a certain calculated figure.
In a number of urban areas law centres provide free advice to people of limited
means. Most law centres (voluntary organisations financed from various
sources, including government grants) have at least one full-time salaried
lawyer and many employ community workers. Most devote much of their time
to tenant-landlord disputes and other housing problems. Free legal advice is
also available in Citizens Advice Bureaux, consumer and housing advice
centres and in specialist advice centres run by various voluntary organisations.
Legal aid for civil proceedings is available to people whose disposable incomes
and capital fall below certain prescribed amounts, but a contribution may be
payable according to the level of the applicant’s income and capital; if they are
below prescribed amounts, legal aid is given free.
An applicant for legal aid must also show reasonable grounds for taking or
defending the proceedings. If the application is successful the case is conducted
in the ordinary way, except that no money passes between the assisted person
and the solicitor — payments being made in and out of the legal aid fund. The
costs of an action which an assisted litigant loses against an unassisted oppo¬
nent may also, subject to certain conditions and if the court so orders, be met out
of the fund. Solicitors and counsel must review the case at each stage to see that
it is not being pursued unreasonably at public expense. Legal aid is not gen¬
erally available in cases where redress is sought for alleged defamation or for
representation in proceedings in most administrative tribunals.
The civil legal aid schemes are run by the Law Society, the Law Society of
Scotland and the Law Society of Northern Ireland, under the general guidance
of the Lord Chancellor and the Secretary of State for Scotland.
In criminal proceedings in England and Wales a legal aid order may be made by
the court concerned if it appears to be in the interests of justice and if a defend¬
ant qualifies for financial help. An order must be made when a person is com¬
mitted for trial on a murder charge or where the prosecutor appeals or applies
for leave to appeal from the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) to the House of
Lords. No person who is unrepresented can be given a custodial sentence for the
first time unless given the opportunity to apply for legal aid.
Voluntary duty solicitor schemes at many magistrates’ courts provide
‘standby’ help for unrepresented defendants.
The criminal legal aid scheme in England and Wales is administered by the
courts, under the overall responsibility of the Lord Chancellor.
The arrangements for aid in criminal proceedings in Scotland and Northern
Ireland are broadly similar, but in Scotland there is a statutory duty solicitor
scheme for accused people in custody in sheriff, and district, court cases and the
‘interests of justice’ test applies only in summary cases. In Northern Ireland a
duty solicitor scheme has been introduced at the principal magistrates’ court in
Belfast.
118
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
LAW REFORM
The duty of keeping the law under review lies with the Law Reform Committee,
the Criminal Law Revision Committee and the Law Commission in England
and Wales, and with the Scottish Law Commission in Scotland. The Law
Reform Committee and the Criminal Law Revision Committee comprise judges
and practising and academic lawyers, appointed respectively by the Lord
Chancellor and the Home Secretary, to examine aspects of the civil and criminal
law in England and Wales.
The Law Commission, a permanent body of five lawyers of high standing
reporting to the Lord Chancellor, scrutinises the law with a view to its systema¬
tic development and reform, and its simplification and modernisation. The
Scottish Law Commission is similar, and reports to the Lord Advocate. Law
reform in Northern Ireland is a matter for the Law Commission and the Office of
Law Reform.
6 Social Welfare
The British social welfare system comprises the National Health Service, the
personal social services and social security. The National Health Service pro¬
vides a comprehensive range of medical services which are available to all
residents, irrespective of means. Local authority personal social services and
voluntary organisations provide advice and help to elderly people, disabled
people and children in need of care. The social security system is designed to
secure a basic standard of living for people in financial need by providing
income during periods of inability to earn, help for families and compensation
for disablement.
Central government is responsible directly for the National Health Service,
administered by health authorities and boards acting as its agents, and for the
social security system. It has an indirect responsibility for the personal social
services administered by local government authorities. Joint finance and
planning between health and local authorities aims to prevent overlapping of
services and to encourage the development of community services.
Spending on social welfare in 1982was:health£14,000million(5 • Ipercentof
gross domestic product) and on personal social services £2,800 million (1 • 0 per
cent). Spending on social security was £31,900 million.
Expenditure on the health service has increased by over 4 per cent in real
terms since 1980. Spending on social security is rising because of increased
numbers of beneficiaries, especially retirement pensioners and the
unemployed, and now accounts for 29 per cent of public expenditure; the value
of benefits is keeping pace with inflation. Spending on the personal social
services is determined by local authorities within the reduced levels that they
have been asked to achieve.
National Health Service
The National Health Service (NHS) is based upon the principle that there should
be a comprehensive range of publicly provided services designed to promote
improvement in the health of the people and in the prevention, diagnosis and
treatment of illness. All taxpayers, employers and employees contribute to its
cost so that those members of the community who do not require health care
help to pay for those who do. Some forms of treatment, such as hospital care, are
provided free of charge; others (see p 120) may be charged for. Growth in real
spending on the health service is being used to meet the needs of increased
numbers of elderly people (over 40 per cent of health authority expenditure on
hospital and community services is spent on care of the elderly); to provide for
advances in medical treatment; to improve standards of long-term care particu¬
larly for mentally ill and mentally handicapped people; and to remedy imba¬
lance in provision between health regions.
In considering the future use of resources, the Government has emphasised
the importance of preventive services, the responsibility of individuals for their
own health, the importance of the family in providing care and support, and the
whole network of support available within the community and through the
voluntary services. It stresses the need for a partnership between the public and
private health sectors and for improving efficiency in order to secure the best
120
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
ADMINIS¬
TRATION
Health Service
Commissioners
Finance
value for money at a time of economic difficulty. It has accepted the findings of
an enquiry which made recommendations for securing more effective manage¬
ment of the service in England.
The health ministers (the Secretary of State for Social Services in England and
the Secretaries of State for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland) are respon¬
sible for all aspects of the health services in their respective areas. The health
departments (the Department of Health and Social Security in England, the
Scottish Home and Health Department, the Welsh Office and the Department of
Health and Social Services in Northern Ireland) are responsible for strategic
planning. District health authorities in England and Wales and health boards in
Scotland are responsible for planning and operational control of all health
services in their areas. In England, because of its greater size and population, a
tier of regional authorities is responsible for regional planning, resource
allocation, major capital building work and certain specialised hospital services
best administered on a regional basis. The authorities and boards co-operate
closely with local authorities responsible for social work, environmental health,
education and other services. Community health councils in each district
health authority area represent public opinion on the health services provided.
(In Scotland this function is exercised by local health councils.)
In Northern Ireland the health and social services boards act as agents for the
Department of Health and Social Services, spanning both health and personal
social services.
There are three Health Service Commissioner posts (for England, Scotland and
Wales) for dealing with complaints from members of the public about the health
service. All three posts are held by the Parliamentary Commissioner for Admin¬
istration (see p 43). The jurisdiction of the Health Service Commissioner covers
the failure of a health authority to carry out its statutory duties, a failure in a
service provided, or maladministration causing injustice or hardship, but not
actions taken solely in the exercise of clinical judgment or the actions of family
practitioners, for which separate complaints procedures exist. The Commis¬
sioner reports annually to ministers who lay the reports before Parliament, and
may make other reports when necessary.
In Northern Ireland the Commissioner for Complaints (see p 64) investigates
complaints concerning the health service, but not the actions of medical prac¬
titioners or the professions supplementary to medicine.
About 86 per cent of the cost of the health services is paid for through general
taxation; the rest is met from the National Health Service contribution paid with
the national insurance contribution and from the charges towards the cost of
certain items such as drugs prescribed by a family doctor, dental treatment,
dentures and spectacles. Health authorities may raise funds from voluntary
sources.
The charges for medical prescriptions do not apply to children under 16 years,
expectant mothers and mothers with a child under the age of one, women aged
60 and over and men aged 65 and over, patients suffering from certain medical
conditions, war and Service disablement pensioners (for treatment of their
disability), and families with very low incomes. Some 7 0 per cent of prescription
items are supplied free of charge. Exemptions from charges for dental
treatment are made for examinations and denture repairs. Some groups of
patients receive free dental treatment, for example, women who are pregnant or
who have had a baby in the last year, anyone under the age of 18, or 19 if in
full-time education, and people receiving supplementary benefit (see p 135) or
SOCIAL WELFARE
121
PRIMARY
HEALTH
CARE
Family
Practitioner
Services
Health Visitors,
District
Nurses and
Mid wives
Group Practices
and Health
Centres
HOSPITALS
AND
SPECIALIST
SERVICES
family income supplement (see p 135). Patients with low incomes may have
their charges remitted.
Provision is made at certain hospitals for private patients who pay the whole
cost of their accommodation and treatment.
Hospital medical staffs are salaried and can be employed full-time or part-
time. Hospital doctors can accept private patients. General medical prac¬
titioners are self-employed, paid by a system of fees and allowances designed to
reflect responsibilities, work load and practice expenses.
Dentists providing treatment in their own surgeries are paid on a prescribed
scale of fees. Pharmacists dispensing on their own premises are reimbursed for
the cost of the items supplied together with professional fees. Ophthalmic
medical practitioners and ophthalmic opticians taking part in the general oph¬
thalmic service receive approved fees for each sight test made; opticians who
dispense spectacles are paid according to the number and type of pairs
supplied.
Primary health care is in the hands of doctors, dentists, opticians and pharma¬
cists working within the Service as independent practitioners, and health
visitors, district nurses and midwives employed by the health authorities; a
wide range of other services is also available including the school health service,
social services and the chiropody service.
The family practitioner services are those given to patients by doctors, dentists,
opticians and pharmacists of their own choice. Family doctors who are under
contract to the National Health Service have on average about 2,200 patients.
They provide the first diagnosis in the case of illness and either prescribe a suita¬
ble course of treatment or refer a patient to the more specialised services and
hospital consultants. Ophthalmic medical practitioners and ophthalmic and
dispensing opticians test the sight and supply spectacles. Patients requiring
treatment are dealt with through the Hospital Eye Service.
Health visitors are responsible for the preventive care and health education of
all families, particularly those with young children. They work closely with
general practitioners, district nurses and other professions. District nurses give
skilled nursing care to people at home or elsewhere outside hospital; they also
play an important role in preventive care and health education. Although
almost all babies are born in hospital, there is a domiciliary service for mothers
having their babies at home, with midwives and general practitioners giving
both ante-natal and post-natal care. Midwives also assist births in hospital.
About four-fifths of family doctors in Britain work in partnerships or group
practices, often as members of health-care teams which also include health
visitors and district nurses and sometimes midwives and social workers. About
a fifth in Great Britain and just over a half in Northern Ireland work in modern
and well-equipped health centres, where medical and nursing services are pro¬
vided. Health centres may also have facilities for health education, family
planning, speech therapy, chiropody, assessment of hearing, physiotherapy
and remedial exercises. Dental, pharmaceutical and ophthalmic services, hos¬
pital out-patient services and supporting social work services may also be
provided.
A full range of hospital services is provided by district general hospitals, includ¬
ing treatment and diagnostic facilities for in-patients, day-patients and
out-patients, maternity departments, infectious disease units, psychiatric and
geriatic facilities, rehabilitation facilities, convalescent homes and all forms of
122
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Rehabilitation
Hospices
specialised treatment. There are also specialist hospitals for children, the men¬
tally ill, mentally handicapped and elderly people, and for treatment of specific
diseases; examples include the world-famous Hospital for Sick Children, Great
Ormond Street and the Brompton Heart and Chest Hospital in London.
Hospitals designated as teaching hospitals combine treatment facilities with
training medical and other students and research work.
Recent policy has been to provide smaller hospitals for local areas in
preference to large district hospitals which may be remote from local
communities.
Many of the hospitals in the National Health Service were built in the nine¬
teenth century; some trace their origins to much earlier charitable foundations,
such as the famous St Bartholomew’s and St Thomas’ hospitals in London.
Much has been done to improve and extend existing buildings and many new
hospitals have been or are being opened. The latest development in hospital
design is the ‘nucleus’ hospital of some 300 beds which makes more intensive
use of space and facilities; it can be used either as the first stage of a new hospital
or as an extension of an existing hospital. The world’s first low-energy nucleus
hospital, which is expected to use less than half the energy of an ordinary
nucleus hospital, is to be built on the Isle of Wight.
National Health Service hospitals provide nearly half a million beds and have
over 480,000 medical, nursing and midwifery staff. The hospital service is
catering for steadily increasing numbers of in-patients, day-cases and out¬
patient attendances, and is making new forms of treatment and diagnosis (such
as kidney dialysis, hip replacement and body scanning) more widely available.
Community services such as the psychiatric nursing service, day hospitals, and
local authority day centres have expanded so that more patients remain in the
community and others are discharged sooner from hospital.
Rehabilitation is an important part of medical care, beginning at the onset of
illness or injury and aimed at helping people to live as normally as possible. It is
especially important for elderly, disabled, mentally-ill and mentally handicap¬
ped people who need such help to resume life in the community. Facilities are
provided in most hospitals and at special centres. The work is carried out by
teams of doctors, nurses, physiotherapists, remedial gymnasts, occupational
therapists, speech therapists and social workers. The hospital departments
may work closely with the Disablement Resettlement Service of the Manpower
Services Commission (the Department of Economic Development in Northern
Ireland).
Medical services may include the provision, free of charge, of artificial limbs
and eyes, hearing aids, surgical supports, wheelchairs, and other appliances.
Very severely physically handicapped patients may be provided with electrical
control equipment which enables them to operate devices such as alarm bells,
radio and television, a telephone, and heating. Nursing aids can be borrowed for
use in the home.
Social workers, home helps and occupational therapists employed by the
local authorities help patients who, due to their illness, have difficulties on
returning home. Many voluntary organisations, such as the Spinal Injuries
Association, also provide valuable help with rehabilitation.
Over 100 hospices provide care for the dying either directly in residential homes
or through the provision of nursing and other assistance in the patient’s own
home. Control of symptoms and psychological support for patients and their
families form the central features of the modern hospice movement, which ori¬
ginated in Britain and is now world-wide. About 28 of the hospices are admin¬
istered entirely by the National Health Service; the remainder, some of which
SOCIAL WELFARE
123
Drug
Dependence
Alcoholism
Parents and
Children
Family
Planning
Abortion
receive support from public funds, are run by independent charitable
organisations.
Treatment for narcotic drug dependence is provided mostly on an out-patient
basis in the National Health Service, although some addicts have a period of
in-patient treatment when necessary. Some hospitals have special drug
treatment units. An increasing number of general practitioners also treat
addicts, but only doctors specially licensed are allowed to prescribe heroin and
cocaine for the treatment of drug addiction. All doctors must notify the authori¬
ties of any patient they consider to be addicted to certain controlled drugs. The
Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs advises ministers on a wide range of
matters associated with the prevention and treatment of drug misuse and con¬
nected social problems. In 1982 it made recommendations for strengthening
and developing treatment and rehabilitation services.
A number of unofficial agencies work with and complement the Health
Service provision. Rehabilitation facilities, for example, are mainly provided by
voluntary organisations, some of which receive financial help from local
authorities. Social work help is given by the probation service and local social
services departments.
Treatment and rehabilitation for problem drinkers, provided by the National
Health Service and social services, include in-patient and out-patient services
in general hospitals, psychiatric units and hospitals and in specialised alco¬
holism treatment units. Primary care teams (general practitioners, nurses and
social workers) and voluntary organisations, providing hostels, day centres,
and counselling services, also play an important part. Educational and research
projects on alcohol misuse, and organisations concerned with alcohol-related
problems, receive financial help from various sources including a charitable
fund administered by the Alcohol Education and Research Council.
Special preventive health services, including free dental care, are available for
expectant and nursing mothers and young children. A feature of the services is
the education of parents before and after the birth by means of talks, discussion
groups, demonstrations and classes. Pre-school-age children receive regular
medical examinations and are tested for vision, hearing, speech and language
deficiencies. Family planning advice and help is provided at many clinics, and
welfare foods (dried milk and vitamins) are distributed from them.
The school health service, which is part of the National Health Service,
organises health surveillance of school children including medical inspection
and dental inspection and treatment where necessary.
Child guidance and child psychiatric services provide help and advice for
children with psychological or emotional problems.
Free family planning facilities are available to everyone through family plann¬
ing clinics, hospitals and a domiciliary service. Most family doctors provide a
similar service for women only.
The Abortion Act 1967 allows the termination of pregnancy by a registered
doctor if two registered doctors consider that its continuance would involve a
greater risk to the life of the pregnant woman (or injury to her physical or mental
health or that of any existing children in the family) than if the pregnancy were
ended. Termination may also be allowed if two doctors consider that there is a
substantial risk that if the child were born it would suffer from such physical or
mental abnormalities as to be seriously handicapped. Abortions are carried out
in National Health Service hospitals or in private premises officially approved
124
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Blood
Transfusion
Organ
Transplants
Ambulance
Services
HEALTH
EDUCATION
Smoking and
Health
for the purpose. About half of the 137,000 legal abortions to women resident in
Great Britain in 1982 were performed in private hospitals and clinics. The Act
does not apply in Northern Ireland.
The blood transfusion service receives over 2 million donations of blood each
year from voluntary unpaid donors. Regional transfusion centres recruit
donors and organise donor sessions in towns and villages, factories and offices,
and within the armed forces. Donors must be between the ages of 18 and 65. The
centres are also responsible for blood grouping and testing, maintaining blood
banks, providing a consultancy service to hospitals, teaching in medical
schools, and instructing doctors, nurses and technicians. Four laboratories
prepare blood products and undertake research.
Over the past 20 years there have been significant developments in transplant
surgery in Britain. Since 1972 the United Kingdom Transplant Service has pro¬
vided a centralised kidney matching and distribution service. At the end of 1981
about 3,500 people were living with functioning kidney transplants and during
1982 over 1,000 more kidney transplants were performed. In 1983 a similar
service was initiated for corneas, about 1,100 being transplanted each year.
Heart transplant operations have been conducted on a trial basis since early
1979 at Papworth Hospital in Cambridgeshire and since 1980 at Harefield
Hospital, West London. By October 1983, 132 transplants had been performed
and 82 patients were still alive. Other organs and tissues which are now
successfully being transplanted include the pancreas, the liver and bone
marrow. A voluntary organ donor card system enables people to indicate their
willingness to become organ donors in the event of their death. Several million
people now participate in the scheme.
Where necessary on medical grounds free transport by ambulance is provided
by the health authorities. The work of the ambulance service is emergency
work dealing with sudden illness, urgent maternity cases, and accidents of all
kinds; and non-urgent work providing transport for people needing out-patient
treatment at hospitals, clinics and day hospitals. In some areas the service for
non-urgent cases is augmented by voluntary organisations using their own
vehicles or by volunteers using their own cars. In Scotland an air ambulance
service is available in the islands and in the remoter parts of the mainland.
The Government is giving greater emphasis to health education as part of its
policy of preventive medicine. In England, Wales and Northern Ireland health
education is promoted by the government-financed Health Education Council,
which assists in the development of programmes with the health authorities,
professional organisations, voluntary bodies and industry. Health education in
Scotland is promoted by the Scottish Health Education Group. Major themes of
publicity campaigns are family planning, dental health, the importance of vac¬
cination for children, correct diet and exercise, and the dangers of cigarette
smoking and excessive consumption of alcohol.
Action to discourage cigarette smoking has been taken by the Government on
the grounds that the habit presents serious risks to health. Apart from the publi¬
city campaigns conducted by the Health Education Council and the Scottish
Health Education Group it seeks the co-operation of a wide range of organi¬
sations in banning or restricting smoking in trains, buses, airports, theatres
and other public places. Cigarette advertising is banned on television and radio.
The tobacco industry has signed a series of voluntary agreements which place
controls on the advertising and promotion of cigarettes. The agreements cover
SOCIAL WELFARE
125
SAFETY OF
MEDICINES
RESEARCH
THE HEALTH
PROFESSIONS
restrictions on the extent of advertising and expenditure on it; the wording and
presentation of government health warnings on packets and advertisements;
and the reduction of the tar yields of cigarettes. Since 1964 the cigarette manu¬
facturers have applied a voluntary code of practice designed to prevent
excessive glamorisation of cigarette advertisements. A separate agreement
controls the sponsorship by tobacco firms of sporting events.
The number of people who smoke has declined steadily in recent years; in
1972, 52 per cent of men and 41 per cent of women were regular smokers; by
1982 this had fallen to 38 and 33 per cent respectively.
Under the Medicines Act 1968 the health and agriculture ministers are respon¬
sible for licensing the manufacture, marketing and importation of medicines for
human and veterinary use. The Medicines Commission advises the ministers
on policy regarding medicinal products. The Committees on Safety of
Medicines, on Dental and Surgical Materials and on the Review of Medicines
advise on the safety, quality and efficiency of medicinal products. The Com-
mitteee on Safety of Medicines also monitors adverse drug reactions. The Act
also controls the advertising, labelling, packaging, distribution, sale and supply
of medicinal products.
In 1982-83 the health departments spent about £26 million on research and
development (in addition to expenditure by the Medical Research Council, see
p 339). Priority areas include primary care, mental health and handicap, physi¬
cal handicap and rehabilitation, services for the elderly and children, and
dental and nursing research. The programme is administered in England and
Wales by the Chief Scientist of the Department of Health and Social Security
who is supported by independent advisers covering a wide range of scientific
disciplines. The Department is involved in international research and
development, and all the health departments participate in the European Com¬
munity’s medical and public health research programme.
Only people whose names are on the medical or dental registers may practise as
doctors or dentists in the National Health Service. University medical and
dental schools are responsible for teaching; the National Health Service pro¬
vides hospital clinical facilities for training. Full registration as a doctor requires
five or six years’ training in medical school and hospital, with an additional
year’s experience in a hospital; for a dentist, four or more years’ training at a
dental school is required. The regulating body for the medical profession is the
General Medical Council and for dentists, the General Dental Council. The main
professional associations are the British Medical Association and the British
Dental Association.
The minimum period of training required to qualify for registration as a first
level nurse in general, sick children’s, mental or mental handicapped nursing is
normally three years. Registration as a second level nurse (enrolled nurse) takes
two years (in Scotland 18 months). Midwifery training for registered general
nurses takes 18 months, and for all other student midwives three years. Health
visitors are registered general nurses with midwifery or approved obstetric
experience who have successfully completed a one-year course in health
visiting. District Nurses are registered general nurses who have successfully
completed a six-month course followed by a period of supervised practice in
district nursing. The examining bodies for all nurses, midwives and health
visitors are the National Boards for Nursing, Midwifery and Health Visiting
established in England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. The regulation
and registration of these professions is the responsibility of the United Kingdom
Central Council for Nursing, Midwifery and Health Visiting.
126
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
ARRANGE¬
MENTS
WITH OTHER
COUNTRIES
PRIVATE
MEDICAL
TREATMENT
Pharmacists in general practice and in hospital must be registered by the
Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain; in Northern Ireland the register is
maintained by the Department of Health and Social Services on behalf of the
Pharmaceutical Society of Northern Ireland. A three-year degree course
approved by the Pharmaceutical Society followed by a year’s approved training
is necessary before registration. The majority of medicines can be sold or
dispensed only by, or under the supervision of, a registered pharmacist.
The General Optical Council regulates the professions of ophthalmic optician
and dispensing optician; only registered ophthalmic opticians (or registered
medical practitioners) may test sight. Training of ophthalmic opticians takes
four years including a year of practical experience under supervision. Dispens¬
ing opticians take a two-year full-time course with a year’s practical experience
or a part-time day-release course while employed with an optician.
State registration may be obtained by chiropodists, dietitians, medical
laboratory scientific officers, occupational therapists, orthoptists,
physiotherapists, radiographers and remedial gymnasts. The governing bodies
are eight boards, corresponding to the eight professions, under the general
supervision of the Council for Professions Supplementary to Medicine. Profes¬
sional training lasts two or four years and only those who are state registered
may be employed in the National Health Service and some other public
services.
Dental therapists (who have undergone a two-year training course) and
dental hygienists (who have undergone a training course of about a year) may
carry out some simple dental work under the direction of a registered dentist.
The member states of the European Community have special health arrange¬
ments under which Community nationals are entitled to receive any necessary
treatment immediately, either free or at reduced cost, during visits to other
Community countries. There are also arrangements to cover people who go to
work or live in other Community countries. In addition there are reciprocal
arrangements with some other countries under which emergency medical
treatment is available. Otherwise, with some exceptions, visitors are expected
to pay if the purpose of their visit is to seek treatment, and also if they should fall
ill while in the United Kingdom.
It is the Government’s policy to encourage the private sector to meet a larger
share of the nation’s health needs in the belief that this will benefit the National
Health Service by relieving pressure on it. The scale of private practice in rela¬
tion to the service is, however, small. Some 6 per cent of acute hospital beds are
in private hospitals and nursing homes and about 1,500 beds in Health Service
hospitals in England are occupied by private patients. It is estimated that about
half of those receiving acute treatment in health service pay beds or private
hospitals are covered by provident schemes which make provision for private
health care in return for annual subscriptions. In 1982 there were some 1 • 93
million subscribers to such schemes of whom the majority were involved in
group schemes, some arranged by firms on behalf of employees. Subscriptions
often cover more than one person (for example, members of a family) and a total
of 4-2 million were covered. Private practice is also undertaken by family
doctors and dentists. Many overseas patients come to Britain for treatment in
private hospitals and clinics, and Harley Street in London is an internationally
recognised centre for medical consultancy.
There is growing interest in alternative therapies such as homeopathy,
osteopathy and acupuncture, which are mainly practised outside the National
Health Service.
SOCIAL WELFARE
127
ENVIRON¬
MENTAL
HEALTH
Safety of Food
Control of
Infectious
Diseases
Environmental health officers employed by local authorities are responsible for
the control of air pollution, noise, food hygiene and quality, the inspection of
offices and shops, the investigation of unfit housing, and in some instances for
refuse collection. Doctors who specialise in community medicine and are
employed by the health authorities advise local authorities on the medical
aspects of environmental health, infectious diseases and food poisoning. They
may also co-operate with the authorities responsible for water supply and
sewerage. Environmental health officers at ports and airports carry out a range
of duties concerned with shipping, inspection of imported foods and disease
control. In Northern Ireland district councils are responsible for noise control,
collection and disposal of refuse, clean air, and food composition, labelling and
hygiene.
It is illegal to sell food unfit for human consumption or to apply any treatment,
process or additive to food which makes it injurious to health. Premises where
food or drink is prepared, handled, stored or sold must conform to certain
hygiene standards. Environmental health officers may take for analysis or for
bacteriological or other examination samples of any food on sale. Special regu¬
lations control the safety of particular foods such as milk, meat and ice-cream.
The Department of Health and Social Security, the Ministry of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food, the Scottish Office, the Welsh Office and the Department of
Health and Social Services in Northern Ireland are the central departments
responsible for giving advice and making regulations.
The district health authorities carry out programmes of vaccination and
immunisation against diphtheria, measles, rubella (females only),
poliomyelitis, tetanus, tuberculosis and whooping cough. Following publicity
given to cases of adverse reaction to vaccination, there was a decline in the
numbers being vaccinated against whooping cough. Government studies have
concluded, however, that the benefits of vaccination far outweigh the risks, and
parents are encouraged to seek protection for their children. The situation is
improving; the proportion of children being vaccinated is increasing.
The Public Health Laboratory Service provides a network of bacteriological
and virological laboratories throughout England and Wales conducting
research and assisting in the diagnosis, prevention and control of communica¬
ble diseases. Its largest establishment is the Central Public Health Laboratory
at Colindale, in north-west London, which includes the National Collection of
Type Cultures, the Food Hygiene Laboratory, and reference laboratories
specialising in the identification of infective micro-organisms. A surveillance
centre investigates and monitors human communicable diseases. In Scotland
microbiological work is done mainly in hospital laboratories. In Northern
Ireland a central public health laboratory shares the microbiological work with
hospital laboratories.
Personal Social Services
Responsibility for personal social services rests with the social services authori¬
ties (local authority social services departments in England and Wales, social
work departments in Scotland and health and social services boards in
Northern Ireland). Many of their services are directed towards the same groups
of people needing health services, for example, elderly or disabled people. Other
groups helped include young families with social problems, children deprived
of a normal home life, the mentally ill or handicapped and young offenders.
Close co-operation is maintained between local authority social services depart¬
ments and health authorities. In Scotland local authorities also undertake
128
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Disabled
People
The Elderly
The Mentally
111 and the
Mentally
Handicapped
duties similar to those of the separate probation and after-care service in
England and Wales (see p 107).
Much of the care given to the elderly and disabled is provided in the com¬
munity itself, by their families, self-help groups and through the voluntary
movement. The statutory sector offers the special skilled care needed in parti¬
cular services. The importance of the contribution made by the voluntary
organisations is recognised especially when economies are being made in
public expenditure and the demand on the statutory services is heavy.
The Government’s policy is to speed up the transfer from hospital to care in
the community of patients who do not specifically need hospital care. It believes
that groups such as the elderly, the disabled, and the mentally ill or handicap¬
ped can lead more normal lives in the community, given appropriate support
and facilities.
Social services authorities provide a range of personal social services for disa¬
bled people, including residential homes. They are also required to establish the
number of disabled people in their area and to publicise services. A wide range
of facilities may be available including advice on personal and social problems
arising from disability, assistance in overcoming the effects of disability, adapt¬
ations to people’s homes (such as fitting ramps for wheelchairs, and ground
floor toilets) and various aids to daily living. In certain circumstances assistance
may be given with the installation of a telephone or a television set, and with
travel, educational, leisure, and other activities. Some authorities make
arrangements for the teaching of handicrafts and other occupations. Voluntary
organisations also provide many of these services to complement and support
those provided by the statutory bodies.
Help available from other sources includes social security benefits, medical
treatment, special education, employment and training services, and specially
designed housing. Adequate provision of means of access for disabled people is
encouraged at an early stage in the design, development, or construction of
public buildings. Disabled people are also encouraged to take part in sport.
Services for elderly people are provided by statutory and voluntary bodies to
help them to live at home whenever possible. These may include the advice and
help of social workers, domestic help, delivery of cooked meals, sitters-in, night
attendants and laundry services as well as day centres, clubs and recreational
workshops. In many areas ‘good neighbour’ and friendly visiting services are
arranged by the local authority or a voluntary organisation. Social services
authorities also provide residential accommodation for the elderly and infirm
and have powers to register homes run by voluntary organisations or privately.
Local authorities, as part of their responsibility for public housing, build flats
specially designed for elderly people; some of these blocks have resident
wardens. Housing associations also build this type of accommodation.
Social services authorities must make arrangements for the provision of pre¬
ventive care services for mentally ill people and after-care services for both men¬
tally ill and mentally handicapped people in the community. Services include
training centres for the mentally handicapped and day centres for the mentally
ill, as well as social centres and a variety of residential care for the mentally ill
and mentally handicapped of all ages. Social workers help patients and their
families to deal with social problems arising from mental illness or handicap
and in certain circumstances can make an application for the compulsory
admission of a mentally disordered person to hospital.
SOCIAL WELFARE
129
Help to
Families
Child Care
Social services authorities, through their own social workers or a voluntary
organisation, make available help and advice to families facing special prob¬
lems. The home help service provides practical assistance at home for sick and
disabled people, elderly people and expectant mothers.
Some authorities make direct provision for the special needs of unmarried
mothers and their babies, but most contribute to the cost of work done by volun¬
tary organisations and other bodies. A new study centre was established with
official funding in 1983 to review the impact of public policies on the family and
bring together research findings.
Day care facilities for children under five are provided by local authorities,
voluntary agencies and privately. In allocating places in day nurseries and
other facilities they themselves provide, local authorities give priority to child¬
ren with special social or health needs for day care. They also register, and
provide support and advice services for, childminders, private day nurseries
and play-groups operating in their areas.
The authorities must offer advice, guidance and assistance to families in diffi¬
culties to promote the welfare of children. The aim is to intervene early to reduce
the need to receive children into care or bring the case before a court.
The recognition, prevention and management of cases of child abuse are the
concern of many authorities, agencies and professions, and area review com¬
mittees provide a forum for discussion and co-ordination and draw up policies
and procedures for handling these cases.
Authorities must receive into their care any child under the age of 17 who has
no parent or guardian, who has been abandoned, or whose parents are unable to
provide for him or her, if they are satisfied that such intervention is in the inter¬
ests of the child. The child remains in care until the age of 18 unless discharged
to the care of parents, other relatives or friends. The local authority may find it
necessary to assume the rights and duties of one or both parents. The parents
must be notified and if they object the matter must be decided in a court of law.
When taking a decision on a child in care, the authorities have to give first con¬
sideration to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of the child. Where
children are in care, efforts are made to work with their families in order, where
appropriate, to enable the children to return home.
Children in England and Wales may be brought before a juvenile court if they
are neglected or ill-treated, exposed to moral danger, are beyond the control of
parents, not attending school or (if ten years or over) have committed an offence
other than homicide (see p 109). At the same time it must be shown that the
children need care or control which they are unlikely to receive unless a care or
other relevant order is made by the court. Local authorities are responsible for
undertaking inquiries through social workers and consultation with parents,
schools and the police. Children may be committed to the care of a local
authority under a care order if the court considers this appropriate. As an altern¬
ative the court may order supervision by a social worker or a probation officer
for up to three years.
In Northern Ireland the court may send children to a training school (see
p 110), commit them to the care of a fit person (which includes a health and
social services board), or make a supervision order. The law relating to children
has been reviewed and the intention in future is to make a distinction between
young offenders and children in need of care and protection. Strong emphasis is
placed on preventive work.
In Scotland children in trouble (see p 110) or in need may be brought before a
children’s hearing which can impose a supervision requirement on a child if it
thinks that compulsory measures of care are appropriate. Under these
requirements most children are allowed to remain at home under the super-
130
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Voluntary
Organisations
Adoption
Social Workers
vision of a social worker but some may be sent to a residential establishment
while under supervision. Supervision requirements are reviewed at intervals of
not more than one year until terminated by a children’s hearing or by the Secre¬
tary of State.
When appropriate, children in care are boarded out with foster parents, who
receive an allowance to cover the cost of maintenance. If foster homes are not
considered appropriate or cannot be found, the children may be placed in child¬
ren’s homes, voluntary homes or other suitable residential accommodation.
Community homes for children in care in England and Wales comprise local
authority and some voluntary children’s homes, and include community
homes with education on the premises which provide long-term care usually for
the more difficult children. In Scotland local authorities are responsible for
placing children in their care either in foster homes, in local authority or volun¬
tary homes, or in residential schools. In Northern Ireland there are residential
homes for children in the care of the health and social services boards; training
schools and remand homes are administered separately. Regulations concern¬
ing community homes, registered voluntary homes and the boarding out of
children in care are made by central government.
Voluntary organisations play a major part in providing accommodation for
children, including those in the care of local authorities. Some children’s homes
run by voluntary organisations which are not within the community homes
system are registered with central government.
Voluntary bodies concerned with the welfare of children in their own homes
include local family casework agencies and the Family Service Units. The
National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children and its Scottish
counterpart investigate reported cruelty or neglect and are actively involved in
preventive work.
Adoption of children is strictly regulated by legislation and some 10,000 adop¬
tion orders are made in Britain each year. The Registrars-General keep confi¬
dential registers of adopted children. Local authorities can act as adoption
agencies and eventually will be obliged to offer such a service. Adoption soci¬
eties must be approved by the respective social services minister.
The effective operation of the social services largely depends on the availability
of professionally qualifed social workers trained in the methods of social work.
Training courses in social work are provided by universities, polytechnics (in
Scotland, central institutions) and colleges of further education; their length
depends upon previous educational qualifications and can extend from one to
four years. The Central Council for Education and Training in Social Work
recognises social work courses and offers advice to people considering entry to
the profession.
Professional social workers (including those working in the National Health
Service) are employed by the social services departments of local authorities.
Others work in the probation service (see p 107), the education welfare service,
or in voluntary organisations.
Social Security
National insurance, industrial injuries benefits, child benefit, family income
supplement, supplementary benefit and war pensions constitute a comprehen¬
sive system of social security. The payment of many benefits depends on prior
payments to the national insurance scheme, while others are available without
contribution conditions. The former are paid from the national insurance fund
which consists of contributions from employed people and their employers,
SOCIAL WELFARE
131
CONTRI¬
BUTIONS
BENEFITS
Retirement
Pension
self-employed people and the Government. Non-contributory benefits are
financed from general taxation revenue. Appeals relating to claims for the
various benefits are decided by independent tribunals.
The social security programme accounts for about 29 per cent of all public
expenditure. It has nearly doubled in real terms since 1970 and now costs the
equivalent of about £1,700 a year for every household. Part of the increase has
been due to the rising numbers of the elderly, and part to the growth in unem¬
ployment; much, however, has been due to real improvement in the level of
benefits, new benefits and increased family support.
The Department of Health and Social Security administers the services in
Great Britain; in Northern Ireland they are administered by the Department of
Health and Social Services. Pensions and welfare services for war pensioners
and their dependants are the responsibility of the Department of Health and
Social Security throughout the United Kingdom. Advice on social security is
given to the Government by the Social Security Advisory Committee.
The Government has changed a number of aspects of the social security
system both to make it more comprehensible and to reduce the rate of growth of
its cost to public funds. It takes steps to ensure that social security payments go
only to those for whom they are intended.
Entitlement to National Insurance benefits such as retirement pension,
sickness and invalidity benefit, unemployment benefit, widow’s benefit, mater¬
nity allowance, death grant and child’s special allowance is dependent upon the
payment of contributions. Industrial injuries benefits are non-contributory, but
are also payable from the National Insurance Fund. There are four classes of
contributions. Class 1 contributions, which are related to earnings, are paid by
employees and employers. The contribution is lower if the employer operates a
‘contracted out’ occupational pension scheme (see below). Self-employed
people pay a flat rate Class 2 contribution and a Class 4 contribution which is
assessed as a percentage of profits or gains within certain limits; they are not
eligible for unemployment and industrial injuries benefit. Voluntary Class 3
contributions are made by people wanting to safeguard rights to some benefits.
Employees who continue working after pensionable age (60 for women and
65 for men) do not pay contributions but the employer continues to be liable.
People earning less than the lower earnings limit are not liable for contri¬
butions; neither are their employers. Self-employed people with earnings below
a set annual amount may apply for exemption and those over pensionable age
are excused payment of contributions.
For most benefits there are two contribution conditions. First, before benefit
can be paid at all, a certain number of contributions has to be made; second, the
full rate of benefit cannot be paid unless contributions have been made or
credited up to a specific level over a specified period. Benefits are increased each
November, the uprating being linked to increases in retail prices. The main
benefits (payable weekly) are summarised below. The rates shown in Tables
5-8 are those effective from November 1983.
A state retirement pension is payable to women at the age of 60 and to men at
the age of 65. People still at work five years after the minimum pension age are
eligible to receive the pension even if they continue working. In 1978 the new
state pension scheme came into operation and will mature fully after 20 years of
contributions; the retirement pension will consist of the basic pension plus an
additional (earnings-related) pension.
Rights to basic pension are safeguarded for mothers who are away from work
looking after children or for people giving up work to care for severely disabled
132
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Mothers and
Children
Widows
Sick and
Disabled
People
relatives. Women contributors receive the same pension as men with the same
earnings.
Employers are free to ‘contract-out’ their employees from the state scheme for
additional pension and provide their own occupational pension in its place, pro¬
vided that the latter is at least as good as the state additional pension. The State
remains responsible for the basic pension.
A non-contributory retirement pension is payable to people over the age of 80
who have not qualified for a contributory pension or who qualified for one at a
lower rate than the non-contributory pension.
A non-contributory maternity grant of £25 is payable for each living child born
and for a still-born child if the pregnancy lasts for at least 28 weeks. Maternity
allowance is a weekly benefit normally paid for 18 weeks, starting 11 weeks
before the baby is expected.
Non-contributory child benefit is the main social security benefit for children.
Tax free and normally paid to the mother, it is payable for children up to the age
of 16 and for those up to the age of 19 if they continue in full-time education. A
sum in addition to child benefit is payable to certain people bringing up children
alone, for the first or only child in the family. A weekly contributory child’s
special allowance is payable to a mother on the death of a former husband if the
marriage was dissolved or annulled and he was contributing to the support of
the children. A non-contributory guardian’s allowance for an orphaned child is
payable to a person who is entitled to child benefit for that child. In certain cir¬
cumstances it can be paid on the death of only one parent.
A widow’s allowance may be payable for the first 26 weeks of widowhood, and
an additional sum is often payable for each child. After this a widowed mother
with a young family receives a widowed mother’s allowance with an addition for
each child. Widow’s pension is payable to a widow who is 40 years or over when
her husband dies or when her entitlement to widowed mother’s allowance ends.
Payment continues until the widow remarries or begins drawing retirement
pension. There are also benefits for widows under the industrial injuries
scheme.
A man whose wife dies when both are over pension age inherits his wife’s
pension rights just as a widow inherits her husband’s rights.
There is a large variety of benefits for people unable to work because of sickness
or disablement. Statutory sick pay is payable by an employer for the first eight
weeks of an employee’s illness. Thereafter contributory sickness benefit is
payable by the State for up to 28 weeks, with additions for a wife or other adult
dependants and for each child for whom child benefit is payable. Employees
with earnings below a certain level do not receive statutory sick pay but may
claim sickness benefit instead.
An invalidity pension plus allowances for a wife and children is payable when
sickness benefit ends if the beneficiary is still incapable of work. This allowance
is paid with the pension to those people who become sick more than five years
before retirement age.
Various benefits are payable for disablement caused by an accident at work or
a prescribed disease. Disablement benefit is usually paid after a qualifying
period of 15 weeks if, as a result of an industrial accident or a prescribed disease,
there is a loss of physical or mental faculty. (During the qualifying period sick
pay or sickness benefit is payable.) The amount depends on the extent of the
disablement as assessed by a medical board but for disablement of less than 20
per cent a gratuity is normally paid. In certain circumstances disablement
benefits may be supplemented by unemployability supplement; constant
SOCIAL WELFARE
133
Other Benefits
Unemployment
Benefit
Death Grant
attendance allowance; an additional allowance payable in certain cases of
exceptionally severe disablement; a special hardship allowance for a person
who is unfit to return to his or her regular job or to do work of an equivalent
standard; and hospital treatment allowance which raises the disablement
pension or gratuity to the 100 per cent assessment rate during hospital
treatment for the industrial injury. Increases of disablement benefit for depen¬
dants may be payable with unemployability supplement. There are benefits for
widows and their children (see p 132).
A non-contributory, tax-free attendance allowance may be payable to severely
disabled people at either a higher or a lower rate depending upon the amount of
care and attention they require. A non-contributory invalidity pension is
payable to people of working age unable to work and not qualifying for the
national insurance invalidity pension; it is also payable to disabled housewives
incapable of work and unable to perform their normal household tasks.
A weekly invalid care allowance may be payable to certain categories of
people (aged between 16 and pension age) who cannot go to work because they
are caring for a severely disabled person receiving an attendance allowance.
Physically disabled people unable or virtually unable to walk may be entitled
to a tax-free mobility allowance to help to pay their transport costs. People aged
between 5 and 65 are eligible for it.
An independent organisation called Motability assists those disabled drivers
and disabled passengers wanting to use their mobility allowance to obtain a
vehicle.
Unemployment benefit at the same rate as sickness benefit is payable for up to a
year in any one spell of unemployment. Periods covered by unemployment or
sickness benefit, maternity allowance or some training allowances, which are
eight weeks or less apart, are linked to form one period of interruption of
employment. Generally anyone claiming unemployment benefit has to be
available for employment, but unemployed people wishing to do voluntary
work in the community can do so in certain circumstances without loss of
entitlement to benefit.
A death grant is payable on the death of a contributor or a contributor’s near
relative. It is normally £30 for an adult and a smaller sum for a child.
Table 5: Benefit Rates
Category
Weekly rate
Retirement and widow’s pensions and
widowed mother’s allowance
Single person 34 • 05
Wife or other adult dependant 20-45
Child 7 • 60
Non-contributory retirement pension for people over 80
Higher rate 20 • 45
Lower rate 12-'25
Maternity allowance 25 • 95
Child benefit 6 ■ 50
One-parent benefit (for the first or only child) 4 ■ 05
134
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIALHANDBOOK
Table 5: Benefit Rates (continued)
Category
Weekly rate
Guardian’s allowance, child’s special allowance
W idow’s allowance (first 26 weeks of widowhood)
Unemployment benefit
For beneficiary under pension age
Single person
Wife or other adult dependant
Child
For beneficiary over pension age
Single person
Wife or other adult dependant
Child
Statutory sick pay (depending on level of earnings)
Sickness benefit
For beneficiary under pension age
Single person
Wife or other adult dependant
Child
For beneficiary over pension age
Single person
Wifeor other adult dependant
Child
Invalidity pension
Single person
Wife or other adult dependant
Child
Invalidity allowance payable with retirement or invalidity
pension
Disablement benefit (100 per cent assessment)
Unemployability supplement
Single person
Wife or other adult dependant
Child
Special hardship allowance (maximum)
Constant attendance allowance
Maximum in exceptionally severe cases
Exceptionally severe disablement allowance
Industrial death benefit
Widow’s pension (first 26 weeks of widowhood)
Widow’s pension (higher rate)
Widow’s pension (lower rate)
Increase for each child
Attendance allowance
Higher rate
Lower rate
Non-contributory invalidity pension, invalid care allowance
Wife or other adult dependant
Child
Mobility allowance
7-60
47-65
27-05
16-70
0-15
34-05
20-65
7-60
27 • 20 to 40 • 25
25-95
16-00
0- 15
32-60
19-55
7-60
32-60
19-55
0-15
2 • 30 to 7 • 15
55-60
32- 60
19-55
0-15
22-24
15 to 22 • 30
33- 45
44-60
11
47-65
34-05
10-22
10-95
27-20
18- 15
20-45
12-25
7-60
19- 00
SOCIAL WELFARE
135
SUPPLEMEN¬
TARY
BENEFIT
FAMILY
INCOME
SUPPLEMENT
Supplementary benefit is payable to people of the age of 16 and over who are not
in full-time work or at school and whose financial resources fall below a certain
level. The amounts shown in the table axe the weekly levels laid down for the
requirements of married couples, single householders and others. The benefit
payable amounts to the difference between a person’s existing resources and
these levels. The long-term rates apply to people aged 60 or over, most disabled
people, and to those people aged less than 60 who have received supplementary
benefit continuously for one year, provided that the award is not subject to the
condition of being available for employment. Families receiving supplementary
benefit (as with family income supplement) are automatically entitled to a
number of other benefits including free school meals, milk and vitamins for
expectant mothers and for children under school age, and exemption from
National Health Service prescription charges and charges for dental treatment
and glasses.
As part of its supplementary benefit responsibilities the Department of Health
and Social Security runs resettlement units in which people without a settled
way of living are provided with temporary board and lodging to help them to
lead a more settled life. The Department also makes grants to voluntary organi¬
sations providing similar services. In addition, the Department runs re¬
establishment centres where men who have been unemployed for long periods
and are receiving supplementary benefit are given help to fit them again for
work.
Table 6: Supplementary Benefit
Category
Weekly rate
Ordinary rate
Husband and wife
Person living alone
Any other person aged
18 and over
16-17
11-15
Under 11 years
Long-term rate
Husband and wife
Person living alone
Any other person aged
18 and over
16-17 years
43-50
26-80
21-45
16-50
13-70
9-15
54-55
34- 10
27-25
20-90
Family income supplement is a cash benefit for families with small incomes
where one of the parents is in full-time work, subject to certain exceptions, and
where there is at least one dependent child. It is payable when the gross weekly
income of a family falls below a prescribed amount, which varies according to
the number of children in the family but is the same for single and two-parent
families. ‘Full-time’ work means, for the purpose of the benefit, work of at least
30 hours a week by either parent in two-parent families or 24 hours a week for
one-parent families. The weekly rate of the supplement is half the difference
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
136
between the family’s income and the prescribed amount, up to a maximum
figure depending on the number of children in the family.
Table 7: Family Income Supplement
£
Weekly rate
Prescribed amount for family with one child (income below
which supplement is payable) 85 • 50
Increase in prescribed amount for each additional child 9 • 50
Maximum weekly amount for a one-child family 22 • 00
Increase in maximum amount for each additional child 2 • 00
WAR
PENSIONS
AND
RELATED
SERVICES
The war pensions scheme is administered throughout the United Kingdom by
the Department of Health and Social Security. Pensions are payable to people
disabled as a result of service in the armed forces or from certain injuries
received in the merchant navy or civil defence during war-time, or to civilians
injured by enemy action. The amount varies according to the degree of disa¬
blement and rank; an allowance is paid for dependants.
There is a wide range of supplementary allowances, the main ones being for
unemployability, the need for constant attendance, the provision of extra
comforts, and as a compensation for a lower standard of occupation. An age
allowance is payable to disabled pensioners who are aged 65 or over and whose
assessment is 40 per cent or more. Pensions are also paid to war widows and war
orphans.
The Department of Health and Social Security maintains a welfare service for
war pensioners, war widows and war orphans. It works closely with many
voluntary and ex-Service organisations who give financial aid and personal
help to disabled ex-Service men and women and their families.
Table 8: War Pensions
Category
Weekly rate
Disablement pensions
For a private at 100 per cent rate
Unemployability allowances
Personal allowance
Wife or other adult dependant
Additionfor each child
Comforts allowance
Allowance for lower standard of occupation (maximum)
Constant attendance allowance
(depending on attention needed)
Age allowance (depending on degree of disability)
Exceptionally severe disablement allowance
Severe disablement occupational allowance
Clothing allowance (per year)
55-60
36-15
20-45
7-60
4 • 80 or 9 • 60
22-24
11- 15to44-60
3-85 to 12 - 10
22-30
11-15
48-00 to 75-00
AIDS FOR THE DISABLED
Above: An electronic voice speaks for this young
boy, handicapped in limbs and speech, as he
indicates words symbolised on a coloured display
panel by means of a joystick on his wheelchair.
Left: With a radio receiver attached to her hearing
aid, this little deaf girl can hear another person
speaking through a transmitter at a distance of up
to 274 metres (900 ft). Background noises can be
filtered out.
Below: A cuddly toy helps deaf children, with the
assistance of a therapist, to form words. When the
child makes a vocal sound the dog’s eyes light up.
MEDICAL AIDS
Right: The Hines Cervical
Splint prevents secondary
damage to the spinal cord
when a person with neck
injuries is moved.
Below: A laser camera, built
at the Royal Sussex County
Hospital, Brighton, which
integrates a series of
scanner images of diseased
parts of the body to produce
a holographic image. This
enables treatment to be
applied more accurately.
Right: This four-picture
display system, for use with
medical diagnostic image
processing, enables doctors
to compare pre-operative
data with post-operative
results. The images are
converted from signals
produced by a gamma
camera which follows the
progress of a radio
pharmaceutical preparation
injected into the patient.
'—
OPTICAL AIDS
Top: The Friedman 2 analyser for detecting serious sight defects
gives accurate results in just two minutes.
Above: ‘LaserSpec’ eye tester. If displayed in an optician’s window,
with simple instructions, it enables people to check their own
eyesight or the accuracy of their spectacles.
SOCIAL WELFARE
137
TAXATION
OTHER
WELFARE
BENEFITS
EUROPEAN
COMMUNITY
Table 8: War Pensions
Category
Weekly rate
Death benefits
Widow’spension (private’s widow)
Childless widow under 40
Rent allowance (maximum)
Age allowance for elderly widows
Ages 65-69
Aged 70 and over
Adult orphans
44-25
10-22
16-85
4-30
8-60
34-05
Social security benefits, other than child, maternity, sickness, invalidity and
disablement benefit, are included in the taxable income on which income tax is
assessed. On the other hand various income tax reliefs and exemptions are
allowed on account of age or liability for the support of dependants. Supple¬
mentary benefit (except that paid to the unemployed), family income supple¬
ment, attendance allowances, mobility allowance and war disability pensions
including supplementary allowances, war widows’ pension and allowances are
not taxable.
Other benefits for which people with low incomes may be eligible include legal
aid and assistance (see p 116), housing benefits (comprising rent and rate
rebates or allowances — see pp 63 and 165), exemption from health service
charges (see p 120) and free school meals (see p 146).
As part of the Community’s efforts to promote the free movement of labour,
there are regulations providing for equality of treatment and the protection of
social security rights for employed and self-employed people working in
another member state. The regulations also cover retirement pensioners and
other beneficiaries who have been employed, or self-employed, as well as
dependants. Benefits affected include child benefit and those for sickness and
maternity, unemployment, retirement, invalidity, accidents at work and
occupational diseases.
Voluntary Services
There is a long tradition of voluntary service to the community and the part¬
nership between the voluntary and statutory agencies is encouraged. It has
been estimated that nearly a quarter of all adults takes part in some voluntary
work during the course of a year. Central and local government make grants to
voluntary agencies, and public authorities plan and carry out their duties
taking account of the work of voluntary organisations. Many services are pro¬
vided by both local authorities and voluntary agencies, for example, residential
care for elderly, disabled, mentally ill and mentally handicapped people and for
children. Voluntary provision and community self-help, however, enable local
authorities to continue the trend towards community rather than institutional
care for elderly, mentally ill and mentally handicapped people. Voluntary
organisations also make a significant contribution to government schemes for
the unemployed, by means of youth training, workshops, co-operatives, and by
138
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Voluntary
Organisations
providing community service opportunities for volunteers. The Government is
maintaining the real value of its grants to voluntary organisations, which
amounted to around £150 million in 1982-83. Tax changes in recent budgets
have helped the voluntary movement to secure a larger flow of funds.
Co-ordination of government interests in voluntary social service throughout
Britain is the responsibility of the Home Office Voluntary Services Unit.
Many voluntary organisations are registered charities, and in England and
Wales the Charity Commission, a government agency, gives free advice to
trustees of charities, making schemes to modify their purposes or facilitate their
administration when necessary.
There are thousands of voluntary organisations ranging from national bodies to
small individual local groups; ‘self-help’ groups have been the most rapidly
expanding part of the voluntary sector in the last decade — examples include
play-groups for pre-school children, groups which help their members to cope
with a particular disability, and organisations run by members of the ethnic
minorities. Many belong to larger associations or are represented on local or
national co-ordinating councils or committees. Some are chiefly concerned
with giving personal service, others in the formation of public opinion and
exchange of information. Some carry out both functions. They may be staffed
by both professional and voluntary workers.
The main voluntary body in England which aims to provide central links
between voluntary organisations and official bodies is the National Council for
Voluntary Organisations, which acts as a resource and development agency for
the voluntary sector. It works to extend the involvement of voluntary organi¬
sations in dealing with social issues, to protect the interests and independence
of voluntary agencies, and to provide them with a range of advice, information
and other services. There are also the Scottish Council of Social Service, the
Wales Council for Voluntary Action and the Northern Ireland Council of Social
Service, which perform similar functions.
The Volunteer Centre is a national voluntary organisation and centre for
information and research on voluntary work. There are many full-time and
part-time local volunteer bureaux which direct volunteers to opportunities for
voluntary service in both the voluntary and statutory sectors.
Specialist voluntary organisations concerned with personal and family prob¬
lems include the family casework agencies like the Family Welfare Association,
Family Service Units, and the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Children; marriage guidance centres affiliated to the National Marriage Guid¬
ance Council; the National Council of Voluntary Child Care Organisations; the
National Council for One Parent Families; Child Poverty Action Group and the
Claimants’ Union, both of which provide expert advice on social security bene¬
fits; and the Samaritans, who help the lonely, the depressed and the suicidal.
Community service of many kinds is given by young people; this is often
channelled through national and local organisations such as Community
Service Volunteers, Task Force, Scouts and Girl Guides.
Voluntary service to the sick and disabled is given by — among others — the
British Red Cross Society, St John Ambulance, the Women’s Royal Voluntary
Service and the Leagues of Hospital Friends. Societies which help people with
particular disabilities and difficulties include the Royal National Institute for
the Blind, the Royal National Institute for the Deaf, the Royal Association for
Disability and Rehabilitation, The Disabled Living Foundation, The Dis¬
ablement Income Group, MIND (National Association for Mental Health),
MENCAP (National Society for Mentally Handicapped Children and Adults), the
Spastics Society, Alcoholics Anonymous, Age Concern, Help the Aged and their
equivalents in Scotland and Northern Ireland.
SOCIAL WELFARE
139
National organisations whose work is specifically religious in inspiration
include the Salvation Army, the Church Army, Toe H, the Committee on Social
Service of the Church of Scotland, the Church of England Children’s Society,
the Church of England Council for Social Aid, the Young Men’s Christian
Association, the Young Women’s Christian Association, the Catholic Marriage
Advisory Council and the Jewish Welfare Board.
A wide range of voluntary personal service is given by the Women’s Royal
Voluntary Service, which brings ‘meals on wheels’ to housebound invalids and
old people, provides flatlets and residential clubs for the elderly, helps with
family problems, and assists in hospitals and clinics and in emergencies.
Over 900 Citizens Advice Bureaux give explanation and advice to people who
are in doubt about their rights or who do not know about the state or voluntary
services available. There are law centres (see p 117) and housing advisory
centres in some areas.
7 Education
Policies
British education aims to develop fully the abilities of individuals, both young
and old, for their own benefit and that of society as a whole. Compulsory
schooling takes place between the ages of 5 and 16, although some provision is
made for children under 5, and many pupils remain at school beyond the
minimum leaving age. Post-school education (mainly at universities, polytech¬
nics and colleges of further and higher education) is organised flexibly to
provide a wide range of opportunities for academic and vocational education
and continuing study throughout life.
For many years British education has been characterised by change, and
much of the post-1945 period has also been marked by growth: large increases in
the number of pupils, the expansion of higher educational opportunities, and
increased expenditure. Although the process of change continues, recent years
have seen increasing reassessment and consolidation as well as a number of
other significant developments, including the beginning of a substantial drop in
the number of school children following a fall in the birth rate, and the need,
because of economic circumstances, to reduce public expenditure. The number
of primary school children has already fallen sharply, and the decline in
numbers has begun to affect secondary schools, although this is partly offset by
the greater numbers staying on at school because of the present high level of
unemployment. It has led to a reduced demand for new teachers (although there
is still a need for more teachers of certain specialised subjects) and teacher
training has been reorganised to cope with the new situation while retaining
flexibility for future expansion.
The Government’s education policies for schools are designed to increase
parental choice and involvement in school organisation; to allow local authori¬
ties to organise publicly maintained schools according to local needs; to pay for
places for pupils at independent schools where appropriate; and to assist child¬
ren from less well-off homes to benefit from attendance at certain of these
schools. Measures are also being taken to improve the quality of teaching. The
Government has issued guidance on the school curriculum in England and
Wales, designed to secure a broader education for all pupils, and consultations
are taking place on the reform of the system of examinations taken at about the
age of 16.
Special attention is being given to the provision of better vocational education
and training in schools and colleges, and to the 40 per cent of pupils who are less
academic and for whom external examinations are not appropriate. A pilot
scheme which began in September 1983, the Technical and Vocational Edu¬
cation Initiative, will provide young people aged 14 to 18 with courses of
technical, vocational, and general education as well as work experience in a
variety of skills. A new qualification, provisionally called the Certificate of Pre-
Vocational Education, has been introduced, intended for those at school or
college who wish to continue in full-time education for a year after the age of 16 to
prepare either for work or for vocational courses. Different forms of school curri¬
culum more suitable for less academic children are also being developed. It is
recognised that co-operation between education and industry can help the
young to acquire the skills necessary to enable Britain to maintain its position
EDUCATION
141
Finance
Administration
as a leading exporter of manufactured goods. Many organisations already work
to improve contacts between educational institutions and industry, and further
links are being encouraged, especially locally. A major priority has been to
extend the knowledge and use of micro-computers in schools.
The Government’s concern to maintain British expertise in science and
technology, and to ensure the contribution of education to Britain’s economic
performance, is also reflected in its policies for higher education. In 1982 it
announced a three-year programme to expand education and research in
information technology and related fields, with extra student places, additional
staff in universities and polytechnics, and further research fellowships. Under
the programme additional researchers and lecturers in natural science and
technology will also be appointed.
More than four-fifths of education expenditure is incurred by local authorities,
to which grants axe made by central government, with the authorities planning
their spending according to local needs and circumstances. Support for the uni¬
versities and certain other higher education institutions, and grants to
students, account for most of the direct expenditure by central government.
Spending on education (some £14,300 million in 1982, about 6 per cent of the
gross domestic product) amounts to more than 11 per cent of general
government expenditure. Planned reductions in the years to 1983-84 have
taken into account the declining number of school children and considerable
savings in the provision of school meals and milk. Additional provision is,
however, being made to meet the cost of a large expansion in the number of
young people expected to stay on at school after 16. The Government plans to
introduce an education support grants scheme, which will enable it to direct a
small percentage of total education spending into certain priority subjects.
The Secretary of State for Education and Science is responsible for all aspects of
education in England, and for the Government’s relations with and support for
universities throughout Great Britain. (He is also responsible for basic civil
science, p 336.) The Secretaries of State for Wales, Scotland and Northern
Ireland have full responsibility in their respective countries for non-university
education; they are consulted about (but do not carry formal responsibility for)
education in universities and civil science.
Administration of publicly provided schools and further education is decen¬
tralised. Responsibilities are divided between the central government depart¬
ments (the Department of Education and Science, the Welsh Office, the Scottish
Education Department, and the Department of Education for Northern Ireland),
local education authorities (education and library boards in Northern Ireland),
and various voluntary organisations.
The provision of maintained school education and most post-school edu¬
cation outside the universities is the responsibility of local education authori¬
ties. They employ teachers and other staff, provide and maintain buildings,
supply equipment and materials and, in England and Wales, provide grants to
students proceeding to further and higher education. In Scotland the central
institutions, which provide most vocational further education to degree level,
and colleges of education, which provide teacher training, are administered by
independent governing bodies. Apart from three central institutions financed
by the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland, these institutions
and the colleges of education are financed directly by the Scottish Education
Department which also pays grants to students on advanced courses. In
Northern Ireland the Ulster Polytechnic is administered by an independent
board of governors and financed directly by the Department of Education for
Northern Ireland; colleges of education are controlled by the Department or
voluntary agencies.
142
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
SCHOOLS
Management
Nursery and
Primary
Schools
Parents are required by law to see that their children receive efficient full-time
education, at school or elsewhere, between the ages of 5 and 16.
Some 10 -4 million children attend Britain’s 35,000 schools. Most receive free
education financed from public funds, but a small proportion (roughly 6 per
cent) attend schools wholly independent of direct public financial support.
Boys and girls are taught together in most primary schools and in an increas¬
ing number of secondary schools. Some 86 per cent of pupils in maintained
secondary schools in England and Wales and nearly 61 per cent in Northern
Ireland attend mixed schools. In Scotland nearly all secondary schools are
mixed. Most independent schools for younger children are co-educational; the
majority providing secondary education are single-sex, although the number of
mixed schools is growing.
No fees are charged to parents of children at maintained schools, and books
and equipment are free, although in Northern Ireland a small proportion of
grammar school pupils is admitted on a fee-paying basis.
Schools supported from public funds are of two main kinds in England and
Wales: county schools and voluntary schools. County schools are provided and
maintained by local education authorities wholly out of public funds. Voluntary
schools, mostly established by religious denominations, are also wholly main¬
tained from public funds but the governors of some types of voluntary school
contribute to capital costs. Nearly a third of the 26,000 or so schools supported
by public funds in England and Wales are voluntary schools, most of them
Anglican or Roman Catholic. Each publicly maintained school has a governing
body, which includes governors appointed by the local education authority.
There is statutory provision for the representation of parents and teachers on
school governing bodies; it is intended that all schools should have at least two
parent and two teacher governors normally elected by parents and teachers.
In Scotland most of the schools supported from public funds are provided by
education authorities and are known as public schools (in England this term is
used for a type of independent school, see page 143). There is a statutory
requirement to establish school councils whose membership includes teachers,
parents, persons interested in religious education, and in certain cases repre¬
sentatives of further education and of the community at large.
In Northern Ireland there are two main categories of school: controlled
schools owned and managed by the area education and library boards and
having all their expenditure met from public funds; and voluntary schools
which are mainly under Roman Catholic management receiving grants
towards the capital running costs. It is government policy to encourage integ¬
ration between Protestant and Roman Catholic schools where there is a local
desire for it.
Successive governments have expanded nursery education within the con¬
straints of limited resources, and current plans allow for some further
expansion, mainly by converting surplus primary school accommodation to
nursery use. In England over half of four-year-olds and about a fifth of three-
year-olds are receiving education in nursery schools or classes or in infants’
classes in primary schools. In addition many children attend informal pre¬
school playgroups organised by parents and voluntary bodies.
Compulsory education begins at five when children in England and Wales go
to infant schools or departments; at seven many go on to junior schools or
departments. The usual age of transfer from primary to secondary schools is 11
in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, but a number of local authorities in
England have established ‘first’ schools for pupils aged 5 to 8, 9 or 10 and
‘middle’ schools covering various age ranges between 9 and 14. In Scotland the
EDUCATION
143
Secondary
Schools
Independent
Schools
Special
Educational
Needs
primary schools take children from 5 to 12, normally having infant classes for
children under seven, although in a few areas there are separate infant schools.
The publicly maintained system of education aims to give all children an edu¬
cation suited to their particular abilities. Some 90 per cent of the maintained
secondary school population in England and Wales attend comprehensive
schools, which take pupils without reference to ability or aptitude and provide a
wide range of secondary education for all or most of the children of a district.
They can be organised in a number of ways including schools that take the full
secondary school age-range from lltol8;middle schools whose pupils move on
to senior comprehensive schools at 12, 13 or 14, leaving at 16 or 18; and schools
with an age-range of 11 or 12 to 16 combined with a sixth-form or a tertiary
college for pupils over 16. Most other children receive secondary education
in ‘grammar’ and ‘secondary modern’ schools to which they are allocated
after selection procedures at the age of 11.
In England, Wales and Scotland parents have a statutory right to express a
preference for a particular school for their children, and have an effective
channel of appeal at local level. Schools also have to publish their public exam¬
ination results and basic information about themselves.
Scottish secondary education is almost completely comprehensive; almost
all pupils are in schools with a non-selective intake. The majority of schools are
six-year comprehensives. Because of local circumstances there are some
comprehensive schools at which courses may extend to four years or less;
pupils may transfer at the end of their second or fourth years to a six-year
comprehensive.
In Northern Ireland secondary education is organised largely along selective
lines according to children’s abilities.
Independent schools are outside the publicly supported sector, but are open to
inspection and must register with the appropriate government education
department, which can require them to remedy features in their premises,
accommodation or instruction and to exclude anyone regarded as unsuitable to
teach in or to be the proprietor of a school.
There are about 2,500 registered independent schools catering for pupils of
all ages. Among these are about 500 ‘public schools’,1 most of which have
boarding pupils and are single sex (with roughly equal numbers of boys’ and
girls’ schools). Pupils are usually accepted at about 12 or 13 years of age after a
fairly demanding examination. A number of preparatory schools prepare child¬
ren for entry to the public schools. Almost all independent schools charge fees at
or near the cost of provision, many of them operating bursary funds to help
pupils from less well-off families. Local education authorities may assist with
the payment of fees, and the Government runs a scheme under which assis¬
tance is given with fees, in relation to parental income, to a proportion of the
pupils admitted to the 223 schools participating in the scheme. The
Government also gives income-related assistance with fees to pupils at certain
specialist music and ballet schools.
Special educational needs embrace learning difficulties arising from emotional
or behavioural disorders as well as physical or mental handicap. Local edu¬
cation authorities in England and Wales must ensure that children with special
needs are educated in ordinary schools provided that the parents’ wishes have
been'taken into account and that this is compatible with meeting the needs of
1 ‘Public schools’ are usually taken to mean those schools in membership of the Headmasters'
Conference, the Governing Bodies Association or the Governing Bodies of Girls’ Schools Asso¬
ciation. They should not be confused with the state-supported public schools in Scotland.
144
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Teachers
The
Curriculum
Religious
Education in
Schools
Educational
Standards
the child, with the provision of efficient education for the other children in the
school, and with the best use of resources. In Scotland, school placing is a
matter for agreement between education authorities and individual parents.
There are some 1,600 special schools (both day and boarding), including those
run by voluntary organisations, which cater for a wide variety of handicap.
Teachers in publicly maintained schools are appointed by local education
authorities or school governing bodies. There are more than 500,000 teachers
(including the full-time equivalent of part-time teachers) in publicly maintained
and assisted schools in Britain, and the pupil teacher ratio in primary and
secondary schools is about 18 to 1. Teachers in these schools must hold qualifica¬
tions approved by the appropriate education department.
In England and Wales the secular curriculum in maintained schools is the
responsibility of the local education authority, and of the schools’ governors. In
practice, responsibility is largely devolved upon head teachers and their staff.
The Government has published guidance recommending a wider programme
of work for primary and secondary school pupils, to ensure a balanced edu¬
cation and to widen educational opportunities as much as possible. It states
that secondary school pupils up to the age of 16 should follow a broad curricu¬
lum including English, mathematics and science, religious and physical
education, some study of the humanities and opportunities for both practical
and aesthetic activities. Most pupils should also study a modern language. In
Wales, the Welsh language is taught and is used as either the main or secondary
medium of teaching in some schools. The content and management of the cur¬
riculum in Scotland is the responsibility of education authorities and individual
head teachers. Provision is made where appropriate for the teaching of Gaelic.
Over the last 20 years much has been done by the educational authorities to
meet difficulties encountered by the ethnic minorities. English language
teaching has received priority and the need has been stressed for the curricu¬
lum to reflect the variety of cultures found in society.
The monitoring of curriculum content and promotion of curriculum
development are performed in England and Wales by the Schools Curriculum
Development Committee, in Scotland by the Consultative Committee on the
Curriculum and in Northern Ireland by the Council for Educational
Development. At some 500 teachers’ centres in England and Wales teachers
meet for curriculum development work, discussion and in-service training.
In England and Wales all children in county or voluntary schools receive relig¬
ious education by law and take part in a daily corporate act of worship unless
their parents choose otherwise. In county schools, and sometimes in voluntary
schools, non-denominational religious instruction is given which may include
the study of comparative religions. In all kinds of voluntary schools there is
opportunity for denominational instruction. In Scotland religious instruction
must be given, but the content is determined by education authorities and the
schools in accordance with the wishes of the local community. Certain schools
provide for Roman Catholic children but in all schools there are safeguards for
the individual conscience. In controlled schools in Northern Ireland clergy have
a right of access which may be used for denominational instruction; in volun¬
tary schools corporate worship and religious education are controlled by the
management authorities.
Her Majesty’s Inspectors report to ministers responsible for education on the
content and volume of education provided in all schools (and in most further
education establishments outside the universities) and advise local education
EDUCATION
145
Educational
Aids
Secondary
School
Examinations
authorities, schools and the Government. Local education authorities also
employ inspectors or advisors to guide them on maintained schools.
There is general concern that there should be an effective means of assessing
the standards of pupils’ performance. The Assessment of Performance Unit of
the Department of Education and Science promotes the development of
methods of assessment and monitors the achievement of school children. Pro¬
grammes of monitoring have been undertaken in English language and mathe¬
matics at the ages of 11 and 15, and in science at the ages of 11, 13 and 15.
Monitoring of science and the first foreign language is continuing. New assess¬
ment techniques are being developed in Scotland.
In most schools teachers and pupils use a range of aids to assist the processes of
teaching and learning, and educational broadcasting is of major importance.
Almost all schools can receive radio and television programmes and most have
audio-visual equipment such as slide-projectors. In addition the British Broad¬
casting Corporation produces radiovision programmes which, in effect, are low
cost tape/slide units. Teachers’ notes and pupils’ pamphlets accompany
many broadcast series. Each year more than 600 hours of school radio and
1,000 hours of school television are transmitted by the BBC and the indepen¬
dent broadcasting companies.
Computers are available widely and children are becoming familiar with
their use and applications. Teachers use them in their own work, including the
planning of timetables and the management of courses. A six-year Micro-
Electronics Education Programme in England, Wales and Northern Ireland and
a separate programme in Scotland aim to give young people a better under¬
standing of the potential applications of microelectronic technology through
the commissioning of new development projects and by building on existing
work. As a result of the Government’s Micros in Schools and Micros in Primaries
schemes, every secondary school in Britain has its own microcomputer, and
every primary school will have one by the end of 1984.
The principal examinations taken by secondary school pupils in England,
Wales and Northern Ireland at the age of 16 and over are those leading to the
General Certificate of Education (GCE) at Ordinary (O) level and to the Certi¬
ficate of Secondary Education (CSE). Both are normally taken after five years of
secondary education. The GCE Advanced (A) level is normally taken after a
further two years’ study. Entries for GCE examinations are also accepted from
private candidates and those attending further education establishments. The
highest grade (grade 1) in the CSE is accepted as equivalent to the standard of
grade C or better at GCE O-level, and these are the qualifying grades for entry to
further education and training. The A-level examination is the standard for
entrance to university and other higher education, and to many forms of profes¬
sional training.
The number of pupils achieving success in O- and A-level examinations has
risen considerably in recent years, partly as a result of the raising of the school
leaving age. Nearly nine in ten pupils left school with at least one graded result
in 1982. Some 10 per cent of pupils achieved five or more higher grades at O-level
or CSE equivalent, while over 16 per cent achieved at least one A-level. Slightly
more girls than boys sit for A-levels.
The present dual system of examinations at 16 plus is regarded as having a
number of defects. The Government is considering whether to replace the GCE
O-level and CSE with a single system of examining or to harmonise and improve
the existing examinations. The A-level examination will remain. Consideration
is being given to the development of an intermediate level (or I-level) examin¬
ation to broaden the scope of schools’ sixth form curricula. A further plan under
146
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Careers
Education and
Guidance
Health and
Welfare of
School
Children
School
Building
POST-SCHOOL
EDUCATION
discussion is to provide pupils with a written record of school achievement and
performance, which would be of particular benefit to those who leave schools
without formal qualifications. The Secondary Examinations Council (SEC) has
been established to co-ordinate and supervise systems of examination and
assessment in England and Wales designed principally for pupils in secondary
education.
In Scotland pupils in the fourth year of secondary education (equivalent to the
fifth year in England and Wales) normally sit examinations for the Scottish
Certificate of Education. From 1984 onwards it will be possible to complete the
Certificate at one of three levels according to ability: Foundation, General, or
Credit. Pupils in the fifth and sixth year sit for the Higher grade of the Certi¬
ficate. Passes at this grade are the basis for entry to university or professional
training. For those who have completed their main studies at the Higher grade
but wish to continue their studies in particular subjects there is a Certificate of
Sixth Year Studies.
Increasing importance is being attached by schools (and by further education
establishments) to careers education to increase young people’s awareness of
further education and careers opportunities and generally help them to prepare
for post-school life.
The work of careers officers at local level is supported by careers information
material produced by the Government’s Careers and Occupational Information
Centre.
Physical education, including organised games, is part of the curriculum of all
maintained schools, and playing fields must be available for pupils over the age
of eight. Most secondary schools have a gymnasium.
The government health departments are responsible for the medical
inspection of school children and for advice on, and treatment of, specific
medical and dental problems associated with children of school age.
Local education authorities have discretion to decide what milk, meals or
other refreshment to provide at their schools, and what charges to make. Provi¬
sion has to be made free of charge, however, for pupils from families receiving
certain social security benefits. Under certain conditions the authorities must
provide free school transport, and they have discretionary powers to assist
financially in the provision of transport for pupils between their home and
school.
Local education authorities are responsible for the provision of school
buildings, under the general supervision of the central departments. Since 1945
an extensive school building programme has been carried out, together with
extensions, alterations and remodelling of existing schools.
Post-school education for young people above school-leaving age is provided at
a range of levels. More than a third of young people receive some form of post¬
school education, compared with a fifth in 1965, while some 13 -5 per cent of
young people in the 18 year old age group entered full-time higher education
courses in 1982-83. The number of degrees awarded per age group is compara¬
ble with that of other developed countries. The proportion of people in all
further and higher education in Britain also compares well, taking into account
the large proportion of part-time students and the large group of students
receiving professional training in firms rather than in educational institutions.
The term further education is usually used to define all post-school education
outside the universities, but often refers specifically to non-advanced voca¬
tional courses for 16 to 19 year olds who have left school. Higher education
EDUCATION
147
Institutions
Finance
Students
(postgraduate, first degree and other courses of post A-level standard) is pro¬
vided at universities, polytechnics and other colleges. While most degree
courses are academic in purpose, other types of course are largely vocational.
Provision ranges from diploma and certificate courses for those aiming at
higher-level posts in commerce, industry, and administration, to courses
leading to professional qualifications in subjects such as engineering, architec¬
ture and law. The system allows the student to acquire whatever qualifications
his or her capabilities and available time allow. A particular feature of voca¬
tional higher education is its strong links with commerce and industry.
Following rapid expansion in higher education, the Government has decided
that there should be a period of consolidation. In order to reduce public expendi¬
ture while maintaining provision of a high standard and relevant to national
needs, some restructuring of courses and departments has been necessary.
Reductions in expenditure by universities have already been achieved and con¬
sideration is being given to possible reductions by the polytechnics and
colleges.
The principal institutions of post-school education are the universities, the
polytechnics, the Scottish central institutions and some hundreds of other
colleges which are maintained or assisted from public funds; these have a
variety of titles including colleges of higher or further education, colleges of
technology, colleges of art, agricultural colleges and adult education centres.
There are in addition many independent specialist establishments, such as
secretarial and correspondence colleges and colleges teaching English as a
foreign language; a number of voluntary and private bodies providing cultural
and general education, sometimes with assistance from local education
authorities; and a large number of other education and training schemes run by
public or private organisations, or firms.
Most establishments for post-school education Eire either maintained or assis¬
ted from public funds. Some undertake training, research or consultancy for
commercial firms, making charges which broadly reflect the economic cost of
provision, and a number have endowments or receive grants or gifts from
foundations and benefactors.
Although the Government is responsible for financing nearly 90 per cent of
universities’ expenditure, a special financial arrangement safeguards individ¬
ual universities from direction by the Government. A block grant is paid to the
University Grants Committee which allocates funds to the universities, the
London Graduate School of Business Studies and the Manchester Business
School. The Department of Education and Science finances directly the Open
University (see p 149), the Royal College of Art and the Cranfield Institute of
Technology. The independent University of Buckingham receives no assis¬
tance from public funds although its students can apply for mandatory grants
(see below). The Northern Ireland Department of Education makes grants
direct to the universities on recommendations from the University Grants
Committee.
Funds for advanced courses in polytechnics and other colleges of further edu¬
cation maintained by local authorities are allocated centrally. The National
Advisory Body for Local Authority Higher Education advises the Government
on how these resources should be allocated in England in future years. A Welsh
Advisory Body has a similar function in Wales.
Some 946,000 students take full-time and sandwich courses (courses where
substantial periods of full-time study alternate with periods of supervised
experience on a relevant job) at universities and major establishments of
148
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Universities
further education in Britain (1981-82 figures). Of these about 308,000 are at
universities while another 247,000 follow advanced courses outside
universities, at colleges of further and higher education, polytechnics and Scot¬
tish central institutions. More than 390,000 take non-advanced courses, most
of them studying for recognised vocational or educational qualifications.
There are in addition about 3 • 1 million part-time students, nearly 500,000 of
whom are released by their employers for further education during working
hours. Many of the remainder take part in adult education classes (see p 150).
Many full-time students are helped by grants from public funds, which are
mandatory for those students taking first degree and other comparable courses
who qualify under national rules. (Grants for other courses may be given at the
discretion of a local education authority.) Grants cover tuition fees and
maintenance, but where parents can afford to contribute this is taken into
account. They are awarded by local education authorities in England and
Wales up to first degree level; in Scotland by the Scottish Education Depart¬
ment; and in Northern Ireland mainly by the education and library boards. For
postgraduate study and research, grants are offered by the education depart¬
ments and the research councils. In all, over 90 per cent of students on full-time
and sandwich advanced courses receive help from public funds. Some scho¬
larships are available from endowments and from particular industries or
companies.
There are 47 universities in Britain, including the Open University, compared
with 17 in 1945.
The English universities are: Aston (Birmingham), Bath, Birmingham,
Bradford, Bristol, Brunei (London), Cambridge, City (London), Durham, East
Anglia, Essex, Exeter, Hull, Keele, Kent at Canterbury, Lancaster, Leeds,
Leicester, Liverpool, London, Loughborough, Manchester, Manchester Insti¬
tute of Science and Technology, Newcastle upon Tyne, Nottingham, Oxford,
Reading, Salford, Sheffield, Southampton, Surrey, Sussex, Warwick, York, and
the independent University of Buckingham, which received its royal charter in
1983. The Royal College of Art, the Cranfield Institute of Technology, the
London Graduate School of Business Studies, and the Manchester Business
School also have university status. The federated University of Wales
comprises seven constituent institutions. The Scottish universities are:
Aberdeen, Dundee, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Heriot-Watt (Edinburgh), St
Andrews, Stirling, and Strathclyde (Glasgow). In Northern Ireland there are the
Queen’s University of Belfast and the New University of Ulster in Coleraine.
The universities of Oxford and Cambridge date from the twelfth and thir¬
teenth centuries, and the Scottish universities of St Andrews, Glasgow,
Aberdeen and Edinburgh from the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. All the
other universities were founded in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
Admission to universities is by examination or by selection. Of the 308,000
full-time university students in 1981 -82, just under 48,000 were postgraduate.
About half lived in colleges and halls of residence.
There are some 34,000 full-time university teachers paid wholly from uni¬
versity funds. The ratio of staff to students is about one to seven, one of the most
favourable in the world.
Except at the Open University, first degree courses are mainly full-time and
usually last three or four years, though medical and veterinary courses usually
require five or six. Degree titles vary according to the practice of each uni¬
versity; in England, Wales and Northern Ireland the most common titles for a
first degree are Bachelor of Arts (BA) or Bachelor of Science (BSc) and for a
second degree Master of Arts (MA), Master of Science (MSc), and Doctor of Phil¬
osophy (PhD); in Scotland Master is used for a first degree in arts subjects. Uni-
EDUCATION
149
The Open
University
Polytechnics
and
Other
Institutions
formity of standards between universities is promoted by the practice of
employing outside examiners for all university examinations, and the general
pattern of teaching is fairly similar throughout Britain.
The Open University is a non-residential university which provides part-time
degree and other courses, using a combination of television and radio
broadcasts, correspondence texts and summer schools, together with a
network of viewing and listening centres. No formal academic qualifications are
required to register for these courses, but the standards of its degrees are the
same as those of other universities. The university’s first degree, the BA (Open),
is a general degree awarded on a system of credits for each course completed.
The first courses began in 1971, and in 1983 some 90,000 students were follow¬
ing courses, over two-thirds at degree level. Courses started in 1983 for English-
speakers in Belgium. The university has advised many other countries on the
setting-up of similar institutions.
A major contribution to post-school education in England and Wales is made by
the 30 polytechnics which have been established since 1967. They provide
courses in a wide range of subjects at all levels, though the trend is toward a
concentration on advanced work. Courses may lead to first and higher degrees,
certain graduate-equivalent qualifications, the examinations of the main pro¬
fessional bodies, and to other qualifications. Polytechnics have close links with
commerce and industry, and many polytechnic students have jobs and attend
on a part-time basis.
Similar provision is made in Scotland in the 14 central institutions and a
number of further education colleges, and in Northern Ireland at the Ulster
Polytechnic.
Institutes and colleges of higher education, formed by the integration of
teacher training with the rest of higher education, also account for a significant
proportion of higher education students, and other further education colleges
run some, usually specialised higher education courses.
An increasing proportion of students on advanced courses outside the uni¬
versities in England, Wales and Northern Ireland are taking courses leading to
the qualifications of the Council for National Academic Awards (CNAA). The
Council awards degrees and other academic qualifications comparable in
standard with those granted by the universities. The courses range from
science and technology to the arts, social studies, business studies and law, but
the proportion of technological, business or other broadly vocational courses is
much higher than in universities.
The Business and Technician Educational Council (BTEC) plans and
administers unified national systems of courses at technician or equivalent
level for students in industry, commerce and public administration in England,
Wales and Northern Ireland. Courses leading to BTEC awards are widely availa¬
ble at polytechnics, colleges and other institutes of further and higher
education, and certain other establishments. BTEC qualifications for business
studies are awarded at three levels: general certificate and diploma; national
certificate and diploma; and higher national certificate and diploma; and for
technical studies at national and higher national certificate and diploma level.
BTEC is also co-operating with others in the provision of new courses at the
vocational preparation level. The Scottish equivalents of the Council, the Scot¬
tish Technical Education Council and the Scottish Business Education
Council, are planning to merge during 1984.
Qualifications in a wide range of craft skills are offered by the City and Guilds
of London Institute, and a variety of qualifications in commercial and office
practice are offered by the Royal Society of Arts.
150
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Teacher
Training
Adult and
Continuing
Education
All new entrants to teaching in England and Wales must have taken a recog¬
nised course of teacher training. Courses are offered by most universities and
by many polytechnics and other institutions of higher education. Non¬
graduates usually qualify by way of a three- or four-year course leading to the
Bachelor of Education degree; graduates take a one-year Certificate of
Education.
In response to demographic trends the number of teachers to be trained to
teach in secondary schools is being greatly reduced, except in a few specialisms
(in particular, mathematics, physics, and craft, design and technology) where
there have been long-standing shortages. At the same time arrangements have
been made to meet the increase in the number of primary school children
expected in the second half of the decade. The Government has announced
plans to improve the quality of teaching by revising selection, training and
placement procedures for new teachers, and by providing more in-service
training opportunities.
In Scotland all teachers in education authority schools must be registered
with the General Teaching Council for Scotland and all teachers of academic
subjects in secondary schools must be graduates. College of education courses
lead to the award of a Teaching Qualification (Primary Education or Secondary
Education). Graduates and holders of specialist diplomas take a one-year
course; courses in practical and aesthetic subjects for non-graduates extend to
two, three or four years. Most Scottish colleges of education also offer four-year
courses leading to the degree of Bachelor of Education. In Northern Ireland
teacher training takes place in the two university education departments, three
colleges of education, the Ulster Polytechnic and one technical college. The
principal courses are the certificate (for three years) and the Bachelor of Edu¬
cation (four years) but there are also one-year courses for graduates or holders of
other appropriate qualifications.
The scope of adult and continuing education has widened over recent years and
now includes, in addition to the development of the individual through cultural,
physical and craft pursuits, such subjects as basic education (for example, in
literacy and numeracy); education for disadvantaged groups and those with
special needs; consumer education; health education; and pre-retirement edu¬
cation. Continuing education includes training for those in employment, to
enable them to keep pace wth technological change. The Government has
launched a Professional, Industrial and Commercial Updating Programme,
(PICKUP), designed to help colleges, polytechnics and universities to meet the
need for updating and broadening the skills of those in mid-career in industry,
commerce and the professions.
Apart from university provision for mature students, courses are provided by
local education authorities, residential colleges, extra-mural departments of
universities, the Open University and various other bodies including a number
of voluntary organisations. Most of the provision is made by the local education
authorities in a wide variety of establishments, including schools used for adult
evening classes and in some cases in ‘community schools’ which provide
educational, social and cultural opportunities for the wider community. Most
courses are part-time. Local authorities maintain or aid most of the short-term
residential colleges or centres which provide courses lasting between a
weekend and a fortnight.
Long-term residential colleges, grant-aided by central government
departments, provide courses of one or two years. They aim to provide a liberal
education without academic entry tests. Most students admitted are entitled to
full maintenance grants.
University extra-mural departments and the Workers’ Educational Associa-
EDUCATION
151
Teaching
Methods
EDUCATIONAL
RESEARCH
EDUCATIONAL
LINKS
OVERSEAS
tion (WEA), the largest recognised voluntary body, are grant-aided to provide
extended part-time courses of liberal studies; they also run short courses for
special (including vocational) interests. Many other organisations, pational and
local, provide various kinds of education and training. Several, such as the
National Federation of Women’s Institutes, the National Federation of
Women’s Organisations, and the Pre-Retirement Association receive
government grants; others are commercially or privately financed.
The National Institute of Adult Education is a centre of information, research
and publication for adult education, as well as a channel of co-operation and
consultation for the many interested organisations in England and Wales.
Mainly financed by local education authorities and a government grant, the
Institute administers the government-funded Adult Literacy and Basic Skills
Unit which covers proficiency in numeracy and communications skills, as well
as literacy. The Institute’s counterpart in Scotland is the Scottish Institute of
Adult Education.
In Scotland the Scottish Community Education Council advises the
Government on all further education matters and administers the Scottish
Adult Basic Education Unit. In Northern Ireland the Council for Continuing
Education also has advisory functions.
The general pattern of teaching and learning on full-time courses at institutions
of higher education remains a mixture of lectures, prescribed or suggested
reading, seminars and tutorials, exercises and tests, and, where appropriate,
practical work or work experience. Educational aids are widely available at
most establishments.
Radio and television programmes, both specifically educational and general,
are important media for continuing education and are often linked to a range of
supplementary publications, courses and activities. BBC radio study program¬
mes are transmitted late at night on weekdays and on Sunday afternoons. Edu¬
cational television programmes are shown on Saturday and Sunday mornings,
during the day on weekdays with some early and late evening transmissions.
Both the BBC and the independent television companies provide programmes
which range from basic education and progressive vocational training to
domestic, social and craft skills. The BBC also works with the Open University
(see p 149), producing and broadcasting radio and television programmes as
part of the courses.
Research into the theory and practice of education and the organisation of edu¬
cational services is supported financially by central and local government, the
Social Science Research Council, philanthropic organisations, universities and
teachers’ associations. Some research is also sponsored at further education
institutions and by a few independent organisations.
The major research institute outside the universities is the autonomous
National Foundation for Educational Research in England and Wales, with
income mainly from funds received from research projects and from corporate
members, including local education authorities, teachers’ organisations and
universities. It receives an annual government grant. There are also the Scot¬
tish Council for Research in Education and the Northern Ireland Council for
Educational Research.
School children, students, teachers and others concerned with education come
to Britain from overseas to study, and British people work and train overseas.
Many opportunities for such movement are the result of international co¬
operation at government level within the European Community and within the
Commonwealth, and of educational schemes, courses and professional con-
152
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Educational
Exchanges
Overseas
Students in
Britain
tacts organised in Britain by officially funded and voluntary organisations. The
British aid programme encourages links between educational institutions in
Britain and in developing countries.
British membership of the European Community is creating closer ties with
other countries. Both in schools and in the colleges and universities there has
been an expansion of interest in European studies and languages, and
exchanges of teachers, school children and students take place. Britain has
adhered to the Statute of the European Schools (nine of which have been estab¬
lished throughout the Community including one at Culham, Oxfordshire) to
provide education for children of people employed in Community institutions.
The promotion of cultural and educational relations with other countries is a
major concern of the British Council (see p 67), which plays an important part in
the management of the aid programme to education. It recruits teachers for
work overseas, organises short visits overseas by British experts, and encou¬
rages cultural exchange visits. It is also responsible for schemes to promote
academic interchange between universities and higher education institutions
in Britain and other countries, and exchange schemes in other scientific, edu¬
cational and cultural areas. The promotion of co-operation between universi¬
ties in Britain and developing countries is undertaken by means of staff
recruitment, the secondment of staff from British universities, inter¬
departmental faculty link schemes, local staff development, short-term
teaching and advisory visits, and general consultancy services.
The Central Bureau for Educational Visits and Exchanges, an independent
foundation financed by the Government, aims to enrich British education
through international contact and exchange. It is responsible, with the League
for the Exchange of Commonwealth Teachers, for teacher exchanges with most
West European countries, a number of Commonwealth countries and the
United States. It arranges links and exchanges between schools, further edu¬
cation establishments and local authorities, and organises study visits for
teachers, education administrators, and young workers. It also administers the
language assistants scheme in Britain and develops opportunities for exchange
in special areas such as sport and the performing arts, as well as between disa¬
bled people.
The Association of Commonwealth Universities promotes co-operation
between member universities in 28 Commonwealth countries. It organises
meetings, provides information and academic appointments services, adminis¬
ters the Commonwealth Scholarship and Fellowship Plan in Britain, and gen¬
erally promotes the movement of academic and administrative staff and of
students from one country to another.
The Commonwealth Education Liaison Committee supplements normal
direct dealings on education between the countries of the Commonwealth. The
United Kingdom Council for Overseas Student Affairs is an independent body
serving overseas students and organisations and individuals concerned in
student affairs.
Students come to Britain from countries throughout the world to study at uni¬
versities or other educational institutions or for professional training. In the
academic year 1981-82 there were some 34,000 overseas students at universi¬
ties and about 30,000 at polytechnics and other establishments of higher and
further education. In addition, others (around 29,000) were training for such
occupations as nursing, law, banking and accountancy, industry and services.
About 42 per cent of all overseas students were from the Commonwealth and 7 0
per cent from developing countries.
Many come to Britain for advanced training. Some 34 per cent (16,000) of
EDUCATION
153
The Teaching
of English
students enrolled for full-time postgraduate study or research at British uni¬
versities in 1981 came from overseas. British universities, polytechnics and
other further education establishments have built up their reputation overseas
by providing tuition of the highest standards, maintaining low student-to-staff
ratios, and adopting courses and qualifications to meet present-day and pos¬
sible future needs. First degree courses tend to be shorter and more intensive
than in many countries (three years is the normal length in England and Wales;
four years in Scotland).
The majority of overseas students pay their own fees and expenses or hold
awards from their own governments. Those following courses of higher or
further education are charged fees which cover the full cost of their courses.
Students from other member countries of the European Community are
charged the lower level of fees that applies to British students. There is,
however, a bursary scheme to provide financial help for overseas research
students of high ability.
Some 11,500 students and trainees from developing countries were fully sup¬
ported in 1982 under programmes of technical co-operation, by awards under
the Commonwealth Scholarship and Fellowship Plan, and under British
Council and other schemes (see below). The total cost of these measures was
some £44 million. The Government plans to increase its financial support for
overseas students by £46 million over the three years 1983-84 to 1985-86; the
money will be used to finance a number of new measures including provision
for some five to six thousand additional scholarships and awards each year.
Many public and private scholarships and fellowships are available to
students from overseas (and to British students who want to study overseas).
Among the best known are the British Council Scholarships, the Common¬
wealth Scholarship and Fellowship Plan, the Fulbright Scholarship Scheme,
the Marshall Scholarships, the independently funded Rhodes Scholarships,
and the Churchill Scholarships for men and women in all walks of life. Most
British universities and colleges offer scholarships for which graduates of any
nationality are eligible. (The British Council and the Association of Common¬
wealth Universities are involved in the selection of British students for awards
offered by many overseas countries.) The Atlantic College at St Donat’s, South
Wales (one of the colleges of the United World Colleges) provides two-year
residential courses for overseas students before they enter university.
The continuing increase in interest in English as a foreign language is reflected
in the growth of the number of private language schools in Britain and the larger
proportion of these recognised by the British Council. At the same time the
British Council has greatly expanded the volume of its own teaching of English
overseas by opening new centres in many countries and extending existing
ones. Publications and other material relating to English language teaching
have also increased in number and are now a large component in many
publishers’ lists, constituting a major export.
The BBC’s English by Radio and Television Service provides a world-wide
facility for the individual learner at home.
The Youth Service
The aim of the youth service is to promote the social and informal education of
young people by offering them opportunities in their leisure time to mix
socially, to develop and enlarge their range of interests and to support their
development to adulthood. The service is provided by a partnership between
public authorities and a large variety of voluntary organisations. Membership
of groups is voluntary and there is no attempt to create anything in the nature of
a national youth movement.
154
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Youth Workers
Other
Organisations
Concerned with
Young People
The youth service forms part of the education system. Government edu¬
cation departments formulate board policy objectives and encourage their
achievement through financial assistance and advice.
Proposals to achieve better planning and management in the youth service
were put forward in an official review published in 1982.
Local education authorities provide and run their own youth clubs and
centres (some of which are residential) which may be purpose-built or associ¬
ated with schools. They also assist local voluntary youth groups by lending
premises and equipment and by contributing to their capital and running costs.
Many authorities have youth committees on which official and voluntary
bodies are represented, and employ youth officers to co-ordinate youth work
and to arrange in-service training. There are also youth councils which are
representative bodies of young people from local youth organisations.
National voluntary organisations promote the larger share of youth activities
through local groups which raise most of their day-to-day running expenses by
their own efforts. These have an estimated combined membership of over 6
million. They vary greatly in character, some concentrating on social and recre¬
ational pursuits, others on educational or religious activities. Most national
organisations in England are members of the National Council for Voluntary
Youth Services, a consultative body. In Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland
there are similar representative bodies.
Among the largest of the voluntary youth organisations are the Scout and Girl
Guides Associations (with about 645,000 and 887,000 members) the National
Association of Youth Clubs (about 731,000), the National Association of Boys’
Clubs (some 180,000), the Youth Hostels Association (about 281,000) and clubs
run by the churches. The three pre-service organisations (the Sea Cadet Corps,
Army Cadet Force and Air Training Corps), with a membership of some 140,000
combine social, educational and physical development with training for pos¬
sible entry to the armed forces.
In England and Wales a basic two-year training course at certain universities
and higher education colleges leads to the status of qualified youth and com¬
munity worker. A number of colleges of higher education include study of
youth work within teacher-training courses. In Scotland one- and three-year
courses are provided at certain colleges of education and in Northern Ireland
courses are provided by the Ulster Polytechnic.
Full-time youth workers are supported by over 400,000 part-time workers,
many of them unpaid. Part-time workers usually have no professional qualifi¬
cation in youth work but some have allied qualifications, for instance as
teachers, and a large number attend short courses and conferences on youth
work. Qualified school teachers are recognised as qualified youth workers.
A substantial sum of money is awarded by the many grant-giving foundations
and trusts each year for activities involving young people. The Royal Jubilee
Trusts, formed in 1978 from King George’s Jubilee Trust (started in 1935 at the
time of the Silver Jubilee of King George V) and the Queen’s Silver Jubilee
Trust, which arose from the 1977 Queen’s Silver Jubilee Appeal, support work
involving young people aged 8 to 18 (King George’s Jubilee Trust) and young
people up to the age of 25 involved in community service work (the Queen’s
Silver Jubilee Trust). King George’s Jubilee Trust has distributed over £5
million since 1935 and the Queen’s Silver Jubilee Trust over £8 million since
1978.
The Duke of Edinburgh’s Award Scheme, which operates through bodies
such as local authorities, schools, youth organisations and industrial firms,
enables young people from Britain and other Commonwealth countries to take
EDUCATION
155
part with the voluntary assistance of adults in a variety of challenging activities
in four areas: community service, expeditions, the development of personal
interests and social and practical skills, and physical recreation.
Voluntary
Service by
Young People
Thousands of young people voluntarily take part in community service
designed to assist those in need, including the elderly and the disabled, and
many others work on conservation projects. Organisations providing opportu¬
nities for community service such as International Voluntary Service, Task
Force and Community Service Volunteers receive grants from the
Government. Many schools also organise community service activities as part
of the curriculum.
The Community Projects Foundation is an independent body which advises
interested organisations in England and Wades on methods of involving young
people in providing service to the community. The Foundation receives a
government grant and employs teams of young people who are available on
request to assist in promoting voluntary service.
8 The
Environment
By comprehensive land-use planning and development control Britain has had
considerable success in resolving the conflicting demands of industry,
commerce, housing, transport, agriculture and recreation and in reducing
environmental pollution. There is no ‘national plan’ for urban and land
development, but there is a statutory system of land-use planning applying
over the whole country and to virtually every kind of development, and there
are laws dealing specifically with environmental health and the control of pollu¬
tion. In general all development requires local ‘planning permission’, and appli¬
cations for permission are dealt with in the light of development plans which set
out strategies for each area on such matters as housing, transport, industry and
open land. The underlying approach is to identify people’s needs and possible
ways of meeting them, and there is a growing move away from narrow land-use
allocation towards broader strategic planning recognising the community’s
social and economic goals. Throughout Britain voluntary organisations take an
active interest in planning, conservation and the control of pollution.
Planning
The system of land-use planning in Great Britain involves a centralised struc¬
ture under the Secretaries of State for the Environment, Wales and Scotland,
and compulsory planning duties for local planning authorities. The Depart¬
ment of the Environment brings together the major responsibilities in England
for land-use planning, housing and construction, countryside policy and
environmental protection. The Welsh Office and the Scottish Development
Department have broadly equivalent responsibilities. Large-scale planning in
England and Wales is primarily the responsibility of the county councils and
the Greater London Council while district councils and the councils of the
London boroughs and the City of London are responsible for most local plans
and development control, the main housing functions and many other environ¬
mental health matters. In Scotland, planning functions are undertaken by
regional and district councils whose responsibilities are divided on a basis
broadly similar to that in England and Wales. In the more rural regions and the
islands, all planning responsibilities are carried out by the regional and islands
councils respectively. In Northern Ireland the Department of the Environment
for Northern Ireland is responsible for planning matters through its local offices
which work closely with the district councils. The councils have local environ¬
mental health responsibilities.
General problems of industrial development are dealt with jointly by a
number of government departments, but each development scheme, as a rule,
requires the local planning authority’s consent. Financial incentives encourage
the location of industry in particular areas (see p 197). For some planning pur¬
poses England is divided into eight regions, each with a planning board. Wales
has an Economic Planning Board and Northern Ireland has an Economic
Council.
The Plans The development plan system in England and Wales involves ‘structure’ and
‘local’ plans. Structure plans are prepared by county planning authorities and
THE ENVIRONMENT
157
Public
Participation
Major
Schemes
New Towns
require ministerial consent. They set out broad policies for the development
and other use of land (including measures for the improvement of the physical
environment and traffic management). Local plans containing detailed
proposals, including plans for ‘action areas’ where comprehensive develop¬
ment is expected to start within a specified period, are normally prepared by
district planning authorities, although sometimes by county planning
authorities, and must conform generally to the approved structure plan. In
exceptional cases, with ministerial approval, the adoption of a local plan may
precede the approval of a structure plan. Local plans are adopted by the plann¬
ing authorities without being subject to ministerial approval unless the Secre¬
tary of State calls in a plan for his own decision. All plans are under continuous
review and may be altered from time to time. Scotland has a broadly similar
system which can also include the production of a regional report by regional
and islands authorities, outlining their priorities and policies. In Northern
Ireland there is a single-tier system; plans are prepared by the Department of
the Environment for Northern Ireland.
Members of the public and interested organisations are given an opportunity to
express their views on the planning of their areas during the formative stages of
the structure and local plans. The local planning authorities must ensure ade¬
quate publicity for matters proposed for inclusion in the plans; representations
may be made about them to the authorities. These opportunities for public par¬
ticipation are additional to provisions for objecting to prepared plans. In the
case of structure plans the Secretary of State normally holds an examination in
public of matters on which he requires more information in order to reach a
decision. In the case of local plans objectors have a right to be heard, and a
public local inquiry is normally held by the planning authorities.
Where specific proposals for development differ substantially from the
intentions of a development plan, they must be publicised locally. Other
schemes affecting a large number of people are usually advertised by the local
planning authority and applications seeking permission for certain types of
development must also be advertised. The applicant has a right of appeal to the
Secretary of State if planning permission is refused or is granted subject to con¬
ditions. Most appeals are transferred for decision to inspectors (in Scotland
reporters) appointed by the Secretary of State.
Similar provision is made in Northern Ireland for public participation in the
planning process and for the hearing of objections. There is a right of appeal to
an independent Planning Appeals Commission.
The Secretaries of State can direct that a planning application be referred to
them for decision. This power is exercised sparingly and usually only in respect
of proposals of national or regional importance. The applicant has the right to be
heard by a person appointed by the Secretary of State and a public inquiry is
normally held for this purpose. In the case of development schemes of national
or regional importance or of a technical or scientific nature, and if an ordinary
inquiry is inadequate for the purpose, the ministers responsible may decide to
set up planning inquiry commissions to carry out investigations and hold inqui¬
ries locally. Where highway development is proposed, the government minister
concerned can hold such inquiries as he considers appropriate; these generally
relate to the compulsory acquisition of land.
The 32 new towns designated since 1946 represent one of the most successful
achievements in recent British planning. Twenty-one of them are in England,
two in Wales, five in Scotland and four in Northern Ireland. Most of them had an
existing town or village as a nucleus. The policy behind their creation was
New Towns
THE ENVIRONMENT
159
Inner City
Policies
Urban
Programme
mainly one of encouraging the gradual dispersal of industry and population
from congested cities to new areas, planned in advance to become self-
contained towns with their own industry, services and amenities within conve¬
nient distance of the whole community.
The new towns have a total population of over 2 million. Young people form a
somewhat higher proportion than in the population of the country as a whole.
Several of the more developed towns are becoming regional centres and, as the
populations grow large enough to give the necessary support, offices, hotels and
department stores, as well as arts centres and entertainment and recreational
facilities, are gradually being provided.
In England eight of the new towns have been substantially completed and the
development corporations, which supervised the planning and development of
the towns, dissolved. Target dates for the dissolution of a further seven new
town development corporations by the mid-1980s and of the remainder by the
late 1980s have been announced. The dissolution of the five Scottish develop¬
ment corporations is not expected before the end of the 1980s. In Wales respon¬
sibility for one of the two new towns has been taken over by the Development
Board for Rural Wales while the other is to be dissolved in the mid-1980s. In
Northern Ireland, development of the new town has been incorporated in a new
District Towns Strategy which is the responsibility of the Department of the
Environment for Northern Ireland. The Government is making substantial
disposals of the completed assets of the new towns to the private sector in order
to release resources for investment and to reduce the involvement of the public
sector.
Town development (or ‘expanding town’) schemes involve the transfer of
people and industry from overcrowded areas to existing towns suitable for
expansion; these are arranged directly between the local authorities of the
towns concerned. Most of the expanding towns are well established and are
providing homes, jobs and amenities for people from large cities.
Revitalising the inner areas of many towns and cities is one of the most impor¬
tant tasks in modern planning. Past policies have produced many successes
(most of the slums have been replaced, much old housing has been improved
and the clean air legislation has enhanced the general environment and public
health) but other problems have still to be overcome. They include high
unemployment, decay and dereliction, and population structures with rela¬
tively high proportions of the disadvantaged and the elderly. It is the
Government’s policy not to seek a universal solution but to work out for each
city the package of measures that is most likely to improve conditions and
encourage, as far as possible, local voluntary action, notably by means of ‘part¬
nerships’ (see below), and the co-operation of the private sector in regenerating
local economies. Various special measures, aimed at increasing employment
opportunities and the involvement of residents in the rejuvenation of their
areas, have been introduced.
The inner city areas have been given greater resources and priority for a
number of years. The ‘urban aid programme’ has been increased from a
1977-78 level in England and Wales of under £30 million to £348 million in
1983-84. The programme complements the main social, environmental and
economic programmes of local authorities often by providing extra facilities
which would otherwise not be available, such as day nurseries, centres for the
elderly and language classes for immigrants, and covers industrial commercial,
environmental and recreational provision as well. The urban programme repre¬
sents only a small part of the central assistance to urban, and other, local
authorities. The main contribution is through the annual ‘rate support’ grant,
160
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Enterprise
Zones
transport supplementary grant (in England and Wales only), housing subsidy
and other programmes.
In certain places, special schemes are in operation. A co-ordinated ‘part¬
nership’ approach has been running for some years in seven English areas
whereby central and local government work together to tackle urban problems
where they are at their most severe. Each partnership has a three-year action
programme rolled forward annually, which is based on the needs of the area and
its particular priorities. Partnerships receive allocations of urban programme
resources ranging from £ 10 million to £25 million a year. To meet the particular
problems and opportunities of the London docklands and the Merseyside dock
area following large-scale dock closures, the Government has set up urban
development corporations modelled on the new town development corpor¬
ations, and these are to receive some £67 million in 1983-84. Elsewhere in
England 23 areas have been identified where the problems are on a slightly
smaller scale but still merit special attention. These areas prepare their own
inner city programmes and like the partnerships receive special allocations of
urban programme resources. Additional resources are also made available to a
further 17 English and five Welsh districts designated under the Inner Urban
Areas Act 1978. In 1982 a new arrangement was introduced within the urban
programme, to attract more private-sector investment into urban areas. Local
authorities have been invited to prepare a range of investment projects in co¬
operation with private interests which will qualify for an Urban Development
Grant from the Government. A key feature of the scheme is that the grant is
available only for projects which involve substantial private funds and will
make a significant impact on the area. Some £60 million has been provided for
the scheme in 1983-84. National Garden Festivals, based on the European idea
of garden shows, are being introduced with the aim of rejuvenating inner-city
areas and reclaiming derelict sites. The first festival, which has international
status, will be held in Liverpool in 1984.
In Scotland, where the urban programme amounts to £35 million in 1983-84 a
major urban renewal exercise in Glasgow to regenerate the city’s east end (the
Glasgow Eastern Area Renewal Project) is organised on somewhat similar lines
to the partnership areas in England, and a further eight Scottish districts have
been designated under the Inner Urban Areas Act. In Northern Ireland a special
effort is being made to tackle Belfast’s inner city problems.
In 1981-82 the Government set up 11 ‘enterprise zones’ which will last for ten
years (see map opposite). The aim of this experimental policy is to see how far
industrial and commercial activity can be stimulated by the removal of certain
tax burdens and by relaxing or speeding up the application of a number of
administrative controls. The zones, which vary widely but all contain land
suitable for development, range in size from about 55 to 450 hectares (about 140
to over 1,100 acres). Benefits in the zones include exemption from rates and
development land tax; 100 per cent allowances for corporation and income tax
purposes for capital expenditure on industrial and commercial buildings; a
much simplified planning system in which most forms of development are
automatically permitted; and a reduction in government requests for statistical
information. Plans have been announced to designate a further 14 zones, and by
September 1983 four of these had been designated.
Housing
The significant general improvement in housing supply and conditions during
the last 35 years has resulted, in national terms, in a slight excess of supply over
demand, while needs and problems have become increasingly specific and
local. The emphasis of public sector housing policy is being shifted from new
Enterprise Zones
162
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Housing
Characteristics
Administration
building to modernisation, improvement and making better use of the existing
stock. In the private sector encouragement of home ownership and of rented
housing are central policy aims.
There are over 21 million dwellings, houses being much more common than
flats (the ratio is roughly four to one). More than two families in every five live in
a post-1945 home, but there remain a large number of old dwellings, some of
which have been kept in good repair and modernised.
Throughout this century pressure on housing accommodation has been
increased more by the rapid rise in the number of separate households than by
the increase in population. While the number of people has increased by about
two-fifths, the number of households has more than doubled.
The 1981 Census showed the total number of households in Great Britain as
19 -5 million. Improvements in living standards were continuing; only 1 • 3 per
cent were not in self-contained accommodation, 4 • 3 per cent had more than
one person per room and 3 • 2 per cent were lacking or sharing use of a bath.
Over half of all dwellings are owned by their occupiers, nearly a third are
rented from public housing authorities, and most of the remainder are rented
from private landlords (see diagram below). There are variations, however, in
the distribution of tenure between different parts of the country; in Scotland
more than half the dwellings are rented from public authorities. Private rented
accommodation is generally more common in the central parts of large towns,
while owner-occupation is more frequent in outer suburbs and in country areas.
New house construction is undertaken by both public and private sectors but
over the past few years the private sector has built more dwellings than the
public sector. In addition, about 7 per cent of the new building in 1982 was
carried out by voluntary housing associations and societies. Public authorities
provide dwellings mainly for renting while private interests build mainly for
sale to owner-occupiers. There has been very little building of private dwellings
to rent but the provisions in the Housing Act 1980 for ‘assured’ tenancies have
encouraged some new building for private letting by such bodies as building
societies, pension funds and insurance companies.
Housing by Tenure
As with environmental planning, responsibility for formulating housing policy
and supervising the housing programme is borne by the Secretary of State for
the Environment in England and by the Secretaries of State for Wales, Scotland
and Northern Ireland. The construction or structural alteration of housing is
subject to the Building Regulations (see p 225).
THE ENVIRONMENT
163
Home
Ownership
Mortgage Loans
Public Sector
Housing
For building in the private sector the National House Building Council sets
standards and enforces them by inspection and certification. Almost all new
private houses are covered by the Council’s insurance scheme which provides
ten-year guarantees against major structural defects. A two-year guarantee is
also given against faulty workmanship. Most lenders will not make a loan for the
purchase of a new house unless it is covered by a Council certificate.
Local authorities are responsible for the payment of house renovation grants
and the implementation of housing renewal programmes. Many have housing
advisory centres to provide information on aspects of housing.
Research into building materials and techniques, as well as into the social,
economic and design aspects of housing, is undertaken by the Department of
the Environment, the Scottish Development Department and the Welsh Office.
The number of people owning their own homes has more than doubled in the
last 20 years, and the number of owner-occupied homes now amounts to over 12
million. Most public sector tenants have the right to buy the homes they occupy
at discounts which vary according to the length of their occupancy. Local
authorities have been asked to encourage low-cost home ownership by selling
land to builders to construct homes for ‘first-time’ buyers, or to individuals or
groups to build their own ‘first-time’ homes in partnership with private
builders; by improving homes for sale; by selling dilapidated homes for
improvement by the purchaser (‘home-steading’); by offering shared
ownership (part owning, part renting); and by using local authority guarantee
powers to facilitate lending by building societies.
In Northern Ireland the concept of shared ownership is being developed in the
public sector by the Northern Ireland Housing Executive (see below) and in the
private sector by the Northern Ireland Co-ownership Housing Association. The
Executive has offered most of its homes for sale to the tenants.
Most people buy their homes through a mortgage which is a system of instal¬
ment purchase through loans (for which the properties are regarded as secur¬
ities) from such sources as building societies, banks, insurance companies,
industrial and provident societies and local authorities. Some companies also
make loans for house purchase to their own employees.
Building societies (see also p 322) which are by far the largest sources of such
loans (their share of the market being about 80 per cent) do not build houses
themselves. For first-time buyers they usually advance about 90 per cent of
their valuation of a property with the help of an appropriate insurance guaran¬
tee but it is possible to borrow up to 100 per cent. Loans are normally repayable
over periods of 20 or 25 years (up to 30 or 35 years in certain circumstances) by
equal monthly instalments to cover capital and interest. Ordinary mortgage
loans from building societies are usually available to purchasers on average
income or above. People with insufficient income to obtain a mortgage for out¬
right purchase may be able to participate in a scheme in which a housing
association buys the home and sells it to them on a shared ownership basis.
Owner-occupiers are entitled to tax relief on interest payments arising on up
to £30,000 of their mortgage loans (on their main home only). Under the Home
Loan Scheme first-time home buyers who have saved for two years and are
buying a home in the lower-price range may qualify for an extra loan of £600
interest-free for up to five years, and a tax-free bonus of up to £110.
Most of the public housing is provided by 459 local housing authorities. The
authorities are: in England and Wales (outside London), the district councils; in
London, the London borough councils and the Common Council of the City of
London; and in Scotland, the district and islands councils. Other public housing
164
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Privately
Rented
Housing
authorities are the new town authorities, the Scottish Special Housing
Association, which supplements building by local authorities in Scotland, and
the Development Board for Rural Wales. The Northern Ireland Housing Execu¬
tive is responsible for the provision and management of public housing in
Northern Ireland.
Subsidies are made available to the authorities to assist them with housing
costs, and guidance is given on design and layout. Public housing authorities
own nearly seven million houses and flats, The number of homes owned by
each authority varies widely, several of the larger authorities having a stock of
well over 100,000.
Local authorities meet the capital costs of new house construction and of
modernisation of their existing stock by raising loans on the open market or by
borrowing from the Public Works Loan Board. Current expenditure, including
maintenance and management costs and loan interests and repayments, is met
from rents, supplemented by subsidies from the Government and, where
required to balance housing revenue accounts, from the rates (the local
property tax). Local authorities are required to charge their tenants reasonable
rents (which keep a balance between the interests of tenants and ratepayers).
Sheltered accommodation (with an alarm system and resident warden) is pro¬
vided for many elderly people who need this degree of support. Increasing
importance is also being placed on the housing needs of physically handicap¬
ped people, and a small but growing proportion of the new housing stock is
suitable for them. Also receiving attention are the needs of other ‘disadvan¬
taged’ groups such as one-parent families, those who have suffered from mental
illness, and victims of violence within the family. Local authorities have a
statutory duty to ensure that accommodation (not necessarily an authority
house) is available for homeless people who have dependent children or are
vulnerable on grounds such as age or disability.
The Housing Act 1980 established a charter for public sector tenants, giving
them statutory rights which include security of tenure, provision for succession
by a resident relative to the tenancy on death, rights of subletting and taking in
lodgers, and, at the landlord’s discretion, reimbursement for improvements
made by the tenant. With certain exceptions, public sector tenants of at least
three years’ standing can buy the freehold of their house, or a long lease of their
flat, at a discount which depends on the length of occupation. Similar provi¬
sions for Scotland are contained in the Tenants’ Rights etc (Scotland) Act 1980.
A National Mobility Scheme, sponsored by the Department of the Environ¬
ment and the principal bodies concerned with public sector housing, has been
introduced to assist tenants in England, Wales and Northern Ireland who need
to move to another area for employment or social reasons. Tenants who wish to
move by exchanging homes are able to make use of a computer-based national
information scheme.
During the last quarter of a century there has been a steady decline in the
number of rented dwellings available from private landlords (including tied
accommodation) —from over 50 per cent of the housing stock to about 12 per
cent (2 -6 million). Major factors have been the increased demand for owner-
occupation, the greater availability of public rented housing, and the operation
of rent restriction. Privately rented dwellings form a high proportion of the older
housing. Many landlords are individuals with small holdings, but some rented
housing is provided by larger property owners, including property companies.
Most privately rented dwellings are subject to rent restriction, of which there
are two kinds: regulated tenancies, where a ‘fair rent’ is fixed by independent
rent officers; and where there is a resident landlord and in a few other types of
furnished accommodation, the fixing of a reasonable rent by a rent tribunal (in
THE ENVIRONMENT
165
Housing
Associations
Improving
Older Homes
Scotland, by a Rent Assessment Committee). Tenants have a wide degree of
security of tenure, and may not be evicted without a court order. Harassment of
residential occupiers is a criminal offence. The Housing Act 1980 and the
Tenants’ Rights etc (Scotland) Act 1980 introduced a system of ‘shorthold’
lettings, giving tenants security of tenure for an agreed period between one and
five years, but not for life. In London a fair rent must be registered for a
shorthold; outside London it is optional. Lettings previously regulated are not
affected. In England and Wales building of private dwellings to let is encouraged
by the system of ‘assured’ tenancies, which allows approved bodies to let
property at freely negotiated rents outside the provisions of the Rent Acts.
Tenants with incomes up to average levels are eligible for assistance with their
rent under a national scheme of rent allowances which is operated by local
authorities and financed mainly by government subsidies.
Housing associations extend the choice of housing by providing accommo¬
dation available for rent through new building or the rehabilitation of older
property. The associations normally cater for people who would otherwise look
to a local authority for a home. In addition to normal family housing, they
provide particularly for the special needs of elderly, disabled and single people.
The associations, which are non-profit-making, have grown under
government encouragement and now own some 430,000 homes. Individual
associations range in size from a group of ‘almshouses’ for less than ten old
people to associations with more than 10,000 homes. Rented housing schemes
carried out by associations qualify for government grant if the association is one
of the 3,000 registered with the Housing Corporation, a statutory body. Rented
homes owned by housing associations come within the fair rent and rent allow¬
ance arrangements, and many housing association tenants have rights under
the tenants’ charter in the Housing Act 1980, including the right to buy, a right
which would be extended under the Housing and Building Control Bill before
Parliament. Housing associations also provide accommodation on a shared
ownership basis, allowing the occupier to part-rent and part-own a home, and
they can improve older properties for outright sale. Both activities are eligible
for government grants.
Modernisation and conversion of sub-standard homes, with the help of grants
from public funds, has increasingly been encouraged as an alternative to
clearing and rebuilding and as a way of preserving established communities
and of making more economic use of resources.
Nearly 1.9 million home improvement grants were paid to householders in
Great Britain between 1967 and 1982. There are four types of grant: improve¬
ment grants, for carrying out improvements to a good standard or for conver¬
sion into flats; intermediate grants, for the provision of standard amenities
(such as a bath and an inside lavatory) and associated repairs; grants for sub¬
stantial and structural repairs to pre-1919 houses; and special grants (not availa¬
ble in Scotland) for providing standard amenities, repairs and means of escape
from fire in houses which are in multiple occupation.
Declaring ‘general improvement areas’ and ‘housing action areas’ enables
local authorities in England and Wales to tackle the improvement of whole
areas of older housing systematically. General improvement areas (of which
there are nearly 1,500) consist of fundamentally sound houses and a stable
population. Housing action areas (about 400) are characterised by relatively
poor housing and bad physical conditions combined with social stress. Local
authorities have special powers to bring about an improvement in living condi¬
tions for the benefit of residents within a five-year period. In both types of area
government financial aid for environmental improvement (such as tree-
166
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
planting) is available to local authorities. Grants to householders may range up
to 75 per cent of the eligible expense limit, and in certain cases of hardship up to
90 per cent. ‘Enveloping’, introducednationally attheendof 1982, involves the
renovation of the external fabric of whole terraces or streets of mainly privately
owned property in housing action areas which has deteriorated beyond routine
maintenance. It is carried out by local authorities entirely at public expense,
and the encouragement it gives to residents is reflected in the increased take-up
of grants for improvements to the interior of homes after enveloping.
An ‘improvement-for-sale’ scheme has also been introduced; the
Government helps to meet any loss a local authority may make in buying,
improving and selling rundown or neglected housing.
In Scotland housing action area powers are available for areas in which at
least half the houses fail to meet prescribed physical standards and there is no
time limit on the period within which improvement must be carried out.
Outside housing action areas in Scotland local authorities have power to require
the improvement of houses below the statutory tolerable standard, or lacking a
bathroom, by improvement orders. In housing action areas or where an
improvement order has been made grants of up to 75 per cent of the eligible
expense limit (up to 90 per cent in cases of hardship) may be made.
Northern Ireland has a major problem of derelict and unfit housing, especially
in Belfast, the situation having been made worse by civil disturbance. Con¬
certed measures are taken in housing action areas, and there is a continuing
programme of rehabilitation in Belfast. Housing has been made the priority in
Northern Ireland’s social and environmental programme. A strategy has been
designed to ensure a reduction in the amount of unfit housing by 1 per cent a
year and in the urgent element of the waiting list by a third over the next five
years.
Slum Clearance In urban areas of Britain slum clearance and redevelopment have been major
features of housing policy. Large-scale clearance is now almost at an end and
greater emphasis is placed on renewal and modernisation. Local authorities
receive special financial assistance from the Government.
Housing authorities are obliged to see that other accommodation exists, or
can be provided by them, for people displaced by slum clearance. Owners of
land compulsorily acquired during slum clearance programmes receive as
compensation either the full market value or, if the property consists of unfit
houses, a sum based on the value of the cleared site; additional payments are,
however, made to most owner-occupiers of unfit houses to bring their compen¬
sation up to market value.
Redevelopment of slums has presented considerable problems. Many of the
areas were seriously overcrowded and lacked social facilities but usually had
the advantages of the basic utilities, local employment and easy access to town-
centre facilities. In order to house as many people as possible on the sites, large
areas were cleared and ‘high-rise’ flats built. Despite the high standards of
many of the homes themselves, ‘high-rise’ flats have not proved satisfactory for
some types of tenant, particularly families with children, because of the lack of
safe and convenient play space. In some cases building maintenance has also
presented problems. Where there is need to build to a high density in inner city
areas it is now met by carefully grouped ‘low-rise’ blocks, (usually not more
than four storeys), including individual houses.
Conservation
Britain is one of the leading countries in the conservation movement. A wide
range of groups, including many voluntary organisations, are active in it. The
THE ENVIRONMENT
167
Historic
Buildings and
Conservation
Areas
Architecture
Council for Environmental Conservation is a national coalition of non¬
governmental organisations which focuses attention on major issues.
Lists of buildings of special architectural or historical interest are compiled, as
required by the planning Acts, by the Secretary of State for the Environment
and the Secretaries of State for Scotland and Wales; over 325,000 buildings are
already listed. It is against the law to demolish or alter the character of any listed
building without special consent from the local planning authority or the appro¬
priate Secretary of State; where consent is given to demolish a building, the
Royal Commission on Historical Monuments (for England) and similar bodies
for Scotland and Wales have an opportunity to make a photographic record of
the building. Emergency ‘building preservation notices’ can be served by the
local planning authority to protect buildings not yet listed.
Grants and loans for the repair or maintenance of buildings (or groups of
buildings) of outstanding interest can be made by the Secretaries of State (on
the recommendation of the appropriate Historic Buildings Council), and local
authorities can make grants and loans for any building of architectural or histo¬
ric interest even if it is not listed. The Architectural Heritage Fund, with the
capital derived from private contributions matched by contributions from the
Government, provides loans for local trusts to preserve historic buildings.
Local planning authorities have designated for special protection over 5,000
‘conservation areas’ of particular architectural or historic interest. Grants and
loans are available for works which make a significant contribution towards the
preservation or enhancement of such an area.
Maintaining royal parks (which are open to the public) and palaces is the
responsibility of the Secretaries of State for the Environment, Scotland and
Wales, as is the protection of ancient monuments, of which nearly 1,000 are in
their care. The Ancient Monument Boards recommend which monuments are
considered to be of national importance and therefore worthy of preservation.
The Government intends to set up a new agency by April 1984 to manage
ancient monuments and give grants for historic buildings in England; the
agency will incorporate the Ancient Monuments Board for England and the His¬
toric Buildings Council for England.
In Northern Ireland the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland
has 152 historic monuments in its care. The Department, acting on the advice
of the Northern Ireland Historic Buildings Council, is also responsible for listing
buildings of special architectural or historic interest, for designation of conser¬
vation areas, and for payment of grants.
Among the voluntary organisations which campaign for the preservation of
buildings are the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings and the
Ancient Monuments Society; the Georgian Group and the Scottish Georgian
Society; the Ulster Architectural Heritage Society; and the Victorian Society.
Besides helping to conserve the best buildings inherited from the past, the
Government encourages high standards in new building. The Secretary of
State for the Environment, in collaboration with the independent Royal Insti¬
tute of British Architects (RIBA), makes annual awards for good design in both
the public and private sectors, with categories for renovation as well as new
building. Wales has a similar but separate awards scheme. The Government
has also encouraged the use of architectural competitions, and has set an
example in the award of some of its own contracts. Royal Fine Art Commissions
for England and Wales and for Scotland advise government departments,
planning authorities and other public bodies on questions of public amenity or
artistic importance.
The RIBA, which is the principal professional body for architects, exercises
168
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Tree
Preservation
Green Belts
The Coast
control over standards in architectural education. The Royal Incorporation of
Architects in Scotland is allied to it. The Civic Trust, with associate trusts in
Scotland, Wales and north-east and north-west England, encourages high
standards in architecture and planning, and the protection and improvement of
the environment. The National Trust (for Places of Historic Interest or Natural
Beauty) is an independent charity which has more than one million members
and owns and protects about 200 historic buildings in addition to 230,000 hec¬
tares (560,000 acres) of land and large stretches of coastline. Scotland has its
own National Trust.
The local planning authorities have power to protect trees and woodlands in the
interest of amenity by means of tree preservation orders. When granting plann¬
ing permission for development, a local planning authority must, where
appropriate, impose conditions to secure the preservation or planting of trees.
Landowners generally must replace trees which die or are removed or
destroyed in contravention of a preservation order.
In order to restrict the further sprawl of large built-up areas, to prevent neigh¬
bouring towns merging into one another, and in some cases to preserve the
character of a town and the amenities of the countryside, ‘green belts’ (areas
where it is intended that the land should be left open and free from further
building development and where people can seek recreation) have been estab¬
lished or proposed on the fringes of certain urban areas. Much of London’s green
belt, for example, is agricultural land or woodland, some of which is used for
recreation. There are also areas specifically for recreational use, such as
country parks, public open spaces, playing fields and golf courses.
The maritime local planning authorities are responsible for planning land use
at the coast providing, for example, recreational facilities and amenities for holi¬
daymakers and local residents; at the same time they attempt to safeguard and
enhance the coast’s natural attractions and preserve areas of scientific interest.
A comprehensive study of the coastline of England and Wales, undertaken by
the Countryside Commission (see p 169) in 1966-70, recommended that
certain stretches of undeveloped coast of particular scenic beauty should be
treated as heritage coast. Jointly with local authorities, the Commission has
defined 35 of these coasts so far, protecting nearly 1,200 kilometres (750 miles).
In 1965 the National Trust launched its Enterprise Neptune campaign to raise
funds for the nation to acquire stretches of coastline of great natural beauty and
recreational value. More than £6 million has been raised so far and as a result the
Trust has under its protection 706 kilometres (440 miles) of coastline in
England and Wales. Some 128 kilometres (80 miles) of coast in Scotland are
protected by conservation agreements with the National Trust for Scotland. In
Northern Ireland 61 kilometres (38 miles) of coast and coastal path have been
acquired by the National Trust.
In exceptional cases economic arguments override conservation; develop¬
ment associated with North Sea oil and gas is occurring on remote and
unspoiled coastal areas in Scotland, for instance, but planning guidelines
drawn up by the Scottish Development Department aim to ensure that oil-
related activities are sited so as to make the best use of existing labour and
infrastructure and to minimise the effect on the coastline. Provision has also
been made for funds to be set aside for the restoration of sites once there is no
further need for them.
The protection of the coastline against erosion is administered centrally by
the Department of the Environment, the Welsh Office and the Scottish Office.
The Maritime local authorities, which have powers to carry out coastal protec-
THE ENVIRONMENT
169
Outdoor
Advertising
Countryside
Commissions
National Parks
and Areas of
Outstanding
Natural Beauty
tion works, are presented with difficult engineering problems and heavy costs,
but substantial grants from central funds may be made available.
The display of outdoor advertisements is controlled by planning legislation.
General consents have been issued for certain classes of advertisement but
these can be withdrawn in particular cases where there is a serious threat to
amenity or public safety. Consent for advertisements outside these classes
must be sought from the local planning authority. Rural areas and urban areas
requiring special protection can be designated as areas of special control which
impose more restrictive standards.
Two Countryside Commissions (one for England and Wales, the other for Scot¬
land) are responsible for encouraging and promoting measures to conserve and
enhance the natural beauty and amenity of the countryside and for encourag¬
ing the development of facilities for open-air recreation in the countryside.
These include the provision by local authorities (sometimes in association with
other bodies) and private individuals of country parks and picnic sites often
within easy reach of towns; the provision or improvement of recreational paths;
the encouragement of amenity tree-planting schemes; and the increased use of
reservoirs, canals and other waterways for bathing, sailing and other activities.
Some 168 country parks and 213 picnic sites have been recognised in England
and Wales by the Countryside Commission. In Scotland 23 country parks are
recognised and a large number of local authority and private sector schemes for
the provision of a variety of countryside facilities have been approved for grant
aid. The Commissions undertake research projects and experimental schemes,
working in consultation with local authorities and such bodies as the Nature
Conservancy Council (see p 170) and the Sports Councils (see p 375). The Com¬
missions give financial assistance to public, private and voluntary bodies and
individuals carrying out countryside recreation and amenity projects.
The Countryside Commission (for England and Wales) is empowered to
designate, for confirmation by the appropriate minister, national parks and
‘areas of outstanding natural beauty’; to define heritage coasts in conjunction
with local authorities (see p 168); and to make proposals for the creation of long¬
distance footpaths and bridleways. Ten national parks have been established
(shown on the map at the end of the book) covering 13,600 sq km (5,250 square
miles), or 9 per cent of the area of England and Wales. Some 33 areas of out¬
standing natural beauty have been designated and confirmed, covering 14,500
sq km (5,600 square miles).
The land in these designated areas generally remains privately owned, but
agreements or orders to secure additional public access may be made by local
authorities. Steps are taken to preserve and enhance the landscape’s natural
beauty by high standards of development control, and by positive measures, for
which grants are available, such as tree planting and the removal of eyesores. In
the national parks, other measures for the benefit of the public include the pro¬
vision of car parks, camping and caravan areas, and information centres. All
national parks and some other designated areas have warden services. Most
local authority expenditure on national parks is met by government grants.
In Northern Ireland the Ulster Countryside Committee advises the Depart¬
ment of the Environment on the preservation of amenities and the designation
of areas of outstanding natural beauty. Eight areas of outstanding natural
beauty have been designated, covering 259,500 hectares (641,000 acres) and
six areas are being managed as country parks and one as a regional park.
In Scotland there are no national parks as such, but there are 40 ‘national
scenic areas’, covering more than 1 million hectares (2.5 million acres), or 13
170
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
per cent of the country, where certain kinds of development are subject to con¬
sultation with the Countryside Commission for Scotland, and the Secretary of
State for Scotland, in the event of a disagreement. More than 98 per cent of the
land in Scotland is designated countryside within which the Commission may
provide grants for a wide range of countryside projects.
There are seven forest parks in Great Britain, covering some 243,000 hec¬
tares (600,000 acres) and administered by the Forestry Commission, and eight
in Northern Ireland administered by the Forest Service of the Department of
Agriculture. Camping and other recreational facilities are provided.
There are many voluntary organisations concerned to preserve the amenities
of the countryside; they include the Councils for the Protection of Rural
England and of Rural Wales, the Association for the Protection of Rural Scot¬
land and the Ulster Society for the Preservation of the Countryside.
County councils in England and Wales are required to prepare and keep under
review definitive maps showing public rights of way; they are also responsible
for keeping rights of way free from obstruction and signposted. If a path is not
shown on the map, a private citizen may claim that it is a public right of way if it
has been used and regarded as such without hindrance for at least 20 years.
Public footpaths are maintained by local authorities which also supervise land-
owners’ duties to repair stiles and gates. Local authorities in Great Britain can
create paths, close existing paths no longer needed for public use and divert
paths to meet the needs of either the public or landowners. Local planning
authorities can also convert minor roads into footpaths or bridleways to
improve the amenities of their area. There are 13 approved long-distance foot¬
paths and bridleways in England and Wales covering some 2,580 kms (1,600
miles). Voluntary organisations concerned with footpaths include the Open
Spaces Society, the Scottish Rights of Way Society and the Ramblers
Association.
There is no automatic right of public access to open country, although many
landowners permit such access more or less freely. Local planning authorities
can secure access by means of agreements with landowners; if agreements
cannot be obtained, authorities may acquire land or make orders for public
access. Similar powers cover Scotland, while comparable legislation is being
prepared in Northern Ireland.
Common land, a large proportion of which is open to the public, totals an
estimated 600,000 hectares (1-5 million acres) in England and Wales. (There is
no common land in Scotland or Northern Ireland.) This land is usually privately
owned, but people other than the owner may have various rights on or over it,
for example, of pasture for farm animals. Commons are protected by law and
cannot be built on or enclosed without the consent of the Secretaries of State for
the Environment or Wales.
Nature . The official body responsible for nature conservation in Great Britain is the
Conservation Nature Conservancy Council which has the functions of establishing, maintain¬
ing and managing nature reserves, advising the Government, providing
general information and advice, and commissioning or supporting research.
There are 193 national nature reserves covering 146,521 hectares, (362,061
acres). Some 4,150 sites of special scientific interest have been scheduled for
their flora, fauna or geological or physiographical features.
About 46,000 hectares (114,000 acres) of Forestry Commission land are
managed as areas in which nature conservation is the main object. Local
authorities have declared about 95 local nature reserves. Voluntary nature con¬
servation trusts and the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds play an impor¬
tant part in protecting wildlife, having established between them some 1,500
Local Footpaths
and Open
Country
THE ENVIRONMENT
171
Land
Reclamation
and Use
Land Registers
reserves. The trusts are affiliated to a parent organisation, the Royal Society for
Nature Conservation. The Royal Society for the Protection of Birds, with over
350,000 members, is the largest voluntary wildlife conservation body in
Europe.
In Northern Ireland the Nature Reserves Committee advises the Department
of the Environment for Northern Ireland on the designation of national nature
reserves and areas of scientific interest; there are 38 and 48 respectively.
The Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 extends the list of protected species,
restricts the introduction into the countryside of animals or plants not normally
found in the wild and affords greater protection for areas of special scientific
interest and other important habitats. Other provisions relate to areas of special
scientific interest, to the making of grants and loans by the Nature Conservancy
Council and to the powers of the Countryside Commission with respect to
experimental schemes. The Act also contains a number of measures designed
to enhance and promote the national parks and amends the law relating to
public rights of way. In Northern Ireland a wildlife protection order is being
prepared which would bring legislation into line with the rest of Britain on
species and habitat protection.
Derelict land, often concentrated in places associated with nineteenth-century
industrial development, presents special problems to planners. It includes
mineral waste tips, old mineral workings, obsolete industrial buildings and
disused railways and docks. In England most derelict land reclamation is
undertaken, with the help of central government grant, by local authorities,
which have the power to acquire derelict land and bring it back into use or
improve its appearance. Grants are also available to people and public bodies
other than local authorities. Planned expenditure on the derelict land program¬
mes in 1983-84 is £75 million, compared with £45 • 7 million in 1982-83.
In Scotland and Wales responsibility for derelict land reclamation rests with
the respective development agencies, which may acquire and reclaim land,
employ local authorities as their agents (in Scotland) or make grants to local
authorities for the purpose (in Wales). In Northern Ireland grants may be paid to
landowners who restore or improve derelict sites.
To prevent new dereliction, planning controls require that when permission
is given for mineral working various measures must be taken to minimise the
disturbance caused by the work and to secure whatever restoration is
practicable, either progressively or when working ceases. The use of land for
disposal of waste materials is also subject to conditions restricting height or
requiring treatment on completion.
The amount of agricultural land taken for development has been steadily
reduced from about 18,000 hectares (45,000 acres) a year between 1965 and
1970 to about 9,000 hectares (23,000 acres) a year between 1975 and 1980.
In England the Government has instituted, and made available for inspection,
registers of under-used land held by local authorities, nationalised industries
and other public bodies; some 41,000 hectares (108,000 acres) had been identi¬
fied by January 1983. There is power to direct a public body to dispose of regis¬
tered land. Registers are also in preparation for certain areas of Wales.
Control of Pollution
Government measures to control environmental pollution, in which industry
and voluntary organisations co-operate, are long established, and are seen as
complementary to the planning system and the various measures to conserve
amenities and the country’s heritage.
172
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Administration
The Land
Recycling and
Materials
Reclamation
The Control of Pollution Act 1974, which applies to England, Scotland and
Wales, sets out a wide range of powers and duties for local and water authorities,
including control over wastes, air and water pollution and noise, and contains
important provisions on the release of information to the public on environ¬
mental conditions. In particular, it introduced a new system for the comprehen¬
sive planning of waste disposal operations so as to ensure that disposal is
carried out to satisfactory standards and that where practicable waste mater¬
ials are recovered and recycled. The Act also increased the penalties for a large
number of pollution offences. The provisions relating to noise and air pollution
are fully in force as are a substantial number of those relating to waste on land;
most of the part dealing with water pollution is being implemented. Similar
legislation applies in Northern Ireland.
Responsibility for the control of pollution is shared by various central
government departments, local and water authorities and statutory agencies.
Industry co-operates with these authorities, and voluntary organisations help
to focus public interest on the process of control. An independent standing
Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution advises the Government on
national and international matters concerning the pollution of the
environment, on the adequacy of research and on the future possibilities of
danger to the environment. In England and Wales the Secretary of State for the
Environment has a co-ordinating role concerning pollution matters as a whole,
exercised in England through a Central Directorate on Environmental Pollu¬
tion within his department and for the Secretary of State for Wales through the
Welsh Office. In Scotland a similar role is exercised by the Secretary of State for
Scotland through the Scottish Development Department.
Local authorities are responsible for matters such as collection and disposal
of domestic wastes; control of air pollution from domestic and certain industrial
premises; and noise abatement measures. Sewerage and sewage treatment and
disposal are the responsibilities of water authorities in England and Wales, of
local authorities in Scotland and of the Department of the Environment in
Northern Ireland. The regional water authorities in England, the Welsh Water
Authority, the river purification boards and islands councils in Scotland and
the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland are responsible for
control of water pollution.
The main risks of land pollution lie in the indiscriminate dumping of waste
materials on land, careless disposal of pesticides and chemicals, fall-out of
materials from the atmosphere and the deposition of materials from flood-
water. The use of sewage sludge on farms, too, involves risks as well as benefits
to the land.
The Control of Pollution Act places a duty on waste disposal authorities
(county councils and the Greater London Council in England, for example) to
ensure that there are adequate arrangements to dispose of controlled wastes. It
requires them to draw up and revise periodically a waste disposal plan and
establishes a licensing system for all waste disposal sites, treatment plants and
storage facilities receiving controlled wastes. In addition, it provides for a more
intensive control system for certain specially hazardous or difficult wastes.
It is a criminal offence to leave litter in any public place in the open air or to
dump rubbish except in designated places.
The Government encourages the reclamation and recycling of waste materials
wherever this is practicable and economic in order to reduce imports and waste
disposal costs and to help to conserve natural resources. Industry already
makes considerable use of reclaimed waste material such as metals, paper and
THE ENVIRONMENT
173
Water Pollution
Marine
Pollution
textiles. Local authorities collect about 200,000 tonnes of waste paper and
about 100,000 tonnes of ferrous scrap annually. In an increasing number of
areas there are ‘bottle banks’ where the public can deposit used glass con¬
tainers. Waste disposal authorities are required under the Control of Pollution
Act to take full account of opportunities for waste reclamation in drawing up
their waste disposal plans. The Department of the Environment has provided
financial and technical help to South Yorkshire and Tyne and Wear County
Councils for two full-scale prototype plants for the mechanical sorting of house¬
hold refuse at Doncaster and Byker. Voluntary organisations also organise col¬
lections of waste material.
There has been a steady and significant improvement in water quality: the level
of pollution in the tidal Thames, for example, has been reduced to a quarter of
the 1950s’ level and over 100 different kinds of fish have been identified there
since 1964. Discharges of polluting matter into rivers, lakes, estuaries and some
coastal waters are already controlled by law. Powers will be extended to lakes
and to underground and all coastal waters when the Control of Pollution Act is
fully implemented. More than 95 per cent of the population is provided with
main drainage, and public authority sewage treatment works serve over four-
fifths of the population — a very high proportion by international standards.
Control of marine pollution from ships is based largely on international conven¬
tions drawn up under the auspices of the International Maritime Organisation, a
United Nations agency with headquarters in London, and implemented for
British ships by domestic legislation. The Prevention of Oil Pollution Act 1971
makes it an offence for ships of any nationality to discharge oil into British terri¬
torial waters and for British registered ships to discharge persistent oil any¬
where at sea, except in accordance with very stringent regulations.
To deal with spillages of oil or chemicals at sea, which may cause coastal
pollution or threaten wildlife, the Department of Transport has a Marine Pollu¬
tion Control Unit and can also call upon the resources of the Marine Survey and
Coastguard services. The main treatment method is to spray dispersant from
aircraft or surface vessels, and emergency cargo transfer equipment is available
to remove oil from a damaged tanker. Local authorities have a primary role in
dealing with oil and chemical pollution of beaches and inshore waters, and
receive government advice and support.
The development of the offshore oil industry has brought an increased risk of
oil pollution in the North Sea. Offshore operators are required to ensure that oil
does not escape into the sea and are also expected to have contingency plans for
dealing with oil spills. Exemption from the 1971 Act, subject to strict controls
laid down by the Department of Energy, is normally granted for offshore install¬
ation discharges into the sea of water separated from crude oil, since it is not
possible to remove all traces of oil. The Department of the Environment, the
Welsh Office, the Scottish Development Department and the Northern Ireland
Department of the Environment have powers to grant exemptions subject to
similar controls for discharges from land-based sources.
Under the Dumping at Sea Act 1974 a licence has to be obtained for the per¬
manent deposit of any substance or article into tidal waters and the sea.
Dumping at sea is permitted on the basis of the scientific criteria set out in the
annexes to the Oslo Convention (International Convention for the Prevention of
Marine Pollution by Dumping from Ships and Aircraft 1972) and the London
Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping Wastes and
Other Matter 1972.
174
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Clean Air
Noise
Responsibility for clean air rests primarily with local authorities. Under the pro¬
visions of the Clean Air Acts 1956 and 1968 they may declare ‘smoke control
areas’ within which the emission of smoke from chimneys constitutes an
offence. About two-thirds of the premises in conurbations are now covered by
smoke control orders. Emissions from most industrial premises are also subject
to the control of local authorities under the Clean Air Acts. The emission of dark
smoke from any trade or industrial premises or from the chimney of any
building is in general prohibited, and new furnaces must be capable as far as
practicable of smokeless operation. The height of the chimney serving a new
furnace must generally be approved by the local authority, and approved grit
and dust arrestment plant has to be installed. Regulations have been made
which prescribe specific limits to the quantities of grit and dust which may be
emitted from certain furnaces. Industrial premises that give rise to particularly
offensive or dangerous emissions are, in England and Wales, under the control
of the Industrial Air Pollution Inspectorate of the Health and Safety Executive
(p 305). In Scotland this function is discharged by the Industrial Pollution
Inspectorate. The Inspectorates require the best practicable means to be used to
prevent or abate emissions. Similar legislation and controls apply in Northern
Ireland. Controls are also in force on emissions from motor vehicles, such as the
maximum permitted lead content of petrol which will be reduced to 0-15
grammes per litre by 1985. The Government has accepted the recommendation
of the Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution that lead be removed
entirely by the end of the 1980s.
Considerable progress has been made towards the achievement of cleaner air
and a better environment, especially in the last 20 years or so. Total emissions
and average concentration of smoke in the air have fallen by 80 per cent since
1960. The domestic smoke control programme has been particularly important
in achieving this result. London no longer has the dense smoke-laden ‘smogs’ of
the 1950s and in central London winter sunshine has been increasing since the
1940s when average hours a day were about 40 per cent less than at Kew in outer
London; the levels are now virtually the same. Similar improvement has been
achieved in other cities including Glasgow and Sheffield. Since 1960 average
concentrations of sulphur dioxide in towns have fallen by over 60 per cent.
The Control of Pollution Act 1974 (and similar legislation in Northern Ireland)
requires local authorities to inspect their areas for noise nuisance and gives
them the power to deal with it. It also enables them to designate ‘noise
abatement zones’ within which registered levels of noise from classified
premises may not be increased without their permission. The Act contains
specific provisions to control noise from construction and demolition sites.
Transport is one of the main offenders in noise pollution, and control
measures are aimed at reducing noise at source, through requirements limiting
the noise that aircraft and motor vehicles may make, and by protecting people
from its effects. The Motor Vehicles (Construction and Use) Regulations 1978 set
out the permissible noise levels for various classes of vehicles when new and
when in use; more stringent limits apply for vehicles coming into use from 1983
onwards and further reductions in noise limits are under consideration.
Under the Land Compensation Act 1973 and similar legislation in Scotland
compensation is payable for loss in property values caused by physical factors
including noise arising from the use of new or improved public works such as
roads and airports. Regulations made under the Acts also enable highway
authorities to carry out or make grants for insulation of homes subject to
specified levels of increased noise caused by new or improved roads. Noise insu¬
lation may also be provided where construction work for new roads is likely
seriously to affect nearby homes.
THE ENVIRONMENT
175
Radioactivity
Noise emission levels of most aircraft on the United Kingdom Register of Civil
Aircraft are regulated in accordance with standards agreed by the International
Civil Aviation Organisation. Subsonic jets acquired by British operators after
September 1978 must already meet the noise certification criteria and all those
on the United Kingdom Register will have to do so from 1 January 1986. Various
operational restrictions have been introduced to reduce noise disturbance
further, and people living in the worst affected areas round a number of airports
may be eligible for noise insulation grants.
In Britain radiation resulting from industrial and other processes represents
only a small fraction of that to which the population is exposed from the natural
environment. Nevertheless, that fraction is subject to stringent control because
of possible effects on health or longer-term genetic effects. Under the Radioac¬
tive Substances Act 1960 users of radioactive materials other than those subject
to licence under the Nuclear Installations Act 1965 must be registered by the
appropriate department and authorisation is also required for the disposal of
radioactive waste, with exemption for very minor users and very small quanti¬
ties of waste. The Health and Safety Executive, through its Nuclear Install¬
ations Inspectorate, is the authority concerned with the granting of nuclear site
licences for commercial nuclear installations. No installation may be con¬
structed or operated without a licence granted by the Executive. The National
Radiological Protection Board established under the Radiological Protection
Act 1970 provides an authoritative point of reference on radiological protection.
Various methods are used to store radioactive wastes, depending primarily
upon their physical form and radioactivity. Wastes of sufficiently low radioacti¬
vity are dispersed safely direct to the environment. For those of higher activity a
comprehensive, international research programme is being carried out with
government assistance and with the participation of the nuclear industry into
methods of treatment, storage, transport and disposal. In a White Paper1
published in 1982 the Government gave formal recognition to the Nuclear
Industry Radioactive Waste Executive to co-ordinate the industry’s plans for
the management and disposal of low and intermediate level radioactive waste.
Radioactive Waste Management, Cmnd. 8607, HMSO,£2.70, ISBNO 11 1860706.
9 The Churches
The Church of
England
Everyone in Britain has the right of religious freedom (in teaching, worship and
observance) without interference from the community or the State. Churches
and religious societies may own property, conduct schools, and propagate their
beliefs in speech and writing. There is no religious or denominational bar to the
holding of public office.
Clergy of the established churches of England and Scotland work in services
administered by the State, such as the armed forces, national hospitals and
prisons, and are paid a salary by the State. Clergy of other denominations are
also appointed. Voluntary schools provided by any religious denomination may
be wholly or partly maintained from public funds.
There is no precise or uniform information about the number of church
adherents since no inquiries are normally made about religious beliefs in
censuses or other official returns, and each church adopts its own criteria in
counting its members. Membership figures in this chapter are therefore
approximate.
The established Church of England’s relationship with the State is one of
mutual obligation - privileges accorded to the Church balanced by certain
duties which it must fulfil. The Sovereign must always be a member of the
Church, and promises to uphold it; Church of England archbishops, bishops
and deans are appointed by the Sovereign on the advice of the Prime Minister;
all clergy take an oath of allegiance to the Crown. The Church can regulate its
own worship. The two archbishops (of Canterbury and York), the bishops of
London, Durham and Winchester, and 21 other bishops (according to their
seniority as diocesan bishops) sit in the House of Lords. Clergy of the Church
(together with those of the Church of Scotland, the Church of Ireland and the
Roman Catholic Church) are not allowed to sit in the House of Commons.
The Church has two provinces: Canterbury, comprising 30 dioceses (includ¬
ing the Diocese of Europe) and York, 14 dioceses. The Archbishop of Canterbury
is ‘Primate of All England’, and the Archbishop of York ‘Primate of England’.
(The following information does not include the Diocese of Europe.) The dio¬
ceses are divided into 13,600 parishes. In 1981 it was estimated that, in the two
provinces, some 257,000 persons were baptized into the Church; of these
218,000 were under one year old (37 per cent of live births). In the same year
there were 90,300 confirmations. Attendances at services on a normal Sunday
are around 1 • 2 million. Many people who rarely, if ever, attend services, never¬
theless regard themselves as Church members (amounting perhaps to some 60
per cent of the population).
The central governing body, the General Synod, has both spiritual authority
and legislative and administrative powers; and bishops, clergy and lay
members are involved in decisions. Certain important issues must be referred
for the approval of the dioceses before being decided by the Synod. Lay
members are associated with church government in the parishes through the
ancient office of churchwarden and the modern parochial church councils.
The General Synod is the centre of an administrative system dealing with
such matters as education, mission, inter-church relations, social questions,
THE CHURCHES
177
The Anglican
Communion
The Church of
Scotland
The Free
Churches
recruitment and training for the ministry, church work at home and overseas
and the care of church buildings, particularly those of historic and architectural
interest. The Synod is also concerned with church schools, church colleges of
education, theological colleges, and establishments for training women in pas¬
toral work.
The Church has its own courts whose jurisdiction today extends only to
matters of purely ecclesiastical concern.
Church finance is administered locally by the parishes and the dioceses, with
contributions to a central fund for the maintenance of central services, includ¬
ing capital expenditure on training and theological colleges and grants for
training candidates for ordination. The State makes no direct financial contri¬
bution to church expenses. The Church’s endowment income is mainly admin¬
istered by the Church Commissioners, the body largely responsible for the
payment of clergy stipends and pensions.
The Anglican Communion comprises 28 autonomous provinces in Britain and
overseas and three regional councils overseas with a total membership of about
65 million. In the British Isles, there are four provinces: the Church of England
(established), the Church in Wales, the Scottish Episcopal Church in Scotland,
and the Church of Ireland.
Every ten years the Lambeth Conference meets for unofficial consultation
among all Anglican bishops (the last meeting was in 1978); presided over by the
Archbishop of Canterbury, it has no executive authority, but enjoys great
prestige, and its findings on doctrine, discipline, relations with other
communions, and attitudes to political and social questions are widely studied.
The Anglican Consultative Council (an assembly of laymen and clergy as well
as bishops which meets every two or three years) is designed to provide consul¬
tations within the Anglican Communion and to serve as an instrument of
common action. The Council last met in 1981.
The Church of Scotland has a presbyterian form of government. Its status as the
national church derives from the Treaty of Union 1707 and the Church of Scot¬
land Act 1921 which confirmed its complete freedom in all spiritual matters. It
appoints its own officers, and its decisions on questions of doctrine and disci¬
pline are not subject to parliamentary discussion or modification.
All ministers have equal status, each of 1,805 churches being governed locally
by the Kirk Session, consisting of the minister and the elected elders of the
Church; above the Kirk Session is the Court of the Presbytery, then the Court of
the Synod, and finally the General Assembly, consisting of elected ministers
and elders, which meets annually under the presidency of an elected moderator
who serves for one year. The Sovereign is represented at the General Assembly
by the Lord High Commissioner. The adult communicant membership of the
Church of Scotland is estimated at almost 919,000.
The expression ‘Free Churches’ is commonly used to describe those Protestant
churches in England and Scotland which, unlike the Church of England and the
Church of Scotland, are not established. In the course of history they have
developed their own convictions in church order and worship.
The Methodist Church, the largest of the Free Churches with nearly 500,000
adult full members, originated in the eighteenth century following the evangeli¬
cal revival under J ohn W esley, and is based on a 1932 union of most of the sepa¬
rate Methodist Churches. The Methodist Churches which did not join the union
include the Independent Methodists (4,500 members) and the Wesleyan
Reform Union (with some 5,000 members). The Methodist Church in Ireland
has nearly 19,000 members in Northern Ireland.
178
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Roman
Catholic
Church
The Baptists are nearly all grouped in associations of churches, most of which
belong to the Baptist Union of Great Britain and Ireland (formed in 1813), with a
total membership of about 168,600; in addition, there are separate Baptist
Unions for Scotland, Wales and Ireland and other Baptist churches.
The United Reformed Church, with some 144,000 members, was formed in
1972 when the Congregational Church in England and Wales (the oldest com¬
munity of dissenters in Britain) and the Presbyterian Church of England mer¬
ged-the first transdenominational union of churches in Britain since the
Reformation in the sixteenth century. In 1981 there was a further union with the
Re-formed Association of the Churches of Christ.
Among the other Free Churches are the Presbyterian Church in Ireland (with
some 132,000 regular communicants in Northern Ireland); the Presbyterian (or
Calvinistic Methodist) Church of Wales, which arose from the revivalist
movement led in 1735 by Howell Harris; the Union of Welsh Independents; the
Free Church of Scotland; the United Free Church of Scotland; the Free Presby¬
terian Church of Scotland; the Reformed Presbyterian Church of Scotland; the
Reformed Presbyterian Church of Ireland; and the Non-Subscribing Presby¬
terian Church of Ireland.
Other Protestant denominations include: the Churches of Christ (known also
in the United States as Disciples of Christ), which have been an organised com¬
munity in Britain since early in the nineteenth century; the British Province of
the Moravian Church, which is an international missionary church; the Free
Church of England (or Reformed Episcopal Church), which was formed in 1844
as a direct result of the Oxford Movement; and the Congregational Federation,
formed from Congregational churches which did not enter the United Reformed
Church. There are also the Pentecostalists, who are increasing in numbers.
Their two main bodies operating in Britain are the Assemblies of God and the
Elim Pentecostal Church, many of whose members are of West Indian origin.
There are a number of small West Indian churches, whose membership
together amounts to well over 85,000 and various African churches with a
membership of over 20,000.
The Religious Society of Friends (Quakers), with about 18,300 members in
Britain and 444 places for worship, came into being in the middle of the seven¬
teenth century under the leadership of George Fox and works for peace and the
relief of suffering in many parts of the world.
The Salvation Army, founded in Britain in 1865, has since spread to 85 other
countries and has a strength of about 2 • 5 million. Within Britain it has some
60,000 active members operating from more than 1,000 centres of worship.
Believing in a very practical expression of Christian concern, the Salvation
Army has 200 centres to help people in need.
There are also a number of other religious organisations with churches or
assemblies in Britain, including the Unitarian and Free Christian Churches, the
Jehovah’s Witnesses, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints (the
Mormon Church); the Christian Scientists with 262 branch churches and soci¬
eties in the British Isles; and the Spiritualists with 900 churches and societies.
The Roman Catholic hierarchy in England and Wales, which became tempora¬
rily extinct during the sixteenth century, was restored in 1850; the Scottish hier-
archy became extinct in the early seventeenth century and was restored in
1878. There are now seven Roman Catholic provinces in Great Britain, each
under an archbishop, 30 episcopal dioceses, and over 3,000 parishes. In
Northern Ireland, there are six dioceses, some of which have territory partly in
the Irish Republic. It is estimated that there are some 5 • 7 million adherents to
the Roman Catholic faith in Britain. In 1982 Pope John Paul II paid a pastoral
visit to Britain, the first by a reigning pontiff.
THE CHURCHES
179
Jewry
Other
Religious
Communities
Co-operation
among the
Churches
The Roman Catholic Church attaches great importance to the education of its
children and requires its members to try to bring up their children in the Catho¬
lic faith. Many schools for Catholic children are staffed by members of the relig¬
ious orders who also undertake other social work such as nursing, child care,
and the conduct of homes for old people.
Jews first settled in England at the time of the Norman conquest, but the com¬
munity in Britain dates from 1656; consisting of some 400,000 people, includ¬
ing both Sephardi (originally from Spain and Portugal) and Ashkenazi (from
Germany and Eastern Europe), it has become one of the largest groups of Jews
in Europe. The community is divided into two schools of thought: the Orthodox,
to which about 80 per cent of practising Jews belong; and the Reform, which
originated in 1840 and was followed in 1901 by the Liberal Jewish movement.
The Chief Rabbi is the head of the largest group (Ashkenazi) within Orthodox
Jewry; the Haham is the head of the Sephardi group. Jewish congregations in
Britain number about 350. Jewish denominational schools are attended by
about one in four Jewish children.
Christian communities of foreign origin, including the Orthodox, Lutheran and
Reformed Churches of various European countries, together with the Arme¬
nian Church, have established their own centres of worship, particularly in
London.
Immigration into Britain during the past 30 years has created substantial
non-Christian communities. There are now an estimated 1.5 million Muslims in
the country, and there are large Hindu and Sikh communities. The Islamic
Cultural Centre (and London Central Mosque) on the edge of Regent’s Park, is
the most important Muslim institution in the Western World, and there are
mosques in almost every town and city where Muslims have settled. The
Hindus and the Sikhs have several hundred temples in Britain, and arrange¬
ments have been made in places of work to allow the members of non-Christian
religions to follow their religious observances. There is a Buddhist Society, with
its headquarters in London, which publicises the principles of Buddhism and
encourages their study and practice. It adheres to no one school of Buddhism.
The British Council of Churches, with representatives or observers from all the
main Christian churches in the British Isles, facilitates common action and
seeks to further Christian unity. It works through five divisions: Christian Aid
(which has a separate constitution); Conference for World Mission; Ecumenical
Affairs; Community Affairs; and International Affairs.
The Free Church Federal Council (which has a concordat with the British
Council of Churches) comprises most of the Free Churches of England and
Wales. It promotes unity and joint action among the Free Churches and is a
channel for communication with central and local government.
The permanent Anglican-Roman Catholic Commission explores points of
possible unity between the two communions.
The Anglican and the main Free Churches also participate in the World
Council of Churches (of which the British Council of Churches is an associated
national council) which links together some 300 churches in over 100 countries
for co-operation and the study of common problems. The Council of Christians
and Jews works for better understanding among members of the two religions
and deals with problems in the social field. The British Council of Churches has
also established a Committee for Relations with People of Other Faiths.
The Sharing of Church Buildings Act 1969 enables agreements to be made by
two or more churches for the sharing of church buildings.
10 National
Economy
Britain is a trading nation, exporting about 30 per cent of its total output of
goods and services. This proportion is matched among comparable developed
countries only by the Federal Republic of Germany and Italy and is well above
those for Japan and the United States.1
Britain is the world’s fourth largest exporter of visible goods (after the United
States, the Federal Republic of Germany and Japan), accounting for about 5 per
cent of the total. It is one of the world’s largest importers of agricultural
products, raw materials and semi-manufactures and is among the largest
exporters of aerospace products, motor vehicles, electrical equipment, finished
textiles and most types of machinery. Britain is self-sufficient in oil in overall
terms.
The British economy is primarily based on private enterprise and
government policy is aimed at encouraging the private sector. There are some
major public corporations, accounting for about 8 per cent of all employees,
while the public sector as a whole employs about 30 per cent.
The traditional economic strength of Britain, as a pioneer in the Industrial
Revolution, was based on manufacturing. More recently there has been a
decline in the relative importance of manufacturing (which now accounts for
only about 27 per cent of the employed labour force) and a rise in that of services,
a pattern in evidence throughout the industrialised world. The trend has coin¬
cided with a rise in the relative importance of manufacturing in the developing
countries.
Less than 2 • 5 per cent of Britain’s employed labour force is engaged in agri¬
culture—a lower proportion than in any other major industrial country.
However, because of a high level of productivity, Britain is able to produce
nearly two-thirds of its own food.
Britain’s energy position has been transformed in the last decade. With the
discovery and exploitation of oil and natural gas from the Continental Shelf
under the North Sea, the country has become self-sufficient in energy in net
terms. The output of the petroleum and natural gas industry amounted to over
£ 15,000 million in 1982, equivalent to about 6 per cent of GDP. Substantial rev¬
enues from oil and gas taxation have helped to ease the pressure of government
borrowing and other forms of taxation, thus making an important contribution
to reducing inflation; there have also been considerable benefits to the balance
of payments. Coal has traditionally played an important role as a source of
energy and still accounts for some 36 per cent of Britain’s needs; the value of
Britain’s coal reserves has been enhanced by the substantial increase in world
oil prices since 1973.
Between 1972 and 1982 the proportion of Britain’s visible exports going to
other Commonwealth countries fell from 18 per cent to 13 per cent while that
going to other Community countries rose from 31 per cent to 42 per cent. Trade
with the newly industrialising countries, including Singapore, South Korea,
Taiwan and Malaysia, has also risen substantially.
1 On the basis of relative prices in the major industrial countries, Britain was tenth in terms of
GDP per head in 1980.
NATIONAL ECONOMY
181
ECONOMIC
BACKGROUND
Post-war
Developments
Inflation and
Competitive¬
ness
The broad historical pattern of Britain’s overseas trade has been a deficit on
visible trade offset by a surplus on invisible transactions (but there was a
surplus on visible trade in 1980-82); these include, for example, transactions
relating to international investment, travel, shipping and financial services. In
1982 earnings from invisibles comprised over one-third of Britain’s earnings on
current account. In 1981 Britain accounted for over 8 per cent of world invisible
receipts (excluding government transactions). The significant contribution
made by invisibles to the current account is largely a reflection of Britain’s posi¬
tion as a major financial centre. The banks, insurance underwriters and
brokers, and other financial institutions of the City of London provide world¬
wide financial services, and the City contains perhaps the most comprehensive
and advanced capital market in the world.
In the period since the end of the second world war in 1945 there has been a
marked rise in living standards, the emergence of new industries and the
renewal and improvement of much of the country’s infrastructure. At the same
time, in spite of short periods of rapid economic expansion, the rate of growth
has been low in comparison with the rates in most other industrialised
countries, averaging 2-3 per cent annually up to 1973 but only about 1 per cent
in subsequent years. Although attention has been paid throughout the period to
achieving higher levels of exports (with considerable success, the proportion of
GDP exported rising from under 20 per cent in 1950 to 32 per cent in 1982), the
economy, during the years of fixed exchange rates and before the growth of
North Sea oil production, was vulnerable to balance-of-payments problems,
with a strong rise in imports at times of expansion. The effects bore most heavily
on the reserves of gold and foreign currencies and led repeatedly to the impo¬
sition of restraints on home demand, as part of a pattern which became known
as ‘stop-go’.
Since the late 1960s the rise in wage and price inflation has had adverse effects
on competitiveness, profitability and business confidence. This has been
associated with an increase in unemployment over the same period. At various
times governments have attempted to control pay rises by means of voluntary
or statutory controls on incomes and also, periodically, on prices but such poli¬
cies have been largely unsuccessful. Following the five-fold increase in world oil
prices in 1973-74, which was accommodated by a rapid growth in money
supply and public spending, the annual inflation rate reached a peak of 24 per
cent in 1975. After falling into single figures in 1978 and early 1979, inflation
again rose rapidly, reaching 22 per cent in May 1980, partly as a result of the
doubling of oil prices in 1979. The growth in earnings also accelerated, particu¬
larly in the 1979-80 pay round when they rose by 22 per cent. Subsequently,
firm monetary and fiscal policies, assisted by the general weakness of world
commodity prices in the early 1980s, have resulted in a much reduced rate of
inflation, to 5 • 1 per cent in September 1983. Pay settlements have also moder¬
ated sharply; average earnings rose by an underlying rate of about 7 per cent in
the year to July 1983.
In the later 1970s British manufacturers experienced a sharp loss of interna¬
tional cost competitiveness due to the appreciation of sterling in 1978-80 and
much more rapid increases in unit labour costs than in other countries. Sterling
then depreciated, partly as a result of the weakness in the world oil market, until
early 1983. This depreciation, together with greater moderation in pay
settlements and a substantial rise in manufacturing productivity since the end
of 1980, led to a considerable improvement in Britain’s cost competitiveness; by
the second quarter of 1983 more than half the competitiveness lost between the
first quarters of 1979 and 1981 had been regained.
182
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Output
and
Employment
Overseas
Sector
Oil and Gas
The rate of growth of industrial output and, within this, of manufacturing
output, has declined in recent years (apart from North Sea oil, see below) rela¬
tive to the rest of the economy. Industrial output rose by some 3 per cent a year
in the decade or so to 1973 (much the same as for the economy as a whole) but
has since fallen. The relative decline partly reflects strong competition in over¬
seas markets from newly industrialising as well as from other developed coun¬
tries. Many industries have undergone considerable reorganisation to improve
competitiveness. A number of them, such as aerospace, chemicals, oil, gas and
electronics, have gained strength while textiles and some other traditional
industries, including steel and shipbuilding, have contracted, shifting empha¬
sis to more profitable or specialised products. Regional policies promoted by
successive governments have encouraged the development of newer manufac¬
turing and service employment in assisted areas. The policies are now directed
more selectively to benefit areas of greatest need.
Industrial output fell by about 14 per cent between the second quarter of 1979
(the previous cyclical peak) and the second quarter of 1981 (the trough of the
current recession), the fall being most pronounced in the manufacturing and
construction industries. Industrial output improved gradually in the second
half of 1981, during most of 1982 and in early 1983. By the second quarter of
1983 total output was about 2 per cent higher than a year earlier.
Although total employment was still falling in early 1983, the rate of decline
was generally smaller than it had been in late 1980 and early 1981. Other labour
market indicators have improved. Overtime in manufacturing has risen and
short-time working has fallen. The number of registered vacancies in August
1983 was nearly double that at the low point in June 1981.
Britain’s overseas trade performance fluctuated during the 1970s. In general,
imports of food, energy, raw materials and manufactured goods were greater
than visible exports, which were largely manufactured goods. This deficit on
visible trade was wholly or partly offset by a surplus on invisibles, which cover
earnings from services, together with interest, profits and dividends, and trans¬
fers. However, in the period 1980-82 there was a surplus on visible trade
(largely due to a rapidly growing surplus on oil). Between 1981 and 1982 exports
and imports both rose in volume (imports particularly sharply to meet the need
for stocks).
The strength of overseas invisible earnings has been maintained by the conti¬
nued adaptation to new conditions and growth in world markets of insurance,
banking, tourism, construction, consultancy and other services.
The substantial surpluses on current account imply corresponding increases
in Britain’s net external assets. Since the abolition of exchange controls in 1979
investment outflows, particularly portfolio investment, have increased
sharply; British banks’ sterling lending abroad has also been at a high level
since that time.
The beneficial effects of growing North Sea oil and gas production on the
balance of payments have been apparent over the second half of the 1970s and
the early 1980s, a deficit on the oil account of nearly £4,000 million in 1976
having been turned into a favourable balance of over £4,600 million by 1982. In
1974 oil accounted for some 4 per cent of Britain ’ s visible exports and 19 per cent
of visible imports; by 1982 the proportions were 19 per cent and 11 per cent
respectively. Exports, mainly to other European Community countries,
account for more than half of domestic production. They are partly offset in
balance-of-payments terms by imports of other grades of crude oil from the
Middle East and elsewhere.
North Sea oil spared Britain the fall in real national income which other
NATIONAL ECONOMY
183
Sterling
ECONOMIC
POLICY
ECONOMIC
MANAGEMENT
industrial countries suffered following the oil price rises of the 1970s. It has
helped to ease the task of controlling public sector borrowing, contributing to
the Government’s strategy of reducing interest rates and inflation. Without
North Sea oil, the benefits of which are expected to continue for some time,
non-oil taxes would have had to be higher or public expenditure lower.
During periods of high world demand for oil the pound has been strong in
foreign exchange markets, reflecting Britain’s position as a net oil exporter.
During 1979 and 1980 sterling appreciated markedly but has since fallen back.
The world price of oil fell sharply in early 1983 and, with it, the value of the
pound against the dollar (Britain then being the world’s fifth largest oil pro¬
ducer). Government policy is to seek to moderate undue fluctuations in the level
of sterling but to allow the rate to be determined primarily by the balance of
market forces. The effective exchange rate index, which shows changes in the
value of a currency as a weighted average of changes in its exchange rate
against other individual currencies, was 85.1 in August 1983 (1975 = 100).
The Government’s objective over the medium term is to continue reducing inf¬
lation and to secure a lasting improvement in the performance of the British
economy, so providing the foundations for substantial growth in output and
employment. The financial framework within which policy is operated is set out
in the Government’s medium-term financial strategy. Control of the money
supply is an essential part of it, though, in judging the rate of monetary growth
needed to reduce inflation, the Government takes account of structural influ¬
ences on the different monetary aggregates and the behaviour of other financial
indicators including the exchange rate. The target range for the growth of both
broad and narrow monetary aggregates in 1982-83 was successfully met. The
range for 1983-84 is 7 -11 per cent. Fiscal policy is designed to be consistent with
this monetary framework: over a period of years, a reduction in public sector
borrowing as a proportion of GDP is important in order to leave room for lower
interest rates in both nominal and real terms. The Government intends to conti¬
nue to pursue policies designed to strengthen performance of the economy such
as a reduction in direct taxation, the encouragement of small firms and new
enterprises, support for the development and application of new technologies,
the provision of a more effective framework for industrial relations and the
removal of administrative controls on prices, wages, dividends and outward
capital movements.
The Treasury has prime responsibility for the formulation and conduct of
economic policy, which also involves the Departments of Trade and Industry,
Employment, Energy, the Environment and Transport and the Ministry of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food. Other bodies are concerned with specific
aspects of economic policy. These include the Bank of England (the central
bank), the National Economic Development Council, which brings together
representatives of government, management and trade unions under the chair¬
manship of the Prime Minister, the Office of Fair Trading (see p 200) and the
Monopolies and Mergers Commission (see p 200).
On matters of major public policy such as the broad economic strategy, and
on the economic problems it faces, the Government makes known its purposes
and keeps in touch with developments throughout the economy by means of
informal and continuous links with the chief industrial, financial, labour and
other interests. Final responsibility for the broad lines of economic policy rests
with the Cabinet.
184
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
NATIONAL
INCOME AND
EXPENDITURE
Output
Use of
Resources
Personal
Income and
Expenditure
Sources of
Income
Consumers’
Expenditure
In 1982 gross domestic product at factor cost (the total value of goods and
services produced at home) is estimated to have been £233,000 million. After
allowing for price changes the increase since 1972 was 15 per cent. Production in
Britain is relatively heavily orientated towards services, which in 1982
accounted for 61 per cent of GDP. Table 12 contains an analysis of GDP by
industry; the general features of industrial activity in Britain are described
more fully in Chapter 11.
The diagram shows that in 1982 Britain consumed nearly 67 per cent of what it
produced and imported. Between 1972 and 1982 the proportion of final expendi¬
ture devoted to exports rose from 18 per cent to 21 per cent.
Personal incomes at current prices before tax rose rapidly and fairly steadily
from £50,000 million in 1972 to £238,000 million in 1982. In real terms (that is.
excluding the effects of inflation), however, personal disposable income was
nearly 1 per cent lower in 1982 than in 1981.
That part of personal pre-tax income which is not taken in taxes or national
insurance is used for consumption or else is saved (see Chapter 18 for some chan¬
nels for personal savings). Consumers’ expenditure amounted to 70 per cent of
pre-tax personal income in 1982 compared with 74 per cent in 1972; there was a
rise in saving as a percentage of personal disposable income from 9 • 7 per cent
in 1972 to 10 -8 per cent in 1982. (A rise in the personal savings ratio during
periods of inflation may reflect people’s wish to compensate for the decline in
the real value of assets fixed in money terms; the ratio fell between 1981 and 1982
with the decline in the inflation rate.)
The proportion of total personal income accounted for by income from
employment was 65 per cent in 1982; average gross weekly earnings in April
1983 in Great Britain were £ 163 ■ 80 for full-time adult male workers (21 and over)
and £106-90 for full-time adult female workers (18 and over). The three other
main sources of personal income were self-employment (8 per cent), income
from rent, dividends and interest (11 per cent) and current grants from general
government (15 per cent).
The diagram on page 186 shows the pattern of consumers’ expenditure in 1982.
Food, alcoholic drink, housing, fuel and power, and clothing and footwear
together accounted for half the total. Consumers’ expenditure increased by a
Final Expenditure at Market Prices in 1982
Total: £341,000 million
%
501-
Consumers’
expenditure
49% £167,000 m
Final
consumption
of general Gross domestic
government jjxecj capjta|
Exports of goods
and services
Final expenditure at market prices is equal to gross
domestic product at market prices plus imports.
-0.3% -£1,000 m
Physical increase
in stocks and
work in progress
NATIONAL ECONOMY
185
Current
Government
Expenditure
Investment
Table 12: Gross Domestic Product by Industry
1972 1982
£ million per cent £ million
per cent
Agriculture, forestry and
fishing 1,577
Energy and water supply 2,771
Manufacturing 17,876
Construction 4,017
Distribution, hotels
and catering, repairs 7,742
Transport 2,896
Communication 1,357
Banking, finance, insurance,
business services and leasing 5,807
Ownership of dwellings 3,011
Public administration,
defence and social security 3,743
Education and health services 4,460
Other services 2,964
2
5
32
1-
13 ■
5'
2'
IQ¬
S'
6-7
8-0
5-3
5,752
26,037
56,492
13,480
29,971
10,311
6,853
29,040
14,690
16,724
20,868
14,543
2-5
2-5
24-3
5-8
12
4-
2
12-
6-
7-2
9-0
6-3
Total
Adjustment for financial
services
Residual error
58,221
104-6 244,761 105-2
-1,939 -3-5 -12,258 -5-3
-610 -11 50 0
Gross domestic product at
factor cost
55,672
100-0 232,553 100-0
Before provision for depreciation but after deducting stock appreciation.
Source: National Income and Expenditure 1983 Edition.
The difference between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
little over 1 per cent in real terms between 1981 and 1982. The changes in the
pattern between 1972 and 1982 in Britain were paralleled in other industrialised
countries with declining proportions spent on food, and on clothing and
footwear.
Current expenditure on goods and services by central government and local
authorities rose by 20 per cent in real terms over the period 1972-82, at the end
of which it amounted to 21 per cent of gross domestic product. The main cause of
this was the growth over the period of the social services, especially education
and the National Health Service.
In addition to their expenditure on goods and services, public authorities
transfer large sums to other sectors, mainly the personal sector, by way of
national insurance and other social security benefits, grants, and interest and
subsidies. Central government also makes grants to local authorities to finance
about one-half of their current expenditure.
Gross domestic fixed capital formation (total fixed investment) represents 12 per
cent of total final expenditure. Excluding the value of the physical change in
stocks and work in progress, the private sector accounted for 72 per cent of
gross domestic fixed capital formation in 1982 and the public sector for 28 per
cent, compared with 61 per cent and 39 per cent respectively in 1972.
186
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Components of Consumers' Expenditure in 1972
and 1982
1972
Food (household
expenditure)
Alcoholic
drink
Tobacco
Clothing and
footwear
Housing
Fuel and
power
Household
goods and
services
Transport
and
communications
Recreation,
entertainment
and education
Other goods
and services
Other items*
18%
7%
40/o
8%
13%
4%
8%
14%
9%
12o/o
2%
1982
15%
7%
4%
6%
17o/o
5%
7%
16%
9o/o
12%
2%
Food (household
expenditure)
Alcoholic
drink
Tobacco
Clothing and
footwear
Housing
Fuel and
power
Household
goods and
services
Transport
and
communications
Recreation,
entertainment
and education
Other goods
and services
Other items*
’Household expenditure overseas plus final expenditure by private non-profit-making bodies minus expenditure
by foreign tourists in Britain.
Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
11 Framework
of Industry
Among the most prominent trends in industrial activity in Britain during the
1970s and early 1980s have been the growth of the offshore oil and gas industries
together with related products and services; the rapid development of elec¬
tronic and microelectronic technologies and their application to a wide range of
other sectors; and a continuous rise in the service industries’ share of total
employment. Following the increase in world oil prices in 1979, Britain, along
with most other countries with similarly advanced economies, experienced an
industrial recession. By 1983 there had been a fall in oil prices which, together
with other influences, including a strong rise in productivity, eased the process
of economic recovery so that, by the middle of the year, industrial output was
3 per cent higher than two years earlier.
In order to support re-expansion in the economy, the Government is encou¬
raging industry to become more competitive, strengthening the small firms
sector and reducing state involvement in industry. It continues to contribute to
the formulation of European Community industrial policies.
This chapter describes some of the general features of industrial activity in
Britain such as the forms of enterprise, trends in production and investment,
and aspects of efficiency such as research and development, technological
advance and management education. It also outlines the framework of incen¬
tives for general industrial development provided by the Government, and by
Community institutions, together with the regulatory framework within which
industry operates. The chapters following cover the main areas of industrial
activity.
ORGANISATION The forms of industrial organisation and the pattern of ownership and control
AND are varied. Unincorporated, corporate (including co-operative) and public
PRODUCTION sector enterprise all assume a number of different forms, and all are important
in the economy. (For a definition of ‘incorporation ’, see p 202.) The Government
is encouraging employees to take a financial interest in the profitability of their
companies. Employees in public sector concerns into which private capital is
being introduced (privatisation) are being given a preferential right to buy
shares in their new companies and employee share-ownership in general has
been facilitated by changes in legislation. Although not numerous, co-operative
schemes are becoming more common and since 1980 there has been a rise in the
number of ‘buy-outs’ in which the staff, or management, of a company raises
the finance to purchase it.
In some sectors a small number of big companies and their subsidiaries are
responsible for a great proportion of total production (see p 204). However, it is
rare for a few shareholders to have a controlling interest since shares in these
companies are usually distributed among many holders or held by insurance
companies or pension funds representing a cross-section of the community.
The private sector accounts for nearly 70 per cent of gross domestic product
in Britain and for the greater part of activity in the agricultural, mining and
quarrying (apart from coal), manufacturing (except steel and shipbuilding),
construction, distributive, financial and miscellaneous service industries.
Industries in public sector ownership include most of the energy, transport and
communications industries.
188
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The private sector comprises at least 1 million unincorporated businesses
(sole traders and partnerships) and around 600,000 corporate enterprises
(companies), with a combined labour force of 16 million in 1982. There are about
17 major public corporations with an employed labour force of about 2 million.
Unincorporated businesses, corporate enterprises and public sector enter¬
prises contribute about 19, 51 and 11 per cent of gross domestic product
respectively (the remainder being accounted for by central and local
government).
Most of Britain’s large firms in the private sector are classified, under
company law, as ‘public companies’, while the great majority of small com¬
panies are ‘private’ (see p 202). At the end of 1982 there were about 900,000
companies on the companies’ register of which about 6,000 were public limited
companies. It is estimated that only about two-thirds of companies on the regis¬
ter are trading.
The largest organisations are shown in Table 10. Altogether about 60 com¬
panies registered in Britain each had net assets of over £500 million in 1982. In
terms of annual sales four of the top 20 industrial groups in Europe were British,
with British Petroleum first and Shell Transport and Trading third. Alongside
these large organisations the many hundreds of thousands of small firms play
an essential part in the economy.
Table 10: Largest Industrial Organisations
Ranked by turnover
Ranked by assets
£ million employed
£ million
Private sector0
British Petroleum Company 34,583
Shell Transport and Trading 21,910
BAT Industries 11,318
Imperial Chemical Industries 7,358
Shell UK 6,665
Esso Petroleum Company 6,109
Unilever PLC 5,447
Imperial Group 4,614
General Electric Company 4,190
Grand Metropolitan 3,848
Rio-Tinto Zinc Corporation 3,680
Ford Motor Company 3,287
P and O Steam Navigation
Company 3,072
BL 3,071
Public sector*3
Electricity Council and Boards 8,417
British Telecom 5,708
British National Oil
Corporation 5,671
British Gas Corporation 5,199
National Coal Board 4,727
British Steel Corporation 3,443
Private sector0
British Petroleum Company 17,306
Shell Transport and Trading 11,962
Imperial Chemical Industries 5,421
Rio-T into Zinc Corporation 5,162
BAT Industries 4,607
Shell UK 3,704
Esso Petroleum Company 2,890
Unilever PLC 2,433
Grand Metropolitan 2,349
Ford Motor Company 2,143
General Electric Company 2,133
Source: Extel Statistical Services and annual reports of public corporations,
a Financial year ending in 1982, except P and O (1981).
b For year ended March 1983.
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY
189
Industrial
Association
Output
Voluntary associations representing private enterprises and covering, with
varying degrees of completeness, most of British industry, exist for a number of
different purposes including the provision of common services, the exchange of
information and representation of their members’ point of view, and negotia¬
tion with trade unions on wages and conditions of work. The majority are either
trade associations or employers’ organisations. Trade associations, concerned
mainly with representation to the Government, the provision of common
services and the regulation of trading practices, are normally composed of con¬
cerns manufacturing or retailing a particular product or group of products.
Employers’ organisations established on a national basis are usually concerned
with negotiation of wages and conditions of work; they normally consist of con¬
cerns engaged in the same type of operation or manufacturing process. In an
industrial sector concerned wholly with an allied group of products, one
association may undertake the functions of both a trade association and an
employers’ organisation.
The central body representing British business and industry nationally is the
Confederation of British Industry (CBI), recognised by the Government as a
channel for consultation between government departments and representa¬
tives of both private and public sector employers.
The CBI represents 263,000 companies directly and indirectly through
parent companies, subsidiaries, employers’ organisations and trade and
commercial associations, and the majority of the nationalised industries. For its
members it acts as an advisory and consultative body providing them with
information and statistics, ascertaining their collective views and representing
them nationally to the Government and the public and also internationally (see
p 302). CBI representatives sit on bodies such as the National Economic Devel¬
opment Council, the Manpower Services Commission, the Health and Safety
Commission, and the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service. The Insti¬
tute of Directors has a representative role for directors of all types of company.
Chambers of commerce are open to all kinds of producers and traders; they
promote the interests of local, regional and national industry and commerce.
The chambers provide export facilities, including export documentation and
the sponsorship of outward trade missions and visits, as well as information
services and training courses. The Association of British Chambers of
Commerce is the co-ordinating body for 86 affiliated local chambers, whose
member companies represent a majority of Britain’s exporters and a significant
number of the largest companies. British chambers of commerce also operate in
25 overseas countries. In Scotland there is an additional central organisation,
the Association of Scottish Chambers of Commerce, and in Northern Ireland the
Northern Ireland Chamber of Commerce and Industry, to which local chambers
are affiliated. Other voluntary associations include industrial development
associations for particular areas or regions, sponsored by local authorities,
trade associations and individual firms.
Industrial output in Britain has twice been affected by recession in the last
decade, partly as a result of fluctuations in oil prices. Output declined for two
years after 1973, recovered steadily between 1975 and 1979, fell again in 1980 and
the first half of 1981, and has since risen gradually. Manufacturing was especi¬
ally affected in the more recent decline (see p 205), together with construction,
while the service industries experienced a less marked downturn in activity. In
contrast, mining and quarrying output continued to rise (owing to the North Sea
oil and gas industries). In the recovery since mid-1981 the construction sector
and mining and quarrying have both performed strongly. Table 11 shows the
trend of output in 1981 and 1982 and the index of employment in 1982, revealing
the shift away from employment in production industries and towards services.
190
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Productivity
and Investment
Industrial
Financing
Technological
Advance
The decline in employment between 198 land 1982 was generally less marked
among the traded services sector. In particular, financial and business services
(including insurance, banking, leasing and real estate), and hotels and catering
recorded moderate growth in numbers employed over the period.
Table 11: Industrial Output and Employment
(Indices: 1980= 100)
Output Index of Output Employment
per cent per cent index
1980 1981 1982 1982 1982
Agriculture
Production industries
of which:
Oil and gas extraction
Manufacturing
Construction
Services
of which:
Distribution, hotels, catering
and repairs
Transport and communications
Financial and business services
Whole economy
2-2
36- 1
4-4
26-6
6-3
59-5
12.8
7-2
11-6
102-5
95-9
110-0
93-1
89-9
99-8
98-1
98-8
104.0
112-5
97-1
125-7
92-4
91-4
100-7
99-3
99-6
110.0
1-7
30-5
0-1
27-3
5-0
62-9
12-8
6-5
6-3
98-3
85-3
na
84-3
82-1
94-7
94-1
91-9
100-6
100-0 97-9 99-0 100.0 92-4
Source: National Income and Expenditure 1983 Edition and Monthly Digest of Statistics.
na = not available
Increases in productivity are recognised as being of prime importance for the
economy. Although output per head has generally been low in Britain by inter¬
national standards, it rose sharply in 1981 and 1982; the index for the whole
economy in 1982 was 104.9 (1980 = 100). Among the factors influencing
productivity are capital investment, innovations and improvements in products
and processes, and the performance of management and labour. The proportion
of gross domestic product invested in Britain is about the same as that in other
industrialised economies. Investment in some of the major sectors between 1978
and 1982 is shown in Table 12. The figures for manufacturing industry do not
include expenditure on leased assets since these are attributed to the service
industries on the basis of ownership. The practice of leasing has grown rapidly
since the early 1970s.
Over half of companies’ funds for further investment and other purposes are
internally generated, with banks providing the chief external source of finance.
The main form of short-term finance is the Stock Exchange. Finance for
industry is also provided by the Government (see pp 193-8), European Com¬
munity sources and specialist financial institutions, including the Investors in
Industry Group.
The 1980s have been particularly notable for the growth of venture capital
schemes run by financial institutions in both the public and private sectors to
provide ‘start-up’ and investment finance for smaller firms.
Advanced applications of information technology (a major new sector in which
computing and telecommunications have been brought together through
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY
191
advances in microelectronics) are having profound effects on the pace of techno¬
logical change. Extensive use of electronics and automated controls is to be
found across the whole range of industry, both in production and services.
Britain was a pioneer in computers and has one of the largest computer
industries outside the United States. It is ahead of most other countries in micro-
and minicomputers. There are many advanced applications of computerised
control in operation in both the public and private sectors of industry (for
example, in steel mills, coal mines, oil refineries and chemical plants) and
Britain is among the world’s leading nations in the provision of ‘software’
services and systems (that is, the preparation of instructions for computer
operations and related services). The importance of developments in
microelectronics, in particular microprocessors, has been widely recognised,
partly through government initiatives and there are special schemes of support
for the fibre optics and optoelectronics industries, computer-aided design and
manufacture, and industrial robots. In recognition of the very wide-ranging
implications of information technology, which is providing the basis for many
new products and services, the Government initiated a campaign in 1981 to
heighten public awareness of recent advances and declared 1982 to be Informa¬
tion Technology Year in Britain. In 1983 the Government announced a collabo¬
rative research programme in advanced information technology, to which the
Government is to contribute some £250 million over five years and industry
£150 million.
The use of robots in manufacturing industry is increasing rapidly, notably in
the motor industry. According to the British Robot Association, Britain was the
world’s fifth largest user of robots at the end of 1983, with more than 1,150 pro¬
grammable robots installed in manufacturing plants, an increase of 60 per cent
over the figure for 1981. There are expected to be some 2,000 by 1984.
British industry has a record of success in biotechnology. The pharmaceuti¬
cal sector is among the world leaders in the production of antibiotics by fermen¬
tation. The problems of maintaining sterility in large-scale continuous
fermentation have been solved in the production of single-cell protein for
animal feed. Microbiological processing of wastes is making rapid advances,
and there has been steady improvement of fermentation techniques in the pro¬
duction of foods and beverages. Biotechnology has gained a new impetus from
research achievements in genetic engineering and cell fusion. The Department
of Trade and Industry and other government bodies are encouraging the exploi¬
tation of new developments. A Biotechnology Unit at the Laboratory of the
Table 12: Gross Domestic Fixed Capital Formation in Major Sectors
1978-82 (1980prices) £ million
1978 1979 1980 1981 1982
Oil and gas extraction
Other energy and water
Manufacturing
Distribution, hotels, catering
and repairs
Transport and communications
Financial and business services:
Leased assets
Other assets
3,089
2,894
7,203
2,520
3,013
7,468
2,393
3,237
6,445
2,616
3,322
4,865
2,778
3,329
4,457
3,152 3,582 3,221 2,983 3,304
4,056 3,932 3,830 3,139 2,921
1,397 1,927 2,158 2,073 2,286
2,878 3,186 3,510 4,018 4,434
Source: National Income and Expenditure 1983 Edition.
192
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Research and
Development
Management
Education
Engineering
Design
Government Chemist is the focus for government co-operation with industry
and an interdepartmental committee ensures the necessary co-ordination in an
area that cuts across established boundaries of responsibility.
Industrial research and development is carried out mainly by firms themselves.
Some 40 research associations, covering all areas of technology, conduct work
mainly for member companies. Work is also done by independent contract
research laboratories, universities and government research establishments,
especially those for which the Department of Trade and Industry is responsible
(see p 195).
Industrial expenditure on research and development in 1981 was £3,799
million. The major part, £3,326 million, was accounted for by private sector
companies. Public corporations spent a further £385 million and research
associations £88 million. The main industrial sectors incurring expenditure on
research and development were electronics (£ 1,153 million), chemicals and allied
products (£655 million), aerospace (£769 million), mechanical engineering
(£276 million) and motor vehicles (£180 million).
The British Institute of Management, which is playing an increasingly repre¬
sentative role for the management and administrative professions, provides a
wide range of information services and has a particular interest in management
education and training. There are also a number of professional bodies con¬
cerned with standards and training in specialised branches of management.
A large proportion of management education is provided by polytechnics and
many of the colleges of further education throughout Britain; regional centres of
management education have been established in England and Wales through
the association of polytechnics and colleges which have high reputations for
management and business studies. Universities also make an important contri¬
bution, especially the full-time post-graduate programmes at the business
schools of London and Manchester Universities. Training courses for higher
management are offered by several independent colleges including the
Administrative Staff College, Henley-on-Thames, and Ashridge College of Man¬
agement, Berkhamsted.
Many firms provide general management courses for senior executives or
systems of informal training. (Industrial training and education below manage¬
ment level are summarised on pp 295 and 150.)
An Engineering Council was set up under Royal Charter in 1981. Its objectives
are to advance education in, and to promote the science and practice of, engi¬
neering for the public benefit and thereby promote industry and commerce in
Britain. The Council maintains a register of professional engineers, technician
engineers and engineering technicians and is developing an organisational
structure that will set standards for education, training and experience to
qualify people for registration. The Council is an independent body although
the Government is providing initial funding of up to £ 1 million a year for the first
three years, and during that period is responsible for approving the members of
the Council.
Design is a crucial factor in maintaining and improving the quality and compe¬
titiveness of manufactured goods. It receives continuous attention from
industry and assistance is available from the government-sponsored Design
Council, while the Computer-Aided Design Centre also provides assistance to
individual firms. The Design Council has centres in London, Cardiff and
Glasgow, and its services include advice on design matters, the organisation of
product displays and overseas trade fairs, conferences and seminars on design,
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY
193
Specification
Standards
Measurement
Standards
THE
GOVERNMENT
AND INDUSTRY
help for design education and the publication of a range of materials. The
Council also provides annual awards for consumer and engineering products
and for medical equipment and motor vehicles. The Society of Industrial Artists
and Designers is the representative professional body in Great Britain of
industrial designers.
The British Standards Institution (BSI) prepares and publishes standards
which specify dimensions, performance and safety criteria, testing methods
and codes of practice for a large range of products and processes in most fields of
production. It is a voluntary non-profit-making body, funded by sales of
standards, subscriptions and government grant. Voluntary acceptance of the
standards by manufacturers, buyers and sellers reduces unnecessary variety
and simplifies the specification of requirements. The board of the BSI includes
representatives of the main organisations of employers and workers, profes¬
sional institutions, consumers and the larger government departments. The
BSI, with government support, co-operates with other countries in achieving
international agreements on standards. In 1983 the Government launched a
National Quality Campaign, supported by a number of non-government bodies
including the BSI.
The National Physical Laboratory (NPL, see p 195), a research establishment of
the Department of Trade and Industry, is responsible for providing the
measurement standards and calibration facilities necessary to ensure that
measurements in Britain are made on a common basis and to the required accu¬
racy. Measurement standards bear directly on quality control in manufacture,
efficiency in commerce and on health and safety. The NPL maintains links with
national standards laboratories all over the world to ensure international
compatibility in measurements essential for overseas trade and technological
co-operation. Much of the dissemination of measurement standards is provided
by the NPL’s British Calibration Service (BCS), which comprises about 100
independent approved laboratories located in industry, universities and
government establishments. These offer authenticated calibrations of scienti¬
fic instruments and official certificates for electrical, mechanical, flow, optical,
pressure, thermal and time interval measurements. BCS measurements are
linked directly or indirectly, within known and approved uncertainties, to the
national measurement standards at the NPL. The National Testing Laboratory
Accreditation Scheme (NATLAS), also based at the NPL, grants official recogni¬
tion to laboratories shown by independent assessors to carry out specific types
of test. Its purpose is to enhance the standing of British testing laboratories and
secure international acceptance of test results from accredited laboratories.
The chief aim of the industrial policy of the Government elected in 1979 is to
encourage industrial enterprise and initiative in a flexible and competitive
market economy. The extent of state ownership is being reduced, a review of
industrial subsidies has been carried out (see p 197) and industrial investment
agencies in the public sector have been encouraged to secure private sector
participation in their projects. Competition policy (see p 200) has been strength¬
ened in order to create a climate in which commerce can flourish. A further
policy to promote efficiency and competitiveness takes the form of a campaign
to enhance the status of standards and quality assurance. The Government is
also encouraging the development of small businesses (see p 199) by reducing
their administrative burdens, adjusting taxation and through other policies.
Successive governments have aimed to provide an environment favourable
to industrial expansion. Encouragement for investment throughout the
economy is given by means of the tax system (see pp 310-14). For areas and
194
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Public
Enterprise
industries with special needs and difficulties, there are schemes of financial and
other aid, administered by a number of bodies, chiefly the Department of Trade
and Industry. Aid provided by the Department in 1982-83 amounted to about
£1,750 million (compared with some £1,950 million in the previous year). The
1982-83 total comprised £800 million for regional and general support, £250
million for scientific and technological assistance, and £700 million for
aerospace, shipbuilding, steel and vehicle manufacture. The largest
component of regional and general industrial support has been the regional
development grant scheme (£600 million in 1982-83). Various other agencies in
the public sector provide aid, either for specific geographical areas, or for more
closely defined activities (for enterprise zones, new towns and other urban area
schemes, see pp 157-60). These national industrial aids are supplemented by
assistance from European Community funds. Direct investment from overseas
is encouraged especially by the Department of Trade and Industry’s Invest in
Britain Bureau. Britain has for many years been the leading country for United
States manufacturing investment in Europe and is also the recipient of more
than half of all Japanese investment in the European Community. Overseas
firms are generally offered the same facilities and incentives as British-based
companies.
Official recognition of outstanding industrial performance is conferred by the
Queen’s Awards for Export and Technology and the Export Awards for Smaller
Manufacturers (for firms employing fewer than 200 people). The Queen’s
Awards are made annually to firms in all sectors of industry (including services)
on the advice of a committee composed of businessmen, trade union repre¬
sentatives and civil servants.
Direct state participation in industry is mainly effected through public corpor¬
ations known as nationalised industries. The major nationalised industries are:
the National Coal Board: British Gas; the electricity industry; the British
National Oil Corporation; the British Steel Corporation; British Shipbuilders;
the Post Office; British Telecom; British Rail; the National Bus Company;
British Airways; and the British Airports Authority. These industries and
services, which employ about 6 per cent of all employees, are described in their
relevant sections.
The Government believes that reform of the nationalised industries is
essential to economic recovery, and that the best way to improve performance
in the long term is to expose the industries to market forces, through privati¬
sation and the reduction of monopoly; British Aerospace, Cable and Wireless,
the National Freight Consortium, Amersham International, Britoil, Associated
British Ports, International Aeradio and some British Rail subsidiaries were all
formerly in the public sector. The Government has also taken steps to encou¬
rage competition in telecommunications, energy supply, transport and postal
services.
The managing boards and staffs of the nationalised industries are not gen¬
erally civil servants although they are responsible to ministers who appoint
(and may dismiss) the chairman and members of each board. Ministers are
responsible for agreeing with the industries their general strategies and have
the power to give general directions as to how the industry should be run, but do
not interfere in day-to-day management. The Government’s policy is to encou¬
rage the nationalised industries to behave as far as possible as commercial
enterprises, and this is carried out through the financial framework, set by the
Government, within which the industries are expected to operate. The financial
framework is designed to integrate the industries’ medium-term commercial
aims with the requirement of government policy on the management of the
economy. The main elements are the principles governing investment
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY
195
Fiscal
Investment
Incentives
Financial
Investment
Incentives
Research and
Development
Support
appraisal and pricing, external financing limits, financial targets and perform¬
ance aims, clear government objectives for the industries, regular corporate
plans and performance reviews, and systematic monitoring.
To ensure that nationalised industry investment earns an adequate
economic return, there is a ‘required rate of return’ which investment program¬
mes are expected to achieve before they are approved by the Government. The
current rate of return is 5 per cent in real terms before tax. Financial targets are
set for individual nationalised industries to give them a financial framework
similar to those of private sector companies which need to earn profits. They are
generally set for a period of three to five years, the form of the target varying
according to the commercial character of the industry concerned. Financial
targets are intended to be backed up by a series of performance aims, covering
costs and standards of service, which are considered particularly important for
industries with some monopoly power where financial targets would not auto¬
matically impose pressures for operating efficiency. External financing limits,
which control the amount of finance (grants and borrowing, including leasing) a
nationalised industry can raise from external sources in any financial year, are
an important short-term operating control. They were introduced in 1976 as
part of a general control over public expenditure, which includes the net exter¬
nal financing of nationalised industries (the difference between an industry’s
internally generated resources and its capital investment plans). The limits are
set in the light of a nationalised industry’s financial target and its expected per¬
formance and investment requirements.
External scrutiny of nationalised industry efficiency has been conducted
through the Monopolies and Mergers Commission since 1980 when it was given
new powers to investigate nationalised industry efficiency (four to six
references are made to it each year) and these investigations are complemented
on occasion by the studies of management consultants. Nationalised industry
matters axe also considered by parliamentary committees such as the Treasury
and Civil Service Committee and the Public Accounts Committee.
Incentives to encourage capital expenditure by industry on plant and
machinery include a system of free depreciation enabling the whole of such
expenditure to be written off against profits for tax purposes in the year in which
it is incurred; there is, in addition, a 79 per cent allowance in the first year on
new industrial buildings and structures and an annual writing down allowance
of 4 per cent thereafter. Corporation tax relief on the inflationary increase in the
value of stocks is also allowed (see p 312).
The Department of Trade and Industry provides selective financial assistance
for major investment projects in manufacturing industry which are judged to
be in the national interest and which would not proceed without assistance. The
Department also operates schemes of selective assistance to support the intro¬
duction by private industry of new products and processes. Particular impor¬
tance is attached to encouraging industry to equip itself with modern aids to
design and manufacture based on microelectronics.
Guarantees are provided for the repayment of loans and interest incurred in
the purchase of new ships and mobile offshore installations built in Britain.
Expenditure on research and development supported by the Department is
aimed at the rapid exploitation of technology, emphasis being placed on part¬
nership with the private sector. A growing proportion of expenditure is going
towards work carried out in industry; other work is done at research associa¬
tions and in government research establishments. The Department of Trade
and Industry’s research establishments are the National Physical Laboratory
196
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
(responsible for measurement standards, see p 193, and for research and devel¬
opment in related fields of national importance, which include work on the
properties of industrially important materials, computer technology and
mathematical applications), the National Engineering Laboratory (research in
mechanical engineering, including manufacturing systems and robotics), the
Warren Spring Laboratory (control engineering, materials handling, metal
extraction, mineral processing, waste materials processing and environmental
technology), and the Laboratory of the Government Chemist (providing analy¬
tical services mainly to central and local government, public institutions and
international organisations).
‘Support for Innovation’ is the Department of Trade and Industry’s general
facility for providing financial assistance for various purposes to companies
(and research associations) in or closely associated with any sector of manufac¬
turing industry. The balance and direction of research and development
support is overseen by industrialists and other specialists in the Department’s
sectoral requirements boards and their advice is closely integrated into the
Department’s industrial support programme.
An Advisory Council for Applied Research and Development, whose mem¬
bers include representatives of industry, industrial research and the engineer¬
ing profession, is a source of independent advice to ministers collectively on
applied research and development in both the public and private sectors, the
linkage between this research and scientific research supported by the Depart¬
ment of Education and Science, the development and application of technology,
and on the role of Britain in international collaboration in such activities. The
Council has published a number of reports on aspects of new technology. It is
served by a secretariat in the Cabinet Office.
British
Technology
Group
Technology
Transfer
Finance for
Advanced
Technology
The British Technology Group (BTG) was formed in 1981 by combining the
National Research Development Corporation and the National Enterprise
Board (although formal merger awaits legislation). Its primary functions are: to
promote the development and commercialisation of technology derived from
public sector sources; to provide finance for the development of advanced tech¬
nology in British industry; to support the creation of growth of small firms; and
to support industrial enterprise in the regions of England.
The BTG is an important channel for the development and exploitation of tech¬
nology derived from public sector sources, such as universities, government
research establishments and other public bodies. The BTG takes responsibility
for protecting and licensing inventions from these sources, provides funds for
development, seeks licensees and negotiates licence agreements. The BTG’s
portfolio contains 6,400 British and foreign patents, 620 licensees in Britain
and overseas, and 350 revenue-earning inventions.
The BTG can provide finance for technical innovation in any area of technology
but it is not a grant-giving body. It seeks to make a return on its investments and
therefore approaches every transaction on a commercial basis. Finance can be
provided either in the form of share capital or project finance. Through its joint
venture project finance, the BTG can provide a proportion (normally 50 per
cent) of the cash flow required for a specified project and expects to recover its
investment by means of a percentage levy on sales.
The BTG has some 400 investments in British industrial companies; about
half are in small companies and many are ‘start-up’ projects. Within the English
assisted areas the BTG has a wider investment role, supporting not only com¬
panies involved in technological innovation but also those engaged in more
traditional industries.
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY
197
Regional
Development
Assisted Areas
Incentives
Other Assisted
Area Measures
Administrative
Arrangements
Northern
Ireland
Some of the major technical achievements which the BTG has exploited or
supported include cephalosporin antibiotics, pyrethroid insecticides, glass-
reinforced cement, computers and computer software, electric motors,
robotics, underwater engineering and biotechnology.
Economic imbalance between different parts of the country is due partly to the
steady decline over the years, in certain regions, of older industries, such as
coal, steel, shipbuilding and textiles, and partly to the tendency of the newer
and expanding industries to develop elsewhere. Thus the traditional industrial
areas, mainly in Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and some parts of England
(particularly in the North and on Merseyside), have for many years experienced
higher unemployment rates than regions such as the Midlands and the South
East, and have suffered from net outward migration and industrial dereliction.
In order to restore the economies of these regions, which are designated as
‘assisted areas’, the Government offers incentives to encourage industrial
development. The Government is reviewing regional industrial policy in Great
Britain. Northern Ireland is treated separately.
There are three categories of assisted area: special development, development,
and intermediate, the need for assistance being considered most urgent in the
first and least in the last. Following a review of the areas in 1979, when they
covered more than 40 per cent of the working population, the Government
reduced them until, in August 1982, they covered about 28 per cent of the
working population, in order to concentrate the available resources more
effectively.
Incentives to encourage industrial investment include regional development
grants towards the cost of new fixed assets for manufacturing industries at the
rate of 22 per cent in special development areas and 15 per cent in development
areas: regional selective assistance for projects in manufacturing, mining or
construction which safeguard or create jobs in any part of the assisted areas and
strengthen the regional and national economy; grants for office and service
industry jobs created in assisted areas together with employee removal grants:
grants of 80 per cent of training costs (half of which is normally provided by the
European Social Fund) for manufacturing and service projects where the
training programme is essential to the project’s success; and government
factories and workshops at favourable rents.
Apart from direct incentives to industry in the assisted areas, firms in the
special development and development areas may be given preferential
treatment when tendering for public sector contracts, and special grants are
available towards the improvement of the infrastructure in the assisted areas
and towards the clearance of derelict land (see p 171).
The Department of Trade and Industry takes the lead in the formulation of
regional industrial policy and administers the regional development grant
scheme throughout Great Britain. Regional selective assistance is admin¬
istered in England by the Department (with some powers delegated to its regio¬
nal offices) and by the Scottish and Welsh Offices. Factories in the assisted areas
are provided, often in association with the private sector, by English
Estates, and by the Scottish and Welsh Development Agencies.
The Industrial Development Board, formed in 1982 under the aegis of the
Northern Ireland Department of Economic Development, offers a range of
incentives similar to those available in the assisted areas, extended in 1983 and
198
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Development
Agencies
Rural
Industries
Tourism
in some cases at higher rates. Incentives automatically available to manufac¬
turing industry include grants of up to 30 per cent of the cost of new fixed assets,
training grants, grants for key workers moving to Northern Ireland and
exemption from local authority rates for industrial premises. Manufacturing
and service industry projects which create jobs may be eligible for grants of up
to 50 per cent of the cost of new fixed assets, interest relief grants, factories on
favourable rental terms, and grants to assist with setting-up costs and research
and development costs. The Board can also provide equity and loan capital for
new expanding businesses, assist the development of new high-technology pro¬
ducts and processes, and promote joint ventures with overseas companies.
Measures announced in 1983 included corporation tax relief of up to 80 per cent
for certain new projects; 30 per cent grants for approved energy conservation
projects; grants to attract and retain good management; and an advisory
service on production methods.
Government regional policies have been aimed at encouraging new industries
in order to offset the decline in traditional activities. Accordingly the Scottish
and Welsh Development Agencies. promote industrial development in their
respective countries. They encourage investment by overseas companies,
provide equity and loan capital for industrial projects (which they are expected
to do with a maximum of private sector participation), provide government
factories, and have powers to assist small firms and undertake land
reclamation.
In the rural areas of England, assistance towards any scheme likely to benefit
the local economy can be provided by the Development Commission. Through
its agency, the Council for Small Industries in Rural Areas (CoSIRA), the Com¬
mission provides managerial and technical advice, training facilities and a
credit service to small manufacturing and service industries in rural areas.
Loans and advice are also provided by CoSIRA for small tourism enterprises in
the rural parts of the assisted areas and in areas designated by the Commission
as priority action areas. In addition, the Commission provides factory premises
and support for pioneering and experimental schemes bearing on the rural
economy and for voluntary bodies aiming to enrich social and cultural life in the
countryside.
In Scotland and Wales these services are provided generally through the
development agencies, but separate bodies cater for two particular rural areas.
In north-west Scotland the Highlands and Islands Development Board provides
loans and grants for viable projects in manufacturing, agriculture, fisheries and
services, makes available training grants and advice, and builds factories. Mid
Wales Development provides factories, key worker housing and advice for small
businesses in its area. It has a general responsibility to promote the economic
and social well-being of mid-Wales and a particular responsibility for the new
town (Newtown, Powys).
Government support for the tourist industry is provided by four statutory
bodies: the British Tourist Authority, responsible for the overseas promotion of
tourism in Great Britain and for providing advice to the Government on matters
affecting tourism; and the English, Scottish and Wales Tourist Boards, which
promote tourism in their respective countries within Britain, encourage the
development and improvement of tourism accommodation and amenities, and
administer grants or loans for projects improving tourist amenities, and inter¬
est relief grants.
The Northern Ireland Tourist Board has a promotional role similar to that of
the other boards.
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY
199
Small Firms
European
Community
Regional Policy
and Aid
European
Regional
Development
Fund
European
Investment
Bank
The Department of Trade and Industry has a separate division which is the focal
point for the formation of policy towards the small business sector. The division,
together with the Scottish Development Agency and the Welsh Office', adminis¬
ters the Small Firms Service which provides advice and guidance on a wide
range of business problems affecting small firms and those seeking to set up
business.
The Government has been particularly concerned since the late 1970s to
encourage small firms. It has introduced over 100 measures, including a loan
guarantee scheme and a business expansion scheme under which tax reliefs
are available to private individuals investing in small businesses. Other tax con¬
cessions have also been provided for small firms in recent years (see p 312). Two
schemes to encourage small engineering firms to purchase advanced equip¬
ment have been introduced, a technical inquiry service has been set up and
there have been experimental schemes to provide new premises. The develop¬
ment of new sources of venture capital has been encouraged. Among venture
capital schemes are those run by public sector bodies, including the British
Technology Group. A number of private sector initiatives have been made by
the clearing banks and by groups of large firms and financial institutions. An
export award for smaller manufacturers is made annually. Assistance for small
firms is also provided by the development agencies and by the agencies for rural
industry (see p 198). In Northern Ireland the Local Enterprise Development
Unit, established to promote the development of smaller industries, provides
grants, loans, premises and management advice to new and expanding
companies.
European Community regional policy has two major aims: the reduction of
existing regional imbalances; and the prevention of new imbalances arising
from the adoption of Community policies. Although the principal responsibility
for helping depressed areas remains with the national authorities concerned,
the Community may complement schemes through aid from a number of
sources.
The European Regional Development Fund was set up to correct the major
regional imbalances in the Community, particularly those resulting from over¬
dependence on agriculture, industrial change and structural under¬
employment. Most of the Fund’s resources are allocated to individual
Community countries by agreed quotas. Britain has the second largest quota
and by May 1983hadbeen allocated over £ 1 million towards the cost of industrial
and infrastructure projects in the assisted areas and in Northern Ireland. The
remaining part of the Fund is used to promote particular measures decided
upon by the Community as a whole. Britain is receiving some £32 million over
the period 1981-85 to help to improve the environment and to encourage the
development of job-creating activities in certain steel and shipbuilding closure
areas in the border regions of Northern Ireland.
The European Investment Bank (EIB) is a self-governing institution set up by
the Treaty of Rome with member states of the European Community subscrib¬
ing to its capital. The Bank’s aims are to help to stimulate development in less
favoured regions, to modernise or convert industries, to help to create new acti¬
vities and to offset structural difficulties affecting certain sectors. The EIB also
serves projects of common interest to several member states or the Community
as a whole. It has loaned over £2,500 million since 1973 for projects in Britain,
mostly for public works such as the Sullom Voe oil terminal, and manufacturing
projects in the assisted areas.
200
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
European Coal
and Steel
Community
Exchange Risk
Guarantee
Scheme
COMPETITION
POLICY AND
CONSUMER
PROTECTION
Competition
Policy
Monopolies and
Mergers
The European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) makes loans to companies in
the coal and steel industries, and for manufacturing projects which create new
employment opportunities for redundant coal and steel workers. Non¬
repayable aid may be available for workers who have been made redundant.
The ECSC can lend up to 50 per cent of the fixed capital costs of a project.
Exchange risk cover may be provided by the Government on EIB and certain
ECSC loans for projects qualifying for regional selective assistance. The British
borrower takes on only a sterling liability.
A major feature of the Government’s economic policy is the stimulation of
competition and the control of practices which are restrictive or anti¬
competitive. Linked to this policy is the encouragement of fair trading, with the
particular aim of helping consumers and safeguarding their rights. The Parlia¬
mentary Under-Secretary of State for Corporate and Consumer Affairs, who is
answerable to the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, has special
responsibilities for competition policy and consumer affairs (although certain
matters, such as safety of foodstuffs and road vehicles, are the concern of other
departments).
The Office of Fair Trading, an independent government agency headed by the
Director General of Fair Trading, has various executive responsibilities relating
to competition policy and consumer protection.
Competition policy has led to the development of machinery for scrutinising
and regulating monopolies, mergers, anti-competitive practices and restrictive
trade practices and of powers to regulate any structural changes or anti¬
competitive practices which operate against the public interest. The Director
General of Fair Trading administers the Fair Trading Act 1973, which deals with
monopolies and mergers, the Restrictive Trade Practices Act 1976, which deals
with restrictive trading agreements, the Resale Prices Act 1976, which deals
with minimum resale price maintenance, and the Competition Act 1980, which
deals with anti-competitive practices.
The Secretary of State for Trade and Industry and the Director General of Fair
Trading can refer monopolies for investigation by the Monopolies and Mergers
Commission. The legislation defines a monopoly as a situation where at least a
quarter of a particular kind of goods or service is supplied by or to a single
person, or by two or more people acting in a way which prevents, restricts, or
distorts competition. Local monopolies can also be referred to the Commission
while the Secretary of State can refer public sector industries. If the Commis¬
sion finds that a monopoly operates against the public interest, the Secretary of
State for Trade and Industry has powers to take action to remedy or prevent the
harm which the Commission considers may exist. Alternatively the Director
General may be asked to negotiate undertakings to remedy the adverse effects
identified by the Commission.
Proposals for a merger (defined as occurring when two or more enterprises are
brought under common ownership or control) may be referred to the Commis¬
sion by the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, taking account of advice
from the Director General, if the merger would result in or intensify a monopoly
or if the total value of gross assets taken over exceeds £ 15 million. If the Commis¬
sion finds that a merger or proposed merger may be expected to operate against
the public interest, the Secretary of State can prevent it from taking place or
obtain undertakings to remedy the adverse effects identified; or, if it has already
taken place, he can require it to be reversed. There are special provisions for
newspaper and certain other mergers.
REPAIRING LASERS
A new first-aid service for repairing laser tubes has been developed by a
Cambridge company. It enables users to keep their laser equipment working for
about one-fifth of the cost of a new tube. This engineer is retuning and realigning
the system for a laser light spectacular.
JOINT EUROPEAN TORUS (JET)
Above: Inside the vacuum chamber
shortly before JET’s successful first
experiment in 1983.
Right: JETT, built at Culham,
Oxfordshire, is a project to determine
the feasibility of nuclear fusion as a
new source of energy for the next
century. The release of energy from
nuclear fusion is similar to naturally
occurring plasma activity in the
centre of the sun; it leaves mainly
helium which is harmless and
non-radioactive.
CRANFIELD INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
Cranfield is a unique university institution specialising in
advanced technology, applied science and management,
mainly for postgraduate students.
Right: An array of
sound measuring
equipment being used
at the Institute to test
The Rock,’ a
remarkable record
player for high fidelity
sound reproduction,
with a turntable made
of synthetic granite
(manufactured at
Cranfield), and a
special stabilised
pick-up arm.
Below: A computerised
robot welding system
for monitoring and
maintaining the quality
of welds, developed at
the Institute.
COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY
Above:
Harnessing solar
power to provide
a telephone
service in the
remote Scottish
Highlands.
Left: ‘Video-
conferencing’
saves time and
money spent in
travel, hotels and
absence from the
office. It requires
no special
lighting and
needs only
minimal acoustic
treatment of a
normal meeting
room.
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY
201
Anti¬
competitive
Practices
The Public
Sector
Restrictive
Trade
Practices
European
Community
Consumer
Protection
Subject to limited exemptions, the Director General can investigate any busi¬
ness practice (whether in the public or private sectors) which may restrict,
distort or prevent competition in the production, supply or acquisition of goods
or services in Britain. If the Director General concludes that a practice is anti¬
competitive he may either accept an undertaking from the business responsible
for the practice or, in default of such an undertaking, refer the matter to the
Commission to establish whether it operates against the public interest. On an
adverse finding by the Commission, the Secretary of State has powers to take
remedial action.
The Competition Act also empowers the Secretary of State to refer to the Mono¬
polies and Mergers Commission any questions on the efficiency and costs of, the
service provided by, or the possible abuse of a monopoly situation by, various
bodies in the public sector. It is the Government’s intention that at least one
major examination of each industry should take place every four years.
Under the Restrictive Trade Practices Act 1976 restrictive trading agreements
have to be registered with the Director General of Fair Trading. Broadly, an
agreement is registrable if two or more parties to it, engaged in business in
Britain in the supply of goods or services, accept some limitation on their
freedom to make their own decisions about matters such as prices or conditions
of sale. Failure to register an agreement means that the restrictions are void and
the parties are liable to legal proceedings. Having placed an agreement on the
register, the Director General has the duty of referring it to the Restrictive Prac¬
tices Court and the Court must declare the restrictions in it contrary to the
public interest unless the parties can satisfy the Court by reference to criteria
laid down in the Act that this is not the case. Restrictions declared contrary to
the public interest are void and the Court can order the parties not to give effect
to them or make any similar agreement. In practice, however, many
agreements do not need to be referred to the Court because, for example, the
parties choose to give up the restrictions rather than go to Court, or the Secre¬
tary of State accepts the Director General’s advice that the restrictions are not
significant enough to warrant reference to the Court.
The objective of the European Community’s competition policy is to ensure
that there is free and fair competition in trade between member states and that
the government trade barriers dismantled by the Treaty of Rome are not
replaced by private barriers which fragment the common market. The compe¬
tition rules are set out in the Treaty of Rome. These are directly applicable in the
law of member states but their enforcement is the responsibility of the
European Commission, which has powers to investigate and terminate alleged
infringements and to impose fines.
The Treaty prohibits agreements or concerted practices which are likely to
affect trade between member states and have as their object or effect, the
prevention, restriction or distortion of competition within the common market;
and prohibits any abuse of a dominant position within the common market or a
substantial part of it, to the extent that it affects trade between member states.
The Fair Trading Act 1973 provides machinery (headed by the Director General
of Fair Trading) for the continuous review of consumer affairs, for action to deal
with trading practices which unfairly affect consumers’ interests and with per¬
sistent offenders under existing law, and for the negotiation of self-regulatory
codes of practice to raise trading standards. The Director General is also respon¬
sible for the working of legislation which regulates consumer credit and hire
business and estate agency work.
202
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The consumers’ interests with regard to the purity of foods, the description
and performance of goods and services and pricing information are safeguarded
by the Food and Drugs Acts 1955 to 1982, the Medicines Act 1968, the Trades
Descriptions Acts 1968 and 1972, the Prices Act 1974, the Unfair Contract Terms
Act 1977, the Sale of Goods Act 1979 and the Supply of Goods and Services Act
1982. The marking and accuracy of quantities are regulated by the Weights and
Measures Acts 1963 and 1979, the latter introducing a system of average weights
for certain pre-packed goods. The Consumer Protection Acts 1961 and 1971 and
the Consumer Safety Act 1978 empower the Government to control the supply
of most goods in the interests of safety.
Advice and Provision of consumer information and advice is an important function of those
Information in local and central government, and of several independent organisations con¬
cerned with consumer protection. The local outlets are the Citizens Advice
Bureaux (see p 139) and in some areas Consumer Advice Centres.
The independent, non-statutory National Consumer Council (and associated
councils for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland), which also receives
government finance, ensures that the consumer’s view is made known to those
in government and industry whose decisions affect the consumer’s interest.
Consumer councils for the energy, rail and communications nationalised
industries investigate questions of concern to the consumer, while some trade
associations in industry and commerce have established codes of practice. In
addition, several private organisations work to further consumer interests.
The largest is the Consumers’ Association, funded by the subscriptions of its
membership of over 600,000. The Association conducts an extensive pro¬
gramme of comparative testing of goods and investigation of services; its views
and test reports are published in its monthly magazine Which? and its other
publications. The Association also provides an advice service on subscription.
Local consumer groups, many belonging to a national federation, also promote
consumers’ interests and provide information and advice.
The European Community’s consumer programme covers a number of
important topics, such as health and safety, protection of the consumer’s
economic interests when purchasing goods and services, promotion of con¬
sumer education and strengthening the representation of consumers. The
views of British consumer organisations are represented by the Consumers in
the European Community Group (UK).
COMPANY LAW The formation and conduct of private sector corporations is regulated by the
Companies Acts. ‘Incorporation’ means registering an enterprise with an
official registrar of companies, with related obligations such as those concern¬
ing the capital structure of a company, the rights and duties of its directors and
members, and the preparation of accounts. Nearly all corporate businesses are
‘limited liability’ companies, which means that each company is a legal entity
distinct from its members, who are not as such liable for its debts. The
members’ liability is limited to contributing an amount related to their
shareholding. In unincorporated businesses, such as sole proprietorships or
partnerships, by contrast, individuals are personally liable for any business
debts.
The European Community is pursuing a programme for the harmonisation of
company law among member states. In accordance with the programme, the
Companies Act 1980 provides for new arrangements for the classification and
registration of companies and their capital structure and distribution of profits
and assets. The Act sets out new criteria for public companies (that were pre¬
viously defined as those not meeting one or other of the tests for private com¬
panies) and, by exclusion, defines private companies as those which are not
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY
203
INDUSTRIAL
PROPERTY
public. It continues to be the case that private companies may not offer shares to
the public. After registering under the Act a public company must put ‘Public
Limited Company’ or PLC after its name. The Act also lays down rules concern¬
ing the conduct of company directors, and makes illegal share dealings that
depend upon certain privileged kinds of information.
The Companies Act 1981 implements a European Community directive that
sets out the statutory framework for the disclosure of company accounts, while
allowing for less disclosure by small- and medium-sized companies. It also
makes provision to enable companies to purchase their own shares (mainly in
order to assist small businesses); extends the law requiring disclosure of inter¬
est in a company s shares; and alters the law controlling company names and
business names.
There is a substantial body of legislation designed to secure the rights of the
originators of inventions relating to manufacture, new industrial designs and
trade marks. These matters are administered respectively by the Patent Office,
the Design Registry and the Trade Marks Registry, while governmental respon¬
sibility is exercised by the Department of Trade and Industry. Protection is also
available under the European Patent Convention and the Patent Co-operation
Treaty, and benefits may be claimed in other countries by virtue of the Interna¬
tional Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property. The Government is
reviewing the law on copyright and related matters, with particular attention to
the problems raised by private tape recordings of sound or video copyright
works, the application of copyright to industrial designs, and the use of photoco¬
pying. The penalties for trading in pirate sound and film recordings (including
video) were greatly increased in 1983.
12 Manufacturing
and Service
Industries
Manufacturing plays a vital role in the economy. It accounts for 23 per cent of
gross domestic product; about 27 per cent of the employed labour force is
engaged in manufacturing; and around 67 per cent of visible exports consists of
manufactured or semi-manufactured goods. Developments of particular note
in manufacturing in the last decade have been fluctuations in output generally
in line with international trends, and rises both in export performance and
import penetration. Growth in output and exports was strongest in chemicals
and electrical, electronic and instrument engineering, while the food industries
as a whole reduced the extent of import penetration. Utilisation of advanced
technologies in industry, especially microelectronics, is steadily increasing
(see p 191).
The proportion of gross domestic product contributed by service industries
continues to increase. Among traded services, financial and business services,
tourism, and earnings on construction work overseas show the greatest
growth.
The manufacturing industries are described by sector or group of sectors in
this chapter, together with construction and services.
The statistics in the following sections, relating to the main sectors of manu¬
facturing industry, are supplied by the Statistical Division of the Department of
Trade and Industry. Unless otherwise stated, export and manufacturers’ sales
figures include parts. (The tables, which contain a selection of leading activities
within each sector and are not comprehensive, incorporate a new industrial
classification introduced in 1983. Corresponding employment figures are not
yet available and revised figures from the 1981 employment census have been
used.) Figures in the text are for 1982.
Manufacturing
Most manufacturing is carried out by private enterprise. Though the greater
parts of the iron and steel and shipbuilding industries are in public ownership,
the Government is reducing the extent of state ownership of industry. Table 13
shows the size distribution of manufacturing establishments. About 58 per
cent of the largest establishments were in engineering and metals and vehicle
manufacturing. Within the private sector, the 100 largest companies accounted
for 37 per cent of manufacturing employment in 1980. (A company may consist
of one or more establishments.) In each of the following sectors over 85 per cent
of net output was attributable to the five largest companies: tobacco, man-made
fibres, wines, cider and perry, motor vehicles and their engines, railway and
tramway vehicles, asbestos, cement, lime and plaster; and over 70 per cent in
ordnance small arms and ammunition, insulated wire cables, cycles and
motorcycles, miscellaneous vehicles, shipbuilding and repairing, aerospace
equipment manufacturing and repairing, spirit distilling and compounding,
organic oils and fats, and watches and clocks.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
205
Output and
Investment
Table 13: Manufacturing: Size Distribution of Establishments
Number of
employees
Number of
establishments
% of total
establishments
% of total
employment
under 20
20 to 499
500 to 1,499
1,500 or more
78,171
28,485
1,651
518
71-8
26-2
1-5
0-5
8-2
39-8
20-6
31-4
Source: Report on the Census of Production 1980
The largest manufacturing companies (by £ million turnover in the latest finan¬
cial year) are BAT Industries (11,318), Imperial Chemical Industries (7,358),
Unilever (5,447), Imperial Group (4,614), General Electric Company (4,190),
Ford Motor Company (3,287), BL (3,072), George Weston Holdings (2,981),
Rothmans International (2,544), Thorn EMI (2,436) and Allied-Lyons (2,398).
The figures in Table 14 show the relative size of the sectors of manufacturing and
their growth rates. Manufacturing output as a whole fell after 1973, following the
rise in international oil prices, but grew again gradually between 1975 and 1979,
most evidently in chemicals: paper, printing and publishing; other manufactur¬
ing (timber, rubber, plastics); food and drink manufacturing; metals; clothing,
footwear and leather; and electrical and instrument engineering.
Between 1979 and 1981 output declined sharply, following further rises in
energy costs, which produced a recession in manufacturing affecting nearly all
the industrialised market economies. Additional factors depressing output in
Britain were high domestic interest rates and, for exporters, a rise in the
Table 14: Manufacturing — Gross Value Added and Index of Production
Gross Value Index of Production
Added (£m) (1980 = 100)
1981 1981 1982
Metal manufacturing
Other minerals and mineral
products
Chemicals and man-made fibres
Mechanical engineering
Other metal goods
Electrical and instrument
engineering
Motor vehicles and parts
Other transport equipment
Food, drink and tobacco
Textiles
Clothing, footwear and leather
Paper, printing and publishing
All other manufacturing
1,859 104-3 100-7
2,913 90-0 94-7
4,831 98-5 98-8
7,377 88-3 88-4
2,993 89-9 78-1
6,734 92-3 95-1
2,917 84-2 80-7
3,165 100-3 99-3
8.200 97-7 99-0
1,679 90-5 86-5
1,878 91-4 87-3
5.200 94-3 90-3
4,037 90-9 87-6
Total 53,783 93-1 91-9
Source: National Income and Expenditure 1983 Edition.
206
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
MINERAL
PRODUCTS
Metals
Iron and Steel
Products
exchange value of sterling which raised the prices of British goods in overseas
markets. Output remained low in 1982 but picked up in the first half of 1983, the
fall in the world price of oil easing the process of recovery.
A major stimulus has been provided by the various needs of the offshore oil
and gas industries. In long-established industries (for example, shipbuilding
and marine engineering) extensive reorganisation, re-equipment and moderni¬
sation are being undertaken to meet changing economic conditions.
Since manufacturing industry lies mainly in the private sector, investment in
manufacturing tends to be determined by market considerations and to reflect
expectations of profitability. There are discernible cycles in the level of invest¬
ment; 1982 represented a trough. Total direct investment in 1982 (at current
prices) was £5,183 million, comprising £3,950 million on plant and machinery,
£732 million on new building and £501 million on vehicles. In addition, assets
worth an estimated £1,160 million were purchased by financial companies for
lease to manufacturers on full payment agreements. By branch of industry, the
main direct investments were in chemicals and man-made fibres (£705 million),
food (£670 million), electrical and instrument engineering (£520 million) and
mechanical engineering (£489 million).
1982 Labour0 Sales5 Exports Imports
’000s £m £m £m
metal manufacturing
of which:
iron and steel products
non-ferrous metals
other mineral products
of which:
building materials and
abrasives
glass and glassware
refractory and ceramic goods
258
182
76
219
103
57
59
9,156
6,788
2,368
6,677
4,836
1,046
795
2,895
1,399
1,496
706
201
220
285
3,231
1,314
1,917
538
146
267
125
a Employees in employment (Great Britain) at September 1981.
b Manufacturers’ sales.
The manufacture of metals is an important activity in Britain, covering both
iron and steel and non-ferrous metals such as aluminium.
Most of the early developments in iron and steel production originated in
Britain, still one of the world’s major steel-producing nations. Britain takes part,
as a member of the European Coal and Steel Community (see p 200), in joint
efforts with other member countries to rationalise the structure of the industry
and improve the profitability of operations.
The British Steel Corporation (BSC), formed as a public corporation in 1967,
has accounted in recent years for some 85 per cent of Britain’s crude steel pro¬
duction by volume.
BSC invested heavily in modernising its production capacity in the 1960s and
1970s. The obsolete open hearth process was replaced by basic oxygen steel¬
making (for bulk production) and the electric arc process (for more specialised
tasks). Because of a marked fall in demand for steel, BSC has had to accelerate
the closure of its older steelworks and reduce capacity at some of the more
modern works. Further restructuring of the industry has included the transfer
of assets and businesses between BSC and the private sector and the closure,
both in the public and private sectors, of plants that cannot be made profitable.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
207
Non-ferrous
Metals
Building
Materials
The private sector accounts for about 30 per cent of the value of the industry’s
turnover and is particularly strong in the manufacture of alloy and stainless
steels and of finished products for the engineering industry. The main steel pro¬
ducing areas are Yorkshire and Humberside (33 per cent of crude steel output in
1982), Wales (29), the Northern region (17) and Scotland (12).
About 70 per cent of British steel producers’ deliveries of finished steel pro¬
ducts is used by home industry and the remainder is for direct export to all parts
of the world. A large part of the steel used by industry in Britain is also subse¬
quently exported as part of other finished products.
Britain’s non-ferrous metal processing and fabricating industry is one of the
largest in Europe. Its major products are aluminium (both virgin and secondary
metal), secondary refined copper and lead, and primary zinc. Tin mining in
Cornwall supplied about 40 per cent of Britain’s tin requirements in 1982 but
otherwise British metal smelting and refining industries are based on imported
ores and concentrates except for substantial secondary production from scrap
metal. Britain is also a major producer of specialised alloys for high technology
requirements in the aerospace, electronic, petrochemical, and nuclear and
other fuel industries. Titanium and titanium alloys are also produced and used
in aircraft production, power generation and North Sea oil production, where
their lightness, resistance to stress, flexibility and resistance to oxidisation are
especially valued. Nearly half the industry is situated in the Midlands. Other
centres include Wales, where Europe’s largest nickel refinery and only titanium
sponge plant are situated, London, Tyneside and Avonmouth, where there is a
zinc smelter of some 100,000 tonnes capacity. Two large-scale aluminium smel¬
ters provide 70 per cent of Britain’s requirements for primary aluminium. The
large non-ferrous metals fabricating industry uses large quantities of imported
refined metals such as copper, lead, zinc and aluminium. A wide range of semi¬
manufactures is produced in these metals and their alloys, and, particularly in
aluminium, firms are engaged in smelting, casting and fabrication by rolling,
extrusion and drawing; advanced techniques of powder metallurgy and
pressure die-castings are also employed, which help to conserve energy and
materials. In recent years considerable progress has been made in the develop¬
ment of superplastic’ alloys, which are more ductile and elastic than conven¬
tional alloys.
The main products exported, including alloys and semi-finished products,
are copper, nickel, aluminium, lead, tin and zinc. Exports of aluminium and
aluminium alloys reached £254 million in 1982 while exports in the same year of
copper, brass and other copper alloys reached £243 million. Exports of silver,
platinum and other metals of the platinum group totalled over £635 million in
1982. The major export markets for the whole industry are the United States and
the rest of the European Community.
Firms in the industry manufacture such items as bricks, roofing tiles, chimney
pots, and concrete, plaster, slate and stonework products. Brickmaking is one of
Britain’s oldest industries, but most manufacture is now based on highly mech¬
anised systems. London Brick PLC supplies about 40 per cent of total brick
deliveries.
The cement industry is chiefly concerned with the manufacture of Portland
cement for the home market. Invented by Joseph Aspdin and patented in 1824,
this material and the methods of its production have been the subject of conti¬
nuous technical improvement and intensive research.
Glass-reinforced cement composites, a new variation, were invented in
Britain in the mid-1970s and are manufactured under licence in some 45 other
countries. The capacity of the industry as a whole has substantially expanded
in recent years.
208
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Ceramic and
Refractory
Goods
Glass
CHEMICALS AND
MAN-MADE
FIBRES
Chemicals
The pottery industry, centred largely in Staffordshire, supplies almost all home
needs for domestic and industrial pottery. It uses largely indigenous clay from
Cornwall and Devon. There has been considerable re-equipment in the
industry; kilns fired by gas or electricity have replaced all the coal-fired kilns,
and new decorating techniques and automatic and semi-automatic machinery,
such as automatic glazing machines, have been introduced. Domestic pottery,
including china, earthenware and stoneware, accounts for 55 per cent of the
industry’s output; the other main divisions are glazed tiles, sanitary ware and
electrical ware, and such specialised industrial products as acid-proof
stoneware, porous ceramics and laboratory porcelain. Research is being con¬
ducted into ceramics for use in housebuilding and diesel and jet engines. Pro¬
duction of tableware is concentrated in two major groups. Britain is the world’s
principal manufacturer of fine bone china, much of which is exported; famous
makes include Wedgwood, Spode, Royal Worcester, Royal Doulton, Minton,
Aynsley, Coalport and Royal Crown Derby. Refractory goods include heat-
resisting materials such as magnesite, silica and high alumina bricks,
crucibles, kiln linings and radiants for gas and electric fires.
Britain’s glass industry is one of the biggest in the world. Glass containers form
the largest part of the industry; another major section is devoted to the manu¬
facture of flat glass in its various forms, chiefly ‘float’ glass, a process developed
in Britain by Pilkington Brothers and licensed to glassmakers throughout the
world. Pilkingtons have also developed an energy-saving window glass which
reflects room heat without impairing visibility. The use of glass for internal
decoration and as a finish for internal and external walls has greatly increased
in recent years. Large quantities of safety glass are produced for the motor and
other industries. Other products include tubular glass, mirrors, lamp and
bulb glass, scientific and medical glassware, glass fibres, and all types of glass
containers (mostly made automatically). A traditional product is handmade
lead crystal glassware of very high quality.
1982
Labour0 Salesfa Exports Imports
’000s £m £m £m
chemicals
of which:
basic industrial chemicals
paints, varnishes and printing
inks
pharmaceuticals
soap and toilet preparations
man-made fibres
359 15,142
143 6,651
32
82
37
17
1,162
2,660
1,602
437
6,061
2,933
193
1,019
339
300
4,447
2,610
92
426
127
284
a Employees in employment (Great Britain) at September 1981.
b Manufacturers' sales.
The chemicals industry is one of the most successful industries in Britain as
well as being its fourth largest industrial sector, accounting for about 10 per cent
of manufacturing net output. The industry is also the second largest in Europe
and its exports of £6,061 million in 1982 (accounting for 11 per cent of British
manufacturing exports) placed Britain among the top four chemical exporting
nations. The largest British chemicals group, Imperial Chemical Industries, is
the fourth largest chemicals company in the world, accounting for 29 per cent of
production in Britain. The industry is represented by the Chemical Industries
Association. Western Europe is the major export market.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
209
Basic Industrial Basic industrial chemicals comprise inorganic chemicals, basic organic
Chemicals chemicals (except specialised pharmaceuticals), fertilisers, synthetic resins
and plastics, synthetic rubber and dyestuffs and pigments.
A high proportion of inorganic chemicals production consists of relatively
simple bulk chemicals, such as sulphuric acid and metallic and non-metallic
oxides, serving as basic materials for industry. Substantial quantities of inor¬
ganic chemicals are used in the manufacture of fertilisers, detergents, paint,
glass and metals. Radioisotopes are produced by Amersham International (for¬
merly the Radiochemical Centre), the world’s largest manufacturers and expor¬
ters of radioactive products; over 80 per cent of production is for export.
Organic chemicals include the heavy organics produced in bulk and the
speciality intermediate products. Oil and natural gas are the source of some 90
per cent of world organic chemicals production. The most important products
(by weight) are ethylene, propylene and benzene. The main uses of organic
chemicals are in solvents, plastics and synthetic resins, synthetic rubber,
man-made fibres and detergents, and as intermediate chemicals in the manu¬
facture of other chemicals, pharmaceuticals, dyestuffs, paints, adhesives, plas¬
tics and textiles.
Many of the basic discoveries in plastics, including polyethylene, were made
in Britain. Over 40 per cent of production is exported. Expansion in recent years
has mainly been in thermoplastic materials, of which the most important are
polyethylene (used on coverings and packaging - notably for foodstuffs), poly¬
vinyl chloride (known as PVC and used for a wide range of industrial purposes
and consumer goods), polystyrene (a material used for toys, light mouldings
and many consumer goods) and polypropylene (which can be fabricated as
mouldings, films and fibres). A new group of plastics materials reinforced with
carbon fibres is also in commercial production in Britain; they have up to three
times the strength but are only 20 per cent of the weight of steel, and are being
increasingly used in, for example, vehicle manufacture. Styrene-butadiene and
polybutadiene rubbers used for tyres, high styrene rubbers for shoe soles and
flooring, and nitrile rubbers for use where oil resistance is required are also in
large-scale production, together with neoprene rubber.
The development of chemical fertilisers owes much to the pioneer work of
British scientists. Manufacture of fertilisers, in particular ammonium nitrate, is
dominated by a few large firms producing almost entirely for the home market.
A number of smaller companies also formulate and market compound
fertilisers.
Britain is a major producer of decorative and industrial paints, varnishes and
allied products. In recent years many improved techniques have been intro¬
duced into the paint and varnish industry, including new ranges of synthetic
resins and pigments, powder coatings, non-drip, quick-drying paints and
paints needing only one top coat.
Specialised
Industrial and
Agricultural
Chemicals
Specialised chemical products made in Britain include dyestuffs, formulated
adhesives and sealants, chemically treated oils and fats, essential oils and
flavouring materials, explosives, industrial gases, products for the treatment of
leather and textiles, adhesive film, cloth and foil, surfactants (surface active
agents) for many purposes and formulated pesticides. A substantial proportion
of world research and development in agrochemicals is conducted in Britain.
Pharmaceu¬
ticals
Britain, whose scientists have discovered and developed many essential drugs
and medicinal products, produces a wide range of pharmaceutical prepar¬
ations. These include antibiotics and other drugs for the treatment of infective
(including tropical) diseases; drugs used for the treatment of gastro-intestinal,
210
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Soap and Toilet
Preparations
Man-made
Fibres
MECHANICAL
ENGINEERING
AND METAL
GOODS
Mechanical
Engineering
respiratory, circulatory, rheumatic and psychiatric conditions; antihistamines,
anaesthetics, synthetic steroid and other hormones; and vaccines, sera and
drugs obtained from natural sources. Manufacturers in Britain are among the
world’s leading producers and exporters of preparations for the treatment of
human and animal diseases.
These industries include washing powders and other synthetic detergents,
soap, detergents, toilet preparations, cosmetics and perfumes. Some of the
large companies in the detergent and toiletries industry are owned or financed
by United States companies but there are a number of long-established British
cosmetics, toiletries and soap manufacturers. Both sectors are significant
exporters.
Much of the early development of man-made fibres took place in Britain and
continuing extensive research has produced a wide variety of types with their
own special characteristics. The two main types are still those first
developed - the cellulosic fibres, such as rayon, and the synthetic fibres, such as
nylon and polyester (a British invention), made wholly by chemical processes.
Acrylic fibres, including Courtelle, Acrilan and Orion, are important products,
as are the elastomeric or spandex fibres which have inherent properties of
stretch and recovery, anti-static synthetic yarns embedded with carbon and
various fire-resistant yarns. More recently there has been a greater use of the
polyolefins (polypropylene and polyethylene) in the carpet, carpet backing and
packaging fields and still more recently in household textiles and clothing.
Output in the man-made fibre producing industry is concentrated in the hands
of a few large companies.
Recent innovations in man-made fibres include a number with industrial
applications. Examples are carbon fibres, used in aerospace; melded fabrics
(bonded together without knitting or weaving) with heavy duty uses in civil
engineering; high-tenacity filament yarns for cables and stays; high-tem¬
perature refractory fibres for furnaces; and charcoal cloth with highly effective
air-filtering properties.
1982
Labour0
'000s
Salesb
£m
Exports
£m
Imports
£m
mechanical engineering 879 15,907 7,395 4,092
of which:
industrial plant and steelwork 83 2,770 614 230
agricultural machinery and
tractors 42 1,144 763 464
machine tools 103 1,161 528 431
textile machinery 15 232 212 103
process machinery 45 883 661 416
mining, construction and
mechanical handling equipment 97 2,786 1,413 668
other metal goods 395 7,350 998 878
a Employees in employment (Great Britain) at September 1981.
b Manufacturers' sales.
The mechanical engineering industry comprises a group of industries manu¬
facturing all types of non-electrical machinery, machine tools, industrial
engines, mechanical handling equipment, construction equipment and
industrial plant. Over half the industry’s production is for the home market.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
211
The major customers for the heavy equipment sectors are the nationalised fuel
industries, the chemical industry and the British Steel Corporation. A wide
range of equipment is supplied to the building and construction industry
Demand for other types of equipment comes from all the production industries
in Britain.
Other companies in the mechanical engineering industry manufacture parts
and components and do general sub-contracting, fabricating and repair work.
Industrial Plant British industry manufactures almost every type of industrial (including
and Steelwork process) plant and steelwork (for nuclear power station construction, see
Chapter 13). Of particular importance are fabricated products such as pressure
vessels, heat exchangers and storage tanks for chemical and oil refining
(process) plant, steam-raising boilers (including those of high capacity for
power stations), nuclear reactors, water and sewage treatment plant and fabri¬
cated steelwork for bridges, buildings and industrial installations. The
industrial plant industry comprises both equipment manufacturers and con¬
tractors responsible for the design, engineering, construction and commis¬
sioning of complete plants for process industries. British manufacturers have
contributed to advances in process technology and British contractors are
carrying out major plant projects in many countries.
Agricultural Britain produces a wide range of agricultural equipment for general and special
Machinery and use, including many special purpose machines such as fruit and vegetable har-
Tractors vesters and improved root harvesters and agricultural tractors, which account
for the bulk of wheeled tractors produced. Mechanised equipment is exten¬
sively used in the arable farming and dairy farming sectors. Much of the new
machinery is designed for use in a variety of conditions to meet the needs of
overseas farmers. A large-scale annual exhibition of the industry’s products is
the Royal Smithfield Show and Agricultural Machinery Exhibition held in
London in December. The annual Royal International Agricultural Show is held
in July at the National Agricultural Centre, which also provides regular demon¬
strations of technical developments in agriculture.
Machine Tools Britain was the birthplace of the machine tool industry and provides a very wide
range of machine tools. Almost all of those produced are purchased by
engineering, vehicles and metal goods industries. As these sectors are among
those most affected by the recession in world manufacturing, production of
machine tools has also contracted.
The most important types of metal cutting machine tools are milling, grind-
ing and turning machines. Britain is an important producer of computerised
numerically controlled machine tools, which are programmed to carry out,
electronically, operations previously undertaken by a human operator. The
United States was again the largest export market for the industry in 1982
(£68 • 5 million). The next were South Africa (£19-2 million), the Federal Republic
of Germany (£14-6 million), Mexico (£13-8 million), France (£13-6 million) and
India (£12 -4 million). The Machine Tool Trades Association represents most of
the industry and is responsible for the international machine tool exhibition
held in Britain every four years, the next in 1984.
Textile Textile machinery produced in Britain includes machines and accessories for
Machinery the manufacture and processing of yarns and fabrics from all types of natural
and man-made fibres. British inventions have remained the foundation of many
textile processes in use internationally and progress has been made in applying
automated techniques (including the use of microelectronics) in the industry.
In 1982 over 90 per cent of the industry’s total sales were to export markets.
212
Process
Machinery
Construction,
Mining and
Mechanical
Handling
Equipment
Other
Machinery
Metal Products
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Another important sector comprises machinery for the food, chemical and
related industries. This includes plant and machinery for industrial food and
drink processing; machinery for bottling, canning, packeting, labelling and
bottlewashing; tobacco processing and cigar and cigarette making machinery;
chemical centrifuges, drying machines and filtration and mixing equipment;
furnaces, ovens and kilns for the manufacture of metals, cement and glass; and
gas, water and waste treatment plant.
Almost the whole range of plant required by the construction industry is
produced, including excavating, earth-moving and road-making equipment,
pile drivers, and quarry crushing and screening plant. Overseas sales of con¬
struction equipment and mining machinery and equipment, including coal
cutting and coal face loading machinery, are substantial. Mechanical handling
equipment is used not only for construction and related activities but
throughout industry generally. It extends from individual units and accessories
to complete operating systems, the main products being cranes and
transporters, lifts, escalators, conveyors, elevators, hoists and powered
industrial trucks. Electronically controlled and completely automatic handling
systems are also available.
Britain is an important manufacturer of industrial engines, including those
derived from aero-engines. Industrial pumps, valves and compressors are vital
components in many industrial processes, particularly in the chemicals, oil and
electric power industries. The fluid power industry makes oil, hydraulic and
pneumatic equipment for operating machinery and construction and other
equipment. There are many new areas where these powerful and flexible
systems may be used. The other major products of the mechanical engineering
industry include bearings, chains and gears, printing, bookbinding and paper
goods machinery, refrigerating, space heating, ventilating and air-conditioning
equipment, engineers’ small tools (excluding gauges), garden tools, portable
power tools and miscellaneous non-electrical machinery, such as boot- and
shoe-making machinery, laundry equipment, automatic vending machines,
plastics working machinery and other types of specialised equipment.
The castings industry plays an important role in meeting the needs of manufac¬
turers for essential components for products sold both in Britain and abroad. Its
main customers are the vehicle, mechanical engineering, and building and con¬
struction industries. The larger mechanised foundries are dominant, but many
smaller craft foundries meet needs for specialised and low-volume castings.
Output (by volume) has been falling and the industry has been progressively
changing. While some foundries have been closing, many others have been
investing in new melting equipment, moulding equipment and processes, and
process and quality control equipment, both to meet demands for castings of
higher quality and strength and to improve working and environmental
conditions.
A range of metal products is produced by a group of industries made up of a
very large number of firms. One of the main groups, in which small firms
predominate, manufactures engineers’ small tools and gauges, which include
jigs and fixtures, press tools and moulds, hard metal-tipped tools and other
metal cutting tools. Another group manufactures cutlery and tableware
(including safety razors and blades).
A wide variety of domestic utensils, such as saucepans, buckets and dustbins,
made mainly from aluminium and wrought steel, are produced by the hollow-
ware industry, together with industrial hollow-ware, such as kegs, drums and
barrels. Five major firms which dominate the can and metal box industry use
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
213
recycled material in can manufacture. The manufacture of hand tools, includ¬
ing files, saws, hammers, axes and spades, is a long-established industry. About
half of its total production is for export. Other main groups of metal goods are
bolts, nuts and screws, metal furniture, metal windows, metallic closures,
metal small-ware such as needles and pins, safes, locks and keys, domestic gas
appliances and drop forgings.
OFFICE
MACHINERY,
DATA PROCESSING
EQUIPMENT AND
ELECTRICAL,
ELECTRONIC AND
INSTRUMENT
ENGINEERING
1982
Labour0 Salesb Exports Imports
’000s £m £m £m
office machinery
electronic data
processing equipment
electrical and electronic
engineering
of which:
basic electrical equipment
telecommunication equipment
radio and electronic capital
goods
electronic components
electronic consumer goods,
records and pre-recorded
tapes
domestic electric appliances
instrument engineering
15
60
634
118
61
83
99
41
45
110
110
1,093
11,760
2,177
1,264
1,939
1,416
714
901
1,710
148
1,183
4,554
1,155
144
768
797
215
152
1,008
197
1,737
4,886
495
125
547
988
1,135
467
974
a Employees in employment (Great Britain) at September 1981.
b Manufacturers’ sales.
Office
Machinery
and Data
Processing
Equipment
The industry covers a wide range of products including duplicators,
photocopiers, typewriters, word processors, microfilm, dictation and mailroom
equipment, and cash registers. A large proportion of the industry is owned by
multinational companies, and is likely to continue to be so, as the rapidly
advancing technologies involved require a heavy commitment to research and
development. In particular, the incorporation of microelectronics into office
products is rapidly increasing. The industry is strong in microfilm
readers/printers, duplicators, and office offset litho and rapid high volume
photocopiers.
Computers In the computer sector, Britain produces an extensive range of computer
systems, central processors and peripheral equipment, from large computers
for large-scale data processing and scientific work to mini- and micro¬
computers for use in control and automation systems and for home and office
use. Britain’s home computer manufacturers are particularly competitive in
export markets, and Sinclair Research is recognised internationally as a
pioneer of home computing. Essential to the sector is the ‘software’ industry,
which provides programs and associated services and complements the hard¬
ware industry, enabling the systems manufacturers to provide complete solu¬
tions to meet the requirements of users.
Electrical and The electrical and electronic engineering industry is engaged in the manufac-
Electronic ture and installation of a wide variety of equipment, including all types of power
Engineering generation, transmission and distribution equipment, motors, telecommuni¬
cations and broadcasting equipment, capital electronics equipment and
214
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Electrical
Engineering
Electronic
Equipment
systems, industrial controls, electronic components, consumer electronics and
domestic electrical appliances. Electronics, which makes a vital contribution to
the efficiency of many branches of the country’s economy, is one of the most
important sectors of British industry.
The main product categories are power equipment (generators, turbines,
motors, converters, transformers and rectifiers) and switchgear, starting and
control gear.
The industry produces cables and wires for the distribution of electric power,
for telecommunications networks and other purposes; its products include
submarine cables and cables insulated by a great variety of materials. Optical
fibres (hair-thin strands of glass) for use in telecommunications (see also p 287)
were invented in Britain in 1964; they can carry much more ‘traffic’ than copper
cables.
A few large firms dominate the market for other electrical goods, including
domestic appliances such as heating and cooking equipment, washing
machines and dryers, refrigeration appliances, vacuum cleaners, irons and
electric kettles. Other major sectors are electrical equipment for motor vehicles
and aircraft, electric lamps and light fittings, and batteries and accumulators.
The British electronics industry is one of the largest and most comprehensive in
the world and British scientists and companies have made important contri¬
butions to electronics technology. Because the applications of electronics tech¬
nology are continuing to multiply rapidly, definition of the industry must be
arbitrary, but the sectors included are radar and navigational aids, telecommu¬
nications equipment, security systems, components, consumer goods,
computers and communications and other capital equipment, as well as elec¬
tronic process control and industrial instrumentation.
The dependence of the telecommunications industry on electronic tech¬
niques is increasing as new switching systems are introduced. The main pro¬
ducts are switching and transmission equipment for telephone, telex and
telegraph systems and subscribers’ apparatus such as telephones, private auto¬
matic branch exchanges, teleprinters and facsimile systems. British Telecom
(see p 285) is the main customer in the home market, and carries out research
and development work in co-operation with companies. Hitherto, British
Telecom has largely been supplied by four big companies (GEC, Plessey, Stand¬
ard Telephones and Cables, and Pye TMC), but active competition from other
companies is being encouraged and the range of new products widened. Inno¬
vative work is being particularly stimulated by plans for direct broadcasting by
satellite and a rapid expansion of cable television (see p 371).
The components sector manufactures a wide range of both active and passive
electronic components. In addition to a comprehensive indigenous industry, a
number of large overseas companies are manufacturing components in Britain.
The sector meets requirements for components in Britain, and is also very
active in international trade. The manufacture of integrated circuits (in which
many components are fabricated within a tiny chip of semi-conductor material)
is an area of particularly rapid change. Britain is improving its position in the
manufacture of advanced components.
The major consumer goods produced are radio and television sets, music
centres and high-fidelity audio and video equipment. In the audio field, British
manufacturers have a reputation for high-quality goods but are less strong in
the mass market. Equipment is also being manufactured for reception of
Britain’s ‘Prestel’ and ‘teletext’ services (see pp 287 and 373).
Another expanding sector of the industry is that which covers the manufac¬
ture of radio communications equipment, radar and radio navigational aids for
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
215
Instrument
Engineering
MOTOR VEHICLES
AND OTHER
TRANSPORT
EQUIPMENT
Motor Vehicles
and Cycles
ships and aircraft, alarms and signalling equipment, public broadcasting
equipment and other capital goods. British equipment is used extensively
overseas, for defence, aviation, shipping, health, educational and other
purposes.
An important advance in medical diagnosis was the development in Britain,
in the 1960s and early 1970s, of the tomographic X-ray scanner. This made a
world-wide impact by providing images of sections of brain or whole body on
living subjects. The more recent nuclear magnetic resonance machines linked,
like X-ray scanners, with computers to display digitised images on a television
screen, have enabled further advances in medical diagnosis to be made, while
eliminating the use of X-rays.
Instrument engineering is a particularly important sector of the engineering
industry. Electronic techniques are widely used, particularly in the industrial
instrument sector, which comprises integrated control systems and
equipment, optical instruments, electronic measurement and test equipment,
analytical instruments and a diverse group of others. The chemical, petroche¬
mical, power, petroleum, and iron and steel industries account for the great
majority of process control applications, the largest sector of the industry and
one which is expanding. Major advances have been made in automatic testing
equipment and analytical instruments for non-destructive testing, medical dia¬
gnosis and pollution control. Other sectors of the instrument industry include
photographic, cinematographic and reprographic equipment, watches, clocks
and time recorders, and surgical instruments and appliances.
1982
Labour*3 Salesb Exports Imports
’000s £m £m £m
motor vehicles (including
trailers and caravans)
motor vehicle parts (includ¬
ing bodies)
other transport equipment
of which:
shipbuilding and repairing
railway equipment
aerospace equipment
120
221
363
123
44
185
4,478
3,463
6,310
1,068
344
4,745
1,537
1,647
3,166
139
129
2,836
3,340
1,141
1,974
46
21
1,754
a Employees In employment (Great Britain) at September 1981.
b Manufacturers' sales.
The motor vehicle industry comprises the manufacture of cars and commercial
vehicles, caravans and trailers, and parts and components. Output of cars and
commercial vehicles is dominated by four large groups: BL, in which there is a
majority public shareholding. Ford, Vauxhall and Talbot (formerly Chrysler
UK), which account for 99 per cent of car production and some 98 per cent of
commercial vehicle output; the remainder is in the hands of smaller, specialist
producers of cars, heavy commercial vehicles, buses and coaches. The BL
board of management is working in agreement with the Government for the
return of all or part of the company to the private sector. In recent years the
home market has been increasingly supplied by imports, mainly from other
European countries and Japan, but British manufacturers are responding
strongly to the competition and the industry remains one of Britain’s major
export sectors. The principal trade associations for the industry are the Society
216
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Railway
Equipment
Aerospace
of Motor Manufacturers and Traders and, on the retail side, the Motor Agents
Association. Motor industry shows are held in alternate years at the National
Exhibition Centre, Birmingham, and in London.
The motorcycle industry has contracted over the last two decades and the
domestic market is largely supplied by imports. On the other hand, the market
for pedal cycles has increased significantly and is mainly supplied by British
firms, the largest of which is TI Raleigh.
British Rail builds most of its locomotives and rolling stock in its own
workshops using components from the private sector; it also supplies equip¬
ment and provides consultancy services to many overseas countries. The large
private sector supplies a full range of equipment, including components, trac¬
tion and control gear, signalling, heating and ventilating systems, and track
equipment to British Rail; it also builds trains for London Transport and rapid
transit networks. All this equipment is also supplied to overseas railway and
rapid transit authorities. In addition, the private sector undertakes electrifi¬
cation and other major works overseas and provides overseas consultancy
services.
Britain’s aerospace industry is one of the largest and most comprehensive in
Western Europe and the Western world. The products of the industry include
civil and military aircraft, helicopters, aero-engines, guided weapons, hover-
craft and space vehicles, supported by a comprehensive range of aircraft and
airfield equipment and systems.
The main British airframe manufacturer is British Aerospace (BAe). During
the three years 1978-80, BAe (which brought together the former separate com¬
panies British Aircraft Corporation, Hawker Siddeley Aviation, Hawker Sid-
deley Dynamics and Scottish Aviation) was a nationalised corporation. In 1981 it
was transformed into a public limited company and the Government sold just
over half of its shareholding in BAe to private investors. Special arrangements
were made for employee shareholdings. The Government, which has a
maximum shareholding of 48 • 43 per cent, does not use its rights as a share¬
holder to intervene in BAe’s commercial decisions.
The major publicly owned companies are Rolls-Royce and Short Brothers.
Rolls-Royce is responsible for almost the entire output of aero-engines in
Britain; it is one of the world’s three leading aero-engine manufacturers and
over 10,000 of the world’s civil and military aircraft are powered by Rolls-Royce
engines.
The remainder of the industry is in private ownership and comprises a
number of aircraft companies, including Westland PLC and its subsidiary,
Westland Helicopters (which specialises in helicopter design and manufacture
and, in addition, performs a wide range of aviation equipment work), and all of
the aviation equipment sector.
Production of BAe includes such civil aircraft as the HS748 feederliner and
the HS125 business jet, while the new BAe 146 feederjet and Jetstream 31 trans¬
port aircraft came into service in 1983. BAe is a full partner in the European
consortium Airbus Industrie; it manufactures the wings for the A300 Airbus
and designs and manufactures the wings for the A310 derivative. Military
aircraft include the unique Harrier vertical/short take-off and landing aircraft
(which has achieved substantial sales to the United States), the Hawk advanced
trainer, the Anglo-French Jaguar tactical fighter/operational trainer and the
Tornado multi-role combat aircraft, which is a collaborative venture by Britain,
the Federal Republic of Germany and Italy.
BAe is also a major producer of guided weapons including a number which
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
217
have been sold overseas, in particular the Rapier ground-to-air missile. Collabo¬
rative guided weapon projects between Britain and its NATO partners are
becoming increasingly important.
Short Brothers, which is based in Belfast, produces the Skyvan, the SD330
and 360 commuter airliners, airframe components and missiles. Westland Heli¬
copters manufactures the successful Sea King and is the British partner in the
Anglo-French collaborative programmes on the Puma, Gazelle and Lynx
helicopters, which are being produced for the armed forces of a number of coun¬
tries besides Britain and France. In 1983 Westland also introduced the W30
Lynx derivative intended mainly for the civil market.
Rolls-Royce aero-engines in production include the collaboratively produced
RB199 for the Tornado, the RB211 civil engine and its more powerful derivative
the RB211 -524, the Pegasus vectored-thrust engine for the Harrier and the Gem
helicopter engine. More advanced versions of the RB211-524 have been
developed, as has another RB211 derivative, the RB211-535, which in 1983 was
the launch engine for the new Boeing 757 airliner. Industrial versions of aero¬
engines such as the RB211 and the Olympus (developed for Concorde) are being
produced for use in oil and gas transmission and as stand-by power generators.
Versions for marine use, in particular of the Olympus and the Tyne, are being
used to power a new generation of warships for the Royal Navy and many over¬
seas navies.
The aviation equipment manufacturers provide a wide range of systems
essential to engines and aircraft, including engine and flight controls, electrical
generation, mechanical and hydraulic power systems, cabin furnishings, flight
decks and information displays including ‘head up’ displays (which project
electronically into the pilot’s line of sight the information needed to fly and navi¬
gate the aircraft, making it unnecessary to look down at the instruments); all are
sold both in domestic and overseas markets. They also supply equipment for
ground operation including that needed for radar and air traffic control, ground
power supplies and flight simulators, to airports and airlines throughout the
world.
The space sector manufactures satellite systems and space hardware for the
programmes of the European Space Agency (ESA, see p 344); it also meets
Britain’s own requirements and contributes as manufacturers of sub-systems
in, for example, the satellite system of the International Telecommunications
Satellite Organisation (INTELSAT). The Dynamics Group of BAe has acted as
prime contractor for all the ESA’s telecommunications satellite projects, which
include the Orbital Test Satellite (OTS), launched in 1978 and still in operation,
the European Communications Satellites (ECS), procured for EUTELSAT (the
European telecommunications satellite authority), and the maritime series of
communications satellites (MARECS), leased to the International Maritime
Satellite Organisation (INMARSAT), the first of which was launched in 1981. BAe
is also the prime contractor for the ESA’s L-SAT large telecommunications
satellite to be launched in 1986. Marconi Space and Defence Systems (MSDS)
concentrates on satellite communications payloads and launcher guidance
systems. MSDS is payload contractor for the MARECS satellites and for L-SAT.
Both BAe and MSDS are involved in the development of the Ministry of
Defence’s Skynet IV satellite series and the world-wide supply of satellite sub¬
systems, and, with British Telecom, have formed a consortium to build satell¬
ites for direct television broadcasting (see p 286), initially for the BBC. The
British space industry continues to contribute to ESA’s scientific satellites,
through BAe’s prime contractorship for the GEOS satellites and principal con-
tractorship for the development of the Giotto satellite, which will investigate
Halley’s comet in 1986. British firms also built the later scientific satellites in
the Ariel series and manufacture all types of ground stations (including those
218
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Shipbuilding
and Marine
Engineering
Offshore
Equipment
on the INTELSAT network) both to meet the requirements of British Telecom
and for business and data communications and television transmission.
The industry is thus extensively involved in the manufacture of space
systems and in scientific research in other European collaborative program¬
mes. It carries out an extensive programme of research and development on
airframes, aero-engines and equipment, including avionics, while considerable
research is also undertaken by universities and government research
establishments.
Aerospace production and exports, which are fairly evenly divided between
aircraft, engines and equipment (including avionics), have made considerable
progress over the past few years and now stand at record levels. The principal
destinations for exports are the United States and countries with which Britain
is involved in collaborative ventures such as France and the Federal Republic of
Germany. However, markets in the developing world may become increasingly
important for sales of satellite equipment.
The main trade association for the industry is the Society of British Aerospace
Companies which organises a major international air show at Farnborough,
Hampshire, every two years (the next in 1984).
Britain has a long-established tradition of shipbuilding and remains one of the
leading countries in the world for the construction, conversion and repair of
merchant vessels, warships and offshore structures. Most of the major British
shipyards have been reorganised in recent years, with the construction, in
several cases, of covered-berth ship ‘factories’ which are among the most
modern and efficient in the world. These yards, in both the public and private
sectors, build a wide variety of ships ranging from series designs like the SD14
general cargo ship to nuclear submarines, and from specialist tugs and offshore
supply vessels to super-tankers.
The public sector, which comprises British Shipbuilders and the Belfast
company Harland and Wolff, accounts for 97 per cent of output in merchant
shipbuilding and for all slow-speed marine diesel engines. In addition, British
Shipbuilders has a substantial warship building capacity. The public sector
also includes a number of companies engaged in general engineering work con¬
nected with the marine industries.
The continuing recession and over-capacity in shipbuilding throughout the
world has led to the closure of a number of shipyards and a reduction in the
industry’s work force. Orders for Royal Navy vessels are expected to remain
strong. About 23 per cent of merchant ship output in 1982 was for overseas
registration. British shipbuilders also export a wide variety of naval vessels and
associated products and services.
The private sector plays an important role in the construction and repair of
smaller vessels. Numerous yards specialise in the construction and repair of
tugs, purpose-built coasting and short-sea cargo vessels, smaller product
tankers, fishing boats, and other small craft required to meet the needs of the
armed forces, harbour and pilotage authorities and the leisure market.
British Shipbuilders provides the offshore oil and gas industry with consul¬
tancy services (including advice on exploiting hydrocarbons under difficult
conditions) and has modern and well-equipped shipyards able to build semi-
submersible units for drilling, production and emergency/maintenance
support, drillships, jack-up rigs, modules and offshore loading systems. Con¬
ventional yards within British Shipbuilders can also supply both traditional
and specialised support vessels. Private sector yards build jack-up rigs, fixed
platforms, submersibles (the world’s first manned submersible, made largely of
glass-reinforced plastic, was built by a British company) and a wide range of
operational equipment.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
219
FOOD, DRINK
AND TOBACCO
Bacon Curing,
Meat and Fish
Products
Dairy Products
1982
Labour0
’000s
Sales6
£m
Exports
£m
Imports
£m
food manufacturing
of which:
bacon, meat and fish products
milk and milk products
fruit and vegetable processing
grain milling and production of
bread, biscuits and flour
confectionery
sugar, ice-cream and cocoa,
chocolate and sugar
confectionery
animal feedstuffs
drinks
of which:
brewing and malting
tobacco
500 21,655
94
44
38
147
74
25
117
62
29
3,293
4,046
1,034
4,049
2,968
2,402
3,981
1,446
1,386
1,628
361
325
76
141
259
60
1,148
91
69
4,809
1,508
578
481
284
596
120
652
73
383
a Employees in employment (Great Britain) at September 1981.
b Manufacturers' sales.
Britain has one of the world’s largest and most sophisticated food processing
industries and processed foods have accounted for a growing proportion of total
domestic demand for food in recent decades, though the rate of growth has
slowed since the early 1970s. Convenience foods, particularly certain frozen
foods, yoghurts and instant snacks, have formed the fastest growing sector.
There is a high rate of innovation in processed foods, largely owing to the need to
increase sales in a food market which is not growing in size, given a nearly static
population. While Britain is a net importer of foodstuffs, the level of imports
declined between 1970 and 1980, though it has since risen somewhat. In 1980 the
food industry supplied the domestic market with 75 per cent of foods capable of
home production compared with less than 60 per cent in 1970. The most
marked reductions in imports have been in dairy, meat, fish, fruit and vegetable
products, and oils and fats. Exports, mainly to other members of the European
Community, have grown steadily. Basic research is being conducted into yeasts
and new sources of protein.
The industry uses about one-third of Britain’s pigmeat in the production of
cured bacon and ham and another third is processed into sausages, pies,
canned hams, pates and similar products. Other meat products include canned
and preserved meat, meat extracts and pastes and meat used to prepare other
foodstuffs. A wide range of fish, including shellfish, is processed by freezing,
canning, smoking or coating in batter or breadcrumbs. Products include fish
portions, complete fish meals, smoked fish and spreads.
Production of milk was some 115,990 million litres in 1982, of which just under
half was for sale as liquid milk. Nine out of ten households in Britain receive
pasteurised milk in bottles through a unique daily door-step delivery system
employing about 40,000 roundsmen (not included in the employment figure in
the table} driving electric vehicles. There are about 180 dairy companies and
co-operatives buying, processing and distributing milk and some 8,500 small
distributors. Domestic milk consumption per head (116 litres in 1982) is among
the highest in the world.
220
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Fruit,
Vegetable
and Other
Products
Bakery
Products
Confectionery
Beverages
The main milk products are butter (215,600 tonnes in 1982), cheese (249,000
tonnes), cream (73,640 tonnes), full-cream condensed milk (224,600 tonnes),
full-cream milk powder (48,900 tonnes) and skim milk powder (347,200
tonnes). The dairy industry accounted for 64 per cent of new butter supplies to
the British market in 1982, 71 per cent of new cheese supplies, and nearly all of
other milk products. Production and exports of butter and cheese have
increased significantly in recent years: butter exports in 1982 were 59,550
tonnes and cheese exports 33,600 tonnes, compared with 16,000 tonnes and
10,700 tonnes respectively in 1976. The other main exports are skim milk
powder (132,800 tonnes in 1982) and condensed milk (37,540 tonnes). The
industry’s interests are represented by the Dairy Trade Federation.
Fruit and vegetable products include canned, frozen and dried fruit and
vegetables, prepared nuts, pectin, jam, marmalade, pickles and sauces. Other
products of the food processing industry include sugar, sugar preparations and
honey, egg-based products, oils and fats, coffee, cocoa, tea and spices, and
cereal preparations. The oils and fats industry comprises a small number of
seed crushing companies (producing about 480,000 tonnes of crude oil a year)
and several refiners, with a combined output of some 900,000 tonnes of refined
oils and fats. These products are used for a number of purposes including food
manufacturing, animal feeding stuffs, soap and paints.
About 70 per cent of the bread in Britain is manufactured in large mechanised
bakeries, most of which use a process (the ‘Chorleywood’ process) developed by
the industry’s principal research organisation, the Flour Milling and Baking
Research Association, and now widely used in other countries. Two groups are
predominant: Associated British Foods and Ranks Hovis McDougall. There is a
growing consumer interest, however, in locally baked varieties, production of
which is usually allied to the production of cakes and other flour confectionery.
Biscuits and related products are a major sector of the industry and have gained
a world-wide reputation. Another sector is grain milling and the production of
various specialised flours and meal.
The cocoa, chocolate and sugar confectionery industry is composed of a small
number of very large manufacturers and many medium-sized and small com¬
panies. The three main manufacturers are Rowntree Mackintosh, Cadbury
Schweppes and Mars. Britain has a large share of world trade in chocolate and
sugar confectionery.
Of prime importance among the alcoholic beverages produced in Britain and in
the food and drink industry as a whole, is whisky. Scotch whisky accounts for
almost all whisky production in Britain. There are 115 distilleries in Scotland and
the well-known brands of blended Scotch whisky are made from the products of
a number of different distilleries. The Distillers Company accounts for about a
half of Scotch whisky output. Over 80 per cent of all Scotch whisky produced is
exported. The principal overseas markets are the United States (which takes
nearly a third of whisky exports from Britain), the rest of the European Com¬
munity and Japan. Production of gin in Britain rose steadily from the early
1950s until 1980 and some of the larger manufacturers also own distilleries over¬
seas. Production of vodka in Britain also increased sharply in the 1970s.
In the brewing and malting industry there are seven major brewery groups
whose products are sold nationally, and about 70 smaller enterprises who
mainly supply locally, or regionally, many of them because of a demand for
traditionally brewed beers. Firms have introduced new production methods,
including continuous brewing processes, and automated batch production
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
221
Tobacco
TEXTILES,
FOOTWEAR,
CLOTHING,
LEATHER AND
FUR GOODS
plants are well established. The main raw materials used are malt, hops and
some sugar. British malt, which is made almost entirely from home-grown
barley, is used by brewers throughout the world. In recent years lager has
increased in popularity.
Cider, perry and wine producers form the smallest sector of the drinks
industry and are located mostly in southern and western England. Made-wine is
produced from imported grapes and juices.
The soft drinks industry has expanded markedly in the last decade. There are
some very large companies among about 20 producing brands which are
marketed on a national scale, while other companies supply regional markets.
There is some specialisation among firms in the production of various types,
such as carbonated drinks, cola-based drinks, squashes and cordials, ‘mixers’,
fruit juices and health drinks.
The British tobacco industry manufactures almost all the cigarettes and
tobacco goods sold in Britain. Over 90 per cent of production is provided by four
major manufacturers (the Imperial Group, Gallaher, Carreras Rothmans and
British American Tobacco). The industry specialises in the production of high-
quality cigarettes made from flue-cured tobacco and achieves significant
exports, mainly of cigarettes. Countries in Europe, the Middle East and Africa
are important markets for British cigarettes. Britain’s most important source of
raw tobacco is Zimbabwe followed by Brazil, India, the United States and
Canada.
1982
Labour0 Salesb Exports Imports
’000s £m £m £m
textile industry 268 4,375 1,319 2,028
of which:
woollen and worsted industry 51 1,045 392 232
cotton and silk industry 46 784 312 924
hosiery and other knitwear 87 1,321 320 442
carpets, rugs and matting 21 619 121 196
footwear 55 774 118 475
clothing, hats and gloves 210 2,773 553 1,063
made-up textiles 30 600 81 141
fur goods 4 101 97 80
leather and leather goods 27 461 150 227
a Employees in employment (Great Britain) at September 1981.
b Manufacturers’ sales.
The historical branches of the industry, based on the natural fibres of cotton and
wool, linen and jute, have retained their separate identities but the boundaries
between them are becoming blurred with the increasing use of man-made fibres
(see p 210). The growth and variety of man-made fibre production has stimu¬
lated the development of new processes and new types of yarn and cloth and has
strongly influenced the structure of the industry. A small number of large
multifibre, multiprocess groups have emerged, although in many sectors a pre¬
ponderance of small companies engages in just one or two operations.
British textile companies manufacture a wide variety of goods, including lace,
narrow fabrics and household textiles, such as blankets, sheets, towels, and
tablecloths. Rope, twine, nets and netting are manufactured by the cordage
industry, and there is an important sector specialising in textiles for industrial
applications such as machine belting. A more recent development has been the
222
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Wool
Cotton
Linen
Hosiery and
Knitwear
Carpets
Jute
Clothing
production of non-woven fabric by a variety of bonding processes (using heat,
chemicals or pressure) which dispense with the conventional weaving and knit¬
ting stages.
The textile and clothing industries in Britain, as in other northern European
countries, have been affected by low-cost imports from developing countries.
Trade in textiles and clothing is regulated by the Multi-Fibre Arrangement
(MFA) of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. The MFA allows a
measure of restraint on imports of textiles and clothing from low-cost countries
into industrialised countries.
In 1982 export sales of tops, yarns and fabrics of the wool textile industry in
Britain were nearly two and a half times the value of imports. The industry is
one of the largest in the world and includes the world’s biggest wool textile
company, Illingworth, Morris. There are two main branches, woollen and
worsted. An increasing amount of man-made fibre is now blended with wool.
West Yorkshire is the main producing area but Scotland and the west of
England are also famous as specialised producers of high quality yarn and
cloth. Large quantities of raw wool are scoured and cleaned in Britain in prepar¬
ation for spinning. The largest markets for woollen and worsted fabrics are the
rest of the European Community, Japan and the United States.
During the nineteenth century cotton was Britain’s chief consumer goods
industry and cotton piece goods its largest export. Low-cost competition has cut
progressively into British markets and made necessary reorganisation,
modernisation and the introduction of new techniques. Production includes
yarns and fabrics of cotton, spun man-made fibres and mixtures of these.
The linen industry is centred in Northern Ireland, where the lighter types of
fabrics for apparel, furnishings and household textiles are produced. The
heavyweight canvas for sailcloth, tents, awnings and tarpaulins is mainly pro¬
duced in Scotland.
The hosiery and knitwear industry comprises about 1,000 companies situated
mainly in the East Midlands and Scotland, of which most are small to medium
in size. The industry produces fabrics, outerwear, underwear, tights, socks,
stockings, gloves and accessories.
Over 50 per cent of the output of the carpet and rug industry (in value terms) is
made up of tufted carpets, in the production of which the pile, usually with a
high man-made fibre content, is inserted into a pre-woven backing. Woven
carpets, such as Axminster and Wilton, account for most of the remainder of
sales. There is a higher wool content in woven types, although they too are
making more use of man-made fibres. The high quality and variety of design
make Britain one of the world’s leading producers of woven carpets. The
volume of carpet sales has contracted since 1978.
Jute products are manufactured in the Dundee area. Jute yarn and the
man-made polypropylene yarn are used in the manufacturing of carpets,
cordage and ropes and woven into fabrics for a wide range of applications in the
packaging, upholstery, building and motor car industries. New uses for jute, for
example, as a plastics reinforcement and for decorative wall coverings, have
also been developed.
The British clothing industry is one of the largest in Europe; it is highly labour
intensive with about 7,000 companies (predominantly small ones), accounting
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
223
for 4 per cent of Britain’s total employment in manufacturing. The existence of
the Multi-Fibre Arrangement has encouraged investment within the industry
and exports have risen somewhat since 1977; a wide range of clothing is
imported from European and Asian countries.
Footwear and The British footwear manufacturing industry is made up predominantly of
Leather small companies although there has been some rationalisation in recent years.
Though largely labour intensive, the industry has made use of technological
advances and supplies nearly half the shoes sold in Britain. Imports have risen
in recent years. Leather tanning and the manufacture of leather goods are also
long-established industries; all types of leather (particularly for footwear,
clothing and gloves) and leather goods are produced, and about one-third of
production is exported.
OTHER
MANUFACTURING
1982
Labour0 Salesb Exports Imports
’000s £m £m £m
timber and wooden furniture 209 4,036 300
paper and paper products 160 5,168 523
printing and publishing 351 5,455 534
processing of rubber and
plastics 197 5,023 1,160
toys and sports goods 30 457 171
other manufacturingc 57 800 747
1,489
2,044
336
1,129
300
1,014
Furniture,
Brushes and
Timber
a Employees in employment (Great Britain) at September 1981.
b Manufacturers’ sales.
c Excluding photographic laboratory processing.
The furniture industry comprises about 1,400 companies mostly small- to
medium-sized with only a few of any significant size. A wide range of products is
manufactured, the greater part of production being accounted for by domestic
furniture and the remainder by office, contract, school and other furniture. The
industry makes wooden, metal and plastic furniture, upholstery, beds and mat¬
tresses. Exports have increased in recent years, rising from £69 million in 1975
to £ 172 million in 1982 while imports have risen also. The major markets are the
United States, the Irish Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany.
The brush industry is located throughout Britain and includes highly mech¬
anised establishments as well as small craft units.
Domestic production of softwood timber has been steadily increasing but the
timber-using industries are mainly dependent on imported supplies. A large
proportion of timber sales goes to the construction industry.
Paper and Board There were about 115 paper and board mills in 1982, the largest six accounting
Manufacture for 27 per cent of total British production, which was 3 • 2 million tonnes. The
and Conversion largest British groups are Wiggins Teape, the Dickinson Robinson Group, Reed
International and the Bowater Corporation. They hold considerable interests
abroad, including pulp and paper producing mills in the United States, Canada,
other parts of the Commonwealth and Europe. Overseas paper and board
groups with manufacturing investments in Britain include Georgia Pacific,
Kimberly Clark, and Consolidated Bathurst. The main types of paper and
board produced are printing and writing papers and board, corrugated case
materials, packaging paper and board, and tissue. There has been a significant
trend towards waste-based packaging grades, in order to reduce the industry’s
reliance on imported woodpulp supplies. The use of recycled waste paper is
increasing and research is helping to extend it. Waste paper provides over half
224
Printing and
Publishing
Rubber
Plastics
Production
Toys, Games
and Sports
Equipment
Other Products
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
of the industry’s fibre needs. Domestically produced wood pulp represents only
a small percentage of raw material supplies.
The packaging and converting industries manufacture a variety of products,
including cardboard boxes, cartons, fibreboard packaging and business
stationery products.
The printing and publishing industries produce a wide range of products,
including national and provincial newspapers, periodicals, books, business
stationery and greeting cards. Mergers have led to the formation of large groups
in the newspaper, magazine and book publishing sectors, but general printing,
engraving, bookbinding and a large part of publishing remain essentially
industries of small firms. The book publishing industry is a major exporter.
Production processes include high-speed printing, electronic engraving,
advanced processes of photographic reproduction and computer typesetting.
Security printers (of, for example, banknotes and postage stamps) have a high
reputation and are important exporters, the two major companies being De La
Rue and Bradbury Wilkinson. The most important overseas markets for printed
matter are the United States, the Irish Republic and Australia.
Tyres and tubes represent around 45 per cent of sales of rubber manufactures,
the most important other goods being vehicle components and accessories,
conveyor belting, cables, industrial, hydraulic and marine hoses, latex foam
products and rubber footwear, gloves and clothing. Rubber is also used for infla¬
table life-rafts, containers for fuel and other industrial liquids and seals for
storage tanks and other products where there are problems of air exclusion and
vapour suppression. The Dunlop Company is Britain’s leading tyre and rubber
goods manufacturer. Tyre manufacturers include several subsidiaries of
United States and other overseas companies. The industry’s consumption of
rubber includes natural, synthetic and recycled rubber.
In addition to the plastics components and accessories supplied to many differ¬
ent industries, the plastics products industry manufactures a wide range of
building materials, such as pipes, sheeting for roofs, sanitary ware, tanks and
other products. It also supplies flexible foams, used in the vehicle, furniture and
other industries; rigid foams; packaging products, including bottles, containers
and bags; domestic and industrial hollow-ware; many kinds of household
goods; vinyl and other floorcoverings; and artificial leathercloth. Extensive
research is being conducted into the use of plastics in engineering products,
particularly those associated with transport.
There are about 480 manufacturers of a wide range of toys and games, only a
few of significant size. About a third of total production is exported, the major
markets being France, the Federal Republic of Germany and the United States.
British diecast toys and plastic toys (including model construction kits) are well
established in overseas markets. The greatest expansion in recent years has
been in electronic toys and games.
There are about 350 manufacturers of sports equipment, many of which are
small companies with a high reputation for craftsmanship. British fishing
tackle and golf and tennis equipment have a world-wide reputation. The main
export markets are the United States and the rest of the European Community.
Jewellery, gold and silverware and the refining of precious metals is an industry
in which British craftsmen are world famous. The Royal Mint makes coins for
some 70 overseas countries. Other miscellaneous manufacturing includes
musical instruments, film processing and small stationery goods.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
225
Structure
Output
Housing
Construction
The construction industry accounts for about 6 per cent of gross domestic
product. In 1982 some 56 per cent of output by value in Great Britain was new
work and 44 per cent was in repairs and maintenance. About 39 per cent of the
work was in housing and 61 per cent in other work. The value of output in
current prices amounted to £22,540 million. About 1 • 1 million people are
employed in the industry, accounting for nearly 5 per cent of total employment.
There are also about 400,000 self-employed.
The industry includes firms engaged on the construction, alteration, repair,
and maintenance of buildings, highways, bridges, tunnels, airfields, drainage
and sewerage systems, docks, harbours and canals, sea defence works, offshore
structures, electrical wiring, heating and other installation work, and structu¬
ral work connected with power stations and telecommunications. Efficiency
and productivity within the industry are benefiting from new computerised
techniques such as the use of electronic load safety measures for cranes, dis¬
tance measuring equipment, computerised stock ordering and job costing, and
computer-aided design.
Government sponsorship of the construction industry is the responsibility of
the Department of the Environment. Building regulations prescribe minimum
standards of construction in England and Wales. Made by the Secretary of State
for the Environment and administered and enforced by local authorities, the
regulations apply to new building, the installation or replacement of fittings,
and alterations and extensions to existing buildings. There are broadly similar
controls under separate legislation in Scotland, Northern Ireland and Inner
London. As an alternative to local authority building control and in order to
simplify procedures, an optional system of private certification of compliance
with building regulations is provided for in the Housing and Building Control
Bill before Parliament.
Construction work is carried out both by private contractors and by public
authorities which employ their own labour. In 1982 about 88 per cent of the
work was done by private firms. Although there were about 88,000 firms
employing two or more people, 91 per cent of them employed fewer than 25.
Some large firms are vertically integrated, owning quarries and workshops,
mechanised plant and standard builders’ equipment; some undertake respon¬
sibility for projects from initial design to finished building. All but the smallest
projects are generally carried out under professional direction, either by archi¬
tects or, in the case of the more complicated civil engineering projects, by con¬
sulting engineers. The latter, acting on behalf of a client, may advise on the
feasibility of projects, draw up plans and supervise the construction work.
The Property Services Agency (PSA), which is an integral part of the Depart¬
ment of the Environment, is responsible for the construction programmes
undertaken directly by the Government, including work for the armed forces
both in Britain and overseas.
A large proportion of public authority employees are engaged on repair and
maintenance work for local authorities. The total labour force includes about
70,000 trainees, whose normal apprenticeship period is three years.
Of the total value of work done in Great Britain in 1982 (£22,540 million), £3,920
million represented new housing and £8,709 million other new work; repair and
maintenance accounted for the remaining £9,911 million.
During 1982 a total of 193,000 dwellings were started in Great Britain, the first
increase for a number of years. Starts in the public sector were 52,400 and those
for private owners 140,700. In the course of the same year 170,700 dwellings
226
Civil
Engineering
Projects
Research and
Advisory
Services
Overseas
Construction
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
were completed, of which 49,400 were in the public sector and 121,300 in the
private sector. Industrialised building methods employing prefabricated
components are used in some of the work in both sectors. A timber-frame con¬
struction technique is employed in a growing proportion of new houses.
Among important construction projects in hand or completed in Britain in 1982
were the Heysham and Torness nuclear power stations, the Dinorwig pumped-
storage electricity station, the Thames Barrier, which forms part of London’s
flood defences, new air terminals at Heathrow and Gatwick, the new Lloyd’s
Insurance building and the International Conference Centre in London, the
M25 motorway, and roads, tunnels, bridges, hospitals and large-scale housing
developments.
Within the Department of the Environment, the Building Research Estab¬
lishment is concerned with all aspects of construction research and also pro¬
vides an advisory service. The British Board of Agrement, sponsored by the
Department, assesses and issues reports and certificates relating to products
and systems for use in the construction industry.
In addition to research carried out within the major construction and building
materials firms, work is also undertaken by research associations, universities
and colleges of technology. The Hydraulics Research Station at Wallingford
(Oxfordshire) carries out research in water supply, drainage, flood control, sea
protection and offshore engineering.
The Association of Building Centres represents 12 building centres
throughout Britain, most of which provide exhibition and information services
on materials, products, techniques and building services.
Total overseas earnings of all sectors of the construction industry in 1981-82
were estimated at about £3,500 million. British contractors earned £220 million
from overseas customers and a further £70 million from overseas branches and
subsidiaries. The related professions (consulting engineers, architects and
surveyors) had earnings of £610 million while process plant engineering contrac¬
tors contributed some £300 million and exports of building materials, plant and
machinery accounted for some £2,300 million.
In 1981-82 British construction firms carried out work overseas valued at
£ 1,480 million. New contracts worth £ 1,870 million were won overseas. Recent
major projects have included the Dubai Dry Dock, the largest in the world, and
the Hong Kong Metro. Among new orders are a power station project and an
international bank headquarters building in Hong Kong, the Mahaweli dam and
power project in Sri Lanka, a share in the second phase of the Trans-Gabon
railway, a dam and water supply system in Oyo State, Nigeria, potash works in
Dubai and Jordan, and a university complex in Oman.
The International Building Service, set up within the Building Centre in
London, helps overseas clients to procure British building products and
services.
Service Industries
There has been a steady rise in the proportion of total output contributed by the
service industries in Britain, and in the proportion of employees working in the
service sector. In 1982 services contributed about 58 per cent of gross domestic
product compared with some 55 per cent in 1970 and 50 per cent in 1960; and in
mid-1982 they accounted for 63 per cent employees in employment compared
with 50 per cent in 1970and47 percentin 1960. There has also been an increase
in service activities carried out within the productive sector; the proportion of
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
227
DISTRIBUTION
WHOLESALE
TRADES
administrative, technical and clerical workers employed in manufacturing, for
example, rose from 21 per cent in 1960 to 27 per cent in 1970 and 30 per cent in
1982. It is probable that this represents a growing contribution of management,
design, research and development, computing, marketing and distribution
skills. The increase in service activity has been accompanied by a rise in the
proportion of women in the working population, women tending to find
employment more readily in service activities than in production. In mid-1982,
7 9 per cent of employed women were in service industries compared with 51 per
cent of males in employment.
The main growth sectors since 1972 have been communications and financial
and business services, followed by miscellaneous services, public health and
education, and public administration. The contributions of the distributive and
allied trades and of transport have declined. The substantial contribution of the
publicly provided health and education services results in part from the recog¬
nition that investment in human resources is of increasing importance to an
industrialised society in an era of technological advance. Within miscellaneous
services, growth (measured by employment) has occurred chiefly in services
associated with sports and leisure activities, research and development
services and hairdressing and beauty parlours. The contribution of the main
service categories to gross domestic product can be seen in Table 12, p 185.
One detectable trend in recent decades is that consumers have exchanged
certain services (such as public transport, laundries and cinemas) for pur¬
chased or rented goods (such as motor cars, washing-machines and television
sets) with which they can provide services for themselves. In turn demand for
the distribution, maintenance and repair of such goods has generated fresh
service activities. Increased consumer expenditure on the running costs of
motor vehicles has contributed significantly to the rise in consumer expendi¬
ture on services from 30 per cent of total consumer expenditure in 1960 to 40 per
cent in 1982.
In general, technical innovation, particularly in electronics, is combining
with increased consumer spending to make possible the provision of new and
improved services, ranging from electronic accounting, stocktaking and
‘check-out’ operations in retail distribution outlets to the provision of credit and
cash through cards, the expansion of information systems such as viewdata,
and the renting of videocassette recorders.
There were about 4 • 1 million people engaged in the distributive and allied
trades in September 1981, together with a large number of owners of businesses.
There were 840,000 people in wholesaling, just over 2 million in retailing,
938,000 in hotels and catering, and 238,000 in the repair of vehicles and con¬
sumer goods. The distributive and allied trades accounted for about 12 per cent
of national income in 1982.
In 1981 there were some 96,000 businesses engaged in wholesaling and dealing,
with a turnover (including sales to other wholesalers and dealers) of some
£115,000 million. The main areas in which wholesalers are dominant are
groceries and provisions, petroleum products, and ores and metals. A number
of large retailers carry out the functions of the wholesaler by having their own
warehouses, and buying and distributive organisations.
The wholesale grocery trade is divided between ‘cash and carry’ and the tradi¬
tional delivered trade in a ratio of 2 to 1. The cash and carry sector, with some
590 depots, grew in importance during the 1960s and 1970s by offering
discounts to customers purchasing in bulk and limiting expenditure on
premises, credit and delivery facilities. Grocery wholesaling has greatly dimi¬
nished in recent years; over two-thirds of groceries are now delivered direct
228
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
RETAIL
TRADES
from manufacturers to the large multiple food retailers, by-passing the tradi¬
tional wholesalers.
Three large groups, Booker McConnell, Nurding and Peacock, and Linfold
predominate in the wholesale grocery trade. London’s wholesale markets play a
significant part in the distribution of foodstuffs. New Covent Garden is the main
market for fruit and vegetables, Smithfield for meat and Billingsgate for fish.
The co-operative movement in Britain has its own wholesale organisation,
the Co-operative Wholesale Society (CWS), to serve the needs of retail societies;
its turnover was £1,980 million in 1982. Retail societies are encouraged to buy
from the CWS, which supplies about two-thirds of their requirements.
In the grocery trade there are a number of voluntary groups which have been
formed by wholesalers with small independent retailers, whereby the retailers
are encouraged by discounts and other incentives to buy as much as possible
from the wholesaler. This has helped to preserve many smaller retail outlets for
the wholesaler, including the traditional ‘corner shops’ and village stores, of
value to local communities, and has given small retailers the advantages of bulk
buying and co-ordinated distribution.
Turnover of the retail trades has been growing slowly in real terms in recent
years, despite the recession. In 1982 retail sales were 55 per cent higher than in
1978, representing, however, only an 8 per cent increase in volume. In 1981 there
were an estimated 232,000 businesses in the retail trade in Great Britain with a
turnover of more than £15,000. Their turnover was about £63,000 million in 1981
when they invested £ 1,700 million. As the large multiple retailers (those with ten
or more outlets) have grown in size and diversified their product ranges, there
has been a decline in the number of retail businesses and outlets. The decline
has been particularly evident among small independent businesses and retail
co-operative societies. Shops selling durable household goods have experi¬
enced the fastest growth in turnover in recent years, while those selling food have
recorded the slowest growth.
The largest multiple retailers in the packaged grocery market are the retail
co-operatives, Sainsbury, Tesco, Asda, Allied Suppliers, Kwik Save, Fine Fare
and International Stores. Retail co-operative societies are voluntary organi¬
sations controlled by their members, membership being open to anyone paying
a small deposit on a minimum share; at the end of 1982 the 149 retail societies
had 9 • 1 million members and 6,983 retail outlets. Turnover in 1981 amounted to
£4,267 million, 6 per cent of total retail trade. Retail co-operatives and the Co¬
operative Wholesale Society (see above) are members of the Co-operative Union
as are a number of other co-operative bodies such as the Co-operative Bank. In
1982-83 Tesco had about 490 stores and sales were valued at £2,277 million.
Sainsbury had some 260 outlets and the company’s sales amounted to £2,293
million.
The leading mixed retail businesses are Marks and Spencer (with sales of
£2,506 million in 1982-83), Boots, F W Woolworth, the John Lewis Partner¬
ship, House of Fraser, W H Smith & Son, Debenhams and British Home Stores.
There are a number of discount stores operating on the principle of selling
most or all of their goods at a reduced price. Electrical goods, furniture, carpets
and do-it-yourself supplies are some of the main items sold by discount stores.
About 18 million people regularly shop by post. In 1981 sales by general mail
order firms totalled some £2,375 million, representing 3-5 per cent of retail
sales and 5 • 8 per cent of retail sales excluding food shops. The volume of mail
order sales increased rapidly in the 1970s butfelloffsomewhatin 1980 and 1981.
Leading items sold by mail order are clothing, footwear, furniture, household
textiles and radio, television and electrical goods. The two main mail order
firms are Great Universal Stores and Littlewoods.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
229
Trends
Supermarkets,
Superstores and
Hypermarkets
Shopping
Centres
Table 15: Retail Trade in Great Britain 1980°
Number of
people
Number of Number of engaged Turnover6
businesses outlets (thousand) (£ million)
Single-outlet retailers 197,884 197,884
Small multiple retailers 28,932 76,920
Large multiple retailers (ten
or more retail outlets)
of which:
Co-operative societies 191 8,556
Food retailers 81,846 118,083
Drink, confectionery and
tobacco retailers 39,408 54,878
Clothing, footwear and
leather goods retailers 29,884 57,069
Household goods retailers 38,864 58,267
Other non-food retailers 32,228 44,745
Mixed retail businesses 3,346 9,520
Hire and repair businesses 2,502 6,038
859
378
1,261 73,797
139
861
248
291
280
221
420
47
18,118
8,451
1,131 31,915
3,869
22,586
5,973
5,281
7,987
4,640
11,083
936
Total retail trade
228,077 348,601
2,368 58,484
Source: British business.
a Figures cover businesses above the threshold of value added tax (£ 13,000 at that time).
b Includes value added tax.
The difference between totals and the sums of their component parts is due to rounding.
One of the most significant trends in retailing in recent years has been the
increase in the proportion of turnover accounted for by large multiple retailers;
they have 54 per cent of retail turnover. Other important trends have been the
increase in very large self-service stores selling a wide variety of products,
diversification by food multiples into selling a wider range of goods, the develop¬
ment of specially designed shopping precincts and an increasing emphasis on
price competition.
There are supermarkets in most towns and cities in Britain. The main multiple
grocery companies have been steadily increasing the size of their supermarkets
and closing the smellier and less efficient ones. The trend to greater size has led
to a growing number of superstores and hypermarkets, single-level, self-service
stores offering a wider range of food and non-food merchandise and which have
at least 2,500 square metres (26,900 square feet) and 5,000 square metres
(53,800 square feet) respectively of selling space. They are designed primarily
for shoppers with cars and substantial free car-parking space is usually pro¬
vided. In Britain the first such store was opened in the mid-1960s and by April
1983 there were some 217 superstores and 41 hypermarkets, while planning per¬
mission for a further 40 superstores and 3 hypermarkets had been granted. It is
government policy that these stores should be located within urban areas,
preferably within shopping centres, where they are accessible to all shoppers
including those without cars.
Britain has a variety of new purpose-built shopping centres. The largest are the
Manchester Arndale and the centre in Milton Keynes, which, both covering
230
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Diversification
Promotions
Use of
Technology
Vehicle and
Petrol Retailing
Hotels and
Catering
more than 93,000 square metres (1 million square feet), are among the largest in
Europe. Other large centres are at Brent Cross in London, the Luton Arndale
and the Eldon Square Development in Newcastle upon Tyne.
Many of the large multiple groups have diversified over the last few years to offer
a much bigger range of goods than previously. This has been especially notice¬
able for the large food retailers, which often sell non-food products, such as beer,
wines and spirits, clothing and household appliances, as well as packaged
groceries. Another trend is that many superstores and large supermarkets offer
fresh as well as packaged food, often with special counters or areas for fresh
meat, fish, vegetables and bread baked on the premises.
Retailers are placing greater emphasis on price competition as a means of pro¬
moting sales, while trading stamps, which were an important method of sales
promotion in the late 1960s and early 1970s, have become much less significant.
With the growth of payments by credit card, certain of the large retailers have
issued their own credit cards for regular customers in an attempt to increase
sales, particularly of high-value goods.
Laser-scanning electronic check-outs are expected to have a major impact on
retailing in the next few years. A low-power laser beam at the point of sale scans
a bar code on the package of each item and the price is automatically retrieved
from a central computer. The customer is given a receipt showing the price and
identity of each item purchased, while the store’s stock records are altered auto¬
matically. Substantial savings are expected from improved stock control and a
reduction of individual price marking in stores. Key Markets introduced the first
operational laser-scanning electronic check-out in Britain at Spalding (Lin¬
colnshire) in 1979. At a local library in Gateshead, Tyne and Wear, a computer¬
ised shopping service enables elderly and disabled people to order goods from a
supermarket by passing a light-pen over items on a list of goods. Some large
multiple retailers are experimenting with sales information on Prestel (see
p 287); others are using electronic order and invoice systems in dealing with
their suppliers, following a legal change permitting tax invoices in forms other
than paper. Small independent retailers, also, are using electronic ordering,
pricing and delivery systems. High-speed labelling techniques, including the
use of electronic printers which can overprint labels, the use of pressure-
sensitive glues and printing in foil instead of ink, are being adopted in order to
save time and labour costs.
In September 1981 some 248,000people were employed in the retail distribution
of motor vehicles and parts and in petrol stations. In spite of the continuing
increase in the number of road vehicles, the number of petrol stations is declin¬
ing and at the end of 1982 there were some 24,108 (2 • 5 per cent fewer than in
1981), of which 31 per cent were owned by oil companies. There were about 8,000
outlets selling diesel fuel. Self-service stations are becoming increasingly
important and in 1982 they accounted for 30 per cent of petrol stations. There
were some 28,000 retail outlets wholly or mainly engaged in motor vehicle dis¬
tribution in 1981, and 27,500 motor repair centres.
The hotel and catering trades employed 952,000 people in mid-1982,272,000 in
hotels and other residential establishments; 188,000 in restaurants, cafes and
snackbars; 248,000 in public houses; 135,000 in clubs; and 109,000 by catering
contractors. A large number of self-employed people are also engaged in hotels
and catering. There were 13,900 licensed hotel businesses in Great Britain in
1981 with a turnover of £2,750 million. Many licensed hotels as well as most of
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
231
BUSINESS
SERVICES
Advertising
Computer
Services
Management
Consultancy
the numerous guest houses axe small, with fewer than 20 rooms, although there
are also several large groups of hotels. The biggest is Trusthouse Forte Ltd, the
world’s largest hotel, catering and leisure company, which runs over 800 hotels
including over 200 in Britain. The total turnover of holiday camps and camping
and caravan sites was about £420 million in 1981. Among the largest firms run¬
ning holiday centres (including holiday camps with full board, self-catering
centres and caravan parks) are Butlins, Pontins, Ladbroke Holidays, Warners
and Haven Leisure. There were over 36,700 businesses in Great Britain in 1981
with a total turnover of more than £2,800 million, which were engaged in the
sale of food for consumption both on and off the premises. These include resta¬
urants, snack bars, cafes, fish and chip shops and other establishments selling
‘take-away’ food. Britain has a very wide range of restaurants of which a sub¬
stantial number specialise in the dishes of other countries such as Chinese,
Italian, Indian and Greek foods. ‘Fast food’ catering, in which establishments
sell hot food such as hamburgers or chicken to be eaten either on the premises or
elsewhere, is becoming increasingly significant. Take-away meals now account
for more than one-third of all meals bought in restaurants and other catering
establishments. There are about 76,000 ‘pubs’ (public houses, which mainly
sell beer, wines and spirits for consumption on the premises) in Great Britain,
with a total turnover of over £5,270 million in 1981.
Business services include advertising, market research, management consul¬
tancy, exhibition and conference facilities, computer services and auction
houses. Most of these sectors have grown rapidly in recent years.
Advertising expenditure rose by 9 per cent in 1982 to £3,126 million, according to
the Advertising Association. Advertising in the press accounted for 64 per cent
of the total, television for 30 per cent, posters for 4 per cent and commercial
radio for 2 per cent. Advertising has been growing fastest in television,
freesheets and directories. Advertising campaigns are planned mainly by
advertising agencies, of which there are several hundred in Britain; in some
cases they also provide marketing, consumer research and other services.
There were some 40,500 people employed in advertising and market research
in mid-1982.
Britain is acknowledged as a world leader in the provision of software and
computer services, and software developed in Britain has contributed to devel¬
opments in the applications of computers in numerous countries. The industry
comprises software houses, which provide professional services such as consul¬
tancy and the writing of programs to meet the computing needs of their clients
and computer bureaux, where the main emphasis is on processing customers’
data. The revenue of the industry was £695 million in 1982, about £83 million
more than the previous year. The industry has recorded an annual average
growth at constant (1975) prices of 13 per cent since 1971. Some 25,140 people
were employed full-time in computing services in 1982. About 215 computer
service companies are members of the Computing Services Association, the
leading trade association. Many of the companies are subsidiaries of firms
engaged in activities such as banking, insurance, manufacturing and dis¬
tribution.
There are thought to be some 5,000 management consultants in Britain, of
whom 2,800 are practising members of the Institute of Management Consul¬
tants. Among the largest management consultancy companies are the 27
members of the Management Consultants Association, whose turnover amoun¬
ted to £81 million in 1982. Revenue earned within Britain comprised £58
232
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Market
Research
Exhibition and
Conference
Centres
Auction
Houses
Other Business
Services
MISCEL¬
LANEOUS
SERVICES
Film and
Television
million, an increase of 21 per cent on the previous year, while overseas revenue
amounted to £23 million. The Association reports a growing demand for
services supporting the application of computer technology, particularly
microprocessing, to all aspects of business.
The 25 members of the Association of Market Survey Organisations (AMSO)
accounted for about two-thirds of total turnover by market research companies
in 1982. Excluding the largest company (the AGB group, which had an esti¬
mated turnover of £ 18 million) the turnover of AMSO members increased to £62
million in 1982 from £57 million in 1981. Research on behalf of food companies
accounted for 30 per cent.
With the steady increase in new and renovated facilities, some 55 to 60 towns
and cities are well equipped to hold conferences and exhibitions. Among the
most modern buildings are the National Exhibition Centre at Birmingham, the
Wembley Conference Centre and the Barbican Centre in London, the Brighton
Centre in Sussex, the Harrogate Centre in North Yorkshire, St David’s Hall in
Cardiff and the Royal Centre in Nottingham. Other large facilities are the Earls
Court, Olympia and Wembley Arena sites in London. The major conference
towns are Blackpool (Lancashire) and Brighton. Britain is one of the world’s
three leading countries for international conferences (the others being the
United States and France); the Union of International Associations, based in
Brussels, estimated that about 11 per cent of the world’s main international con¬
ferences were held in Britain in 1982. British firms axe very active overseas in the
market for exhibition organising services.
Britain’s chief auction houses are active in the international auction markets for
works of art, trading on the acknowledged expertise of British valuers and
dealers. The two largest houses, Sotheby’s and Christie’s, are established
world-wide and had turnover of £273 million and £229 million in 1982-83
respectively.
Other business services include land and estate companies, estate agents, and
typewriting, duplicating, document copying, translating and employment
agencies.
Some 96,000 people were employed in film, theatre, musical, broadcasting and
related services in September 1981, 280,000 in sanitary services, 121,000 in
research and development services and 276,000 in services connected with
sport, recreation, gambling and betting. Other services provided include
hairdressing and beauty parlours (92,000 employees), laundries (41,000), dry
cleaning, photographic studios, religious organisations, tourist offices, learned
societies, employers and trade union organisations, and funeral services.
Among major changes in the film and television industry in recent years, two
main trends have been the growth of the specialised film and television services
sector on the one hand, and the decline of the cinema sector, partly as a result of
the growth of public television services, on the other (see also pp351 and 368).
Technical developments, such as the use of magnetic videotape instead of film,
and the exploitation of computer-generated graphics, have been responsible for
changes both in the production and exhibition of film and television material.
They have also played a part in the growth of the specialised sector, in which
relatively small studios, mostly based in London, provide a wide range of film
and television services, including the making of advertising films, ‘special
effects’ sequences for feature and other films, documentary and educational
programmes, and cartoon films. In addition, new audio-visual technology is
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
233
TRAVEL
AND
TOURISM
being adopted in industrial, commercial medical and scientific contexts for
information, observation and training purposes.
The Department of Trade and Industry conducts an annual inquiry into the
value of overseas transactions relating to the production and exhibition of
cinema and television material. For many years the inquiry has shown a
surplus of receipts over expenditure. In 1982 receipts by film and television com¬
panies were £163 million, while expenditure was £85 million, a surplus of £78
million. Film companies’ receipts totalled £130 million and television com¬
panies’ receipts £33 million, the North American market accounting for 60 per
cent of revenue in both cases. Some 191 film companies, the 18 Independent
Broadcasting Authority programme contractors and the British Broadcasting
Corporation were covered in the 1982 inquiry.
The travel business is another growth sector and some 2,200 travel agencies
with about 5,380 offices (over 90 per cent of the total) belong to the Association
of British Travel Agents (ABTA). Many travel agents are small businesses but
nearly half of ABTA members have more than one office. There are a few large
firms (of which the biggest is Thomas Cook) with over 190 branches. There are
also some 460 tour operator members of ABTA, of whom half are also travel
agencies. The leading tour operators are British Airways (through its subsidia¬
ries, Sovereign and Enterprise), Cosmos, Horizon, Intasun, Rank Travel and
Thomson. Some 69 per cent of the air package holiday market is accounted for
by the 26 largest air travel organisers. ABTA operates financial protection
schemes to safeguard its members’ customers, maintains codes of conduct
drawn up with the Office of Fair Trading, and offers a free conciliation service to
help to resolve complaints against members and an independent arbitration
scheme for tour operators’ customers.
Overseas earnings from foreign travel increased greatly in the 1970s and
Britain had a surplus on its travel account from 1968 to 1980. It is estimated that
in 1982 some 11 • 6 million overseas visitors to Britain (some 180,000more than in
the previous year) spent £3,184 million, about £214 million more than in 1981.
British residents made 20 • 6 million trips abroad and spent £3,650 million,
giving a deficit on the travel account of £466 million. About half of overseas
visitors to Britain came from the other European Community countries, 18 per
cent from North America and about 12 per cent from elsewhere in Western
Europe. There was an increase of 1 • 6 million visits abroad by British residents
in 1982; the main destinations were the European Community (just over half of
all visits) and elsewhere in Western Europe (30 per cent). Official support for the
promotion of tourism within Britain is provided by the British Tourist Authority
and the tourist boards for England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland (see
p 198). Voluntary registration schemes exist for tourist accommodation
throughout Britain and facilities offered by registered establishments are listed
in the boards’ accommodation guides. Information on tourist facilities and
accommodation is available from official information centres throughout
Britain and on the Prestel information service.
13 Energy
and Natural
Resources
Britain has the largest energy resources of any country in the European Com¬
munity. Minerals as a whole make an important contribution to the economy.
The approximate value of minerals produced in 1981 was £18,760 million, of
which crude oil accounted for 65 per cent, coal 24 per cent and natural gas 5 per
cent. The value of mineral production was 47 per cent higher at constant prices
than in 1970, virtually all of the increase being accounted for by oil and gas.
All minerals in Great Britain are privately owned, with the exception of gold,
silver, oil and natural gas (which are owned by the Crown), and coal and some
minerals associated with coal. On the United Kingdom Continental Shelf the
right to exploit all minerals except coal is vested in the Crown. The exclusive
right to extract coal, or license others to do so, both on land and under the sea, is
vested in the National Coal Board. Normally, ownership of minerals runs with
the ownership of the land surface but in some areas, particularly where mining
has taken place, these rights have become separated. Mining and quarrying,
apart from coal, are usually carried out by privately owned companies.
Water resources are normally sufficient for domestic and industrial
requirements; supplies are obtained from surface sources such as mountain
lakes and from underground sources by such means as wells and boreholes.
Energy
Four main primary sources of energy — petroleum, coal, natural gas and
nuclear power — are used in Britain, together with some water power; secondary
sources produced from these are electricity, coke and very small quantities of
town gas. Since 1980 Britain has been self-sufficient in energy in net terms as a
result of the continued growth in offshore oil production, and this position
should be maintained for a number of years. Coal and nuclear power are never¬
theless likely to have an increasingly important role in Britain’s primary energy
supply particularly in the long term. Estimated operating reserves of coal,
Britain’s richest natural resource, are 7,000 million tonnes, equivalent to
output at present rates of extraction for nearly 60 years; total coal resources are
many times higher. A major capital investment programme in the coal industry
is in progress. Nuclear power provided about 16 per cent of electricity available
through the public supply system in 1982 and the proportion will grow as
further nuclear power stations now under construction, or planned, are
brought into service.
Privately owned companies predominate in offshore oil and gas production
and oil refining, while publicly owned bodies are responsible for most coal
production, gas distribution, and electricity generation and distribution. The
publicly owned fuel and power industries in Britain employ in total about
500,000 people (some 2 • 5 per cent of all employees); their annual turnover is
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
235
Energy Policy
ENERGY
CONSUMPTION
about £25,000 million and capital investment £3,500 million. In Great Britain
the Secretary of State for Energy is responsible for these industries, except for
electricity in Scotland which is the responsibility of the Secretary of State for
Scotland.
The Government’s energy strategy involves ensuring the security and availabi¬
lity of energy supplies, using oil and gas reserves at an optimum rate,
developing competitive coal production, expanding the role of nuclear power,
supporting research into renewable sources of energy and encouraging
measures which result in lower energy consumption. Pricing that reflects the
true long-term costs of energy supplies is also central to the Government’s
approach, both to discourage the wasteful use of energy and to stimulate new
methods of utilising and saving it.
Britain is actively engaged in international collaboration on energy ques¬
tions, notably through its membership of the European Community (following
a British initiative, agreement was reached in 1981 on energy pricing principles)
and of the International Energy Agency (IEA, a body with 21 member countries
attached to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development).
Since its establishment in 1974, the IEA has agreed a wide range of co-operative
measures to reduce member nations’ dependence on imported oil. The rapid
increase of North Sea oil production, together with the Government’s policies
on coal, nuclear power and energy conservation, has meant that, from being a
net oil importer of 41 million tonnes of oil in 1978, Britain has been able to accept,
as a contribution to the European Community’s response to the world economic
summit in T okyo in 1979, a target for 1985 of net exports of 5 million tonnes of oil.
The Government also attaches considerable importance to a common under¬
standing between energy producers and energy consumers.
Inland primary energy consumption fell by 1 • 7 per cent in 1982 to 311 • 9 million
tonnes (see Table 16), the third successive annual fall in consumption, reflecting
energy conservation and the economic recession. The changing pattern of con¬
sumption is illustrated in the diagram on p 236, the most noticeable feature
being the growing contribution of natural gas. Energy consumption by final
users in 1982 amounted to 54,280 million therms1 on a ‘heat supplied’ basis, of
which industrial users consumed about 32 per cent, domestic users 29 per cent,
transport 26 per cent and public services 6 per cent.
Table 16: Inland Energy Consumption (in terms of primary sources)
million tonnes coal equivalent
1972
1977 1980 1981 1982
Oil
Coal
Natural gas
Nuclear energy
Hydro-electric power
162
122
40
10
1
136-6
122-7
62-8
14-3
2-0
121-4
120-8
711
13-4
2-0
110
118
72
13
2
111-1
110-7
71-7
16-0
2-4
Total
338-0 338-4 328-7 317-2 311-9
Source: Department of Energy.
Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
1 therm = 105,506 kilojoules.
236
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Primary Energy Consumption
1972
Coal 36.2<>/o
I
Oil 48.0%
Natural gas 12.1%
Nuclear energy 3.1%
Hydro-electric power 0.5%
1982
Coal 35.5%
Oil 35.6%
?
Natural gas 23.0%
i
Nuclear energy 5.1%
Hydro-electric power 0.8%
ENERGY Energy conservation has a central place in the Government’s energy strategy. It
CONSERVATION is based on the rational pricing of energy and supported by a campaign of
information and advice to consumers including the encouragement of good
energy conservation practice throughout industry and commerce. The Secre¬
tary of State for Energy is advised by an independent Advisory Council on
Energy Conservation, while studies on energy conservation and alternative
sources of energy are undertaken by a number of organisations, notably the
Energy Technology Support Unit of the Department of Energy.
Conservation Several schemes to help industry and commerce to conserve energy are in
Measures operation, including assistance towards the cost of consultants’ surveys,
energy audits in selected industries and financial assistance for research, devel¬
opment and demonstration projects, and the Department of Energy is setting
up an Energy Efficiency Office. Firms are encouraged to appoint energy man¬
agers (of whom there are over 5,000) to draw up and be responsible for energy
conservation measures in factories and offices. Many firms have achieved signi¬
ficant economies through measures such as better use of heating and lighting,
improved operational and maintenance techniques, and the installation of
draught-proofing and additional insulation. Following discussions with the
Government, the motor manufacturers are working towards a voluntary target
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
237
OFFSHORE
OIL AND GAS
Offshore
Supplies
OIL
North Sea
Fields
ofa 10 per cent improvement between 1978and 1985 in the average mileage per
gallon achieved by new cars sold in Britain. The Government believes that in
certain circumstances it is appropriate to give consumers a direct financial
inducement to adopt conservation measures and, for example, under the
Homes Insulation Act 1978, grants are available to householders for loft and
water-tank insulation. In some areas the Government sets compulsory stand¬
ards such as the maximum temperature in non-domestic buildings and the
minimum insulation standard of all new buildings. Under the Energy Conser¬
vation Act 1981 the Government has powers to enable standards to be set for the
efficiency of new space and water heating appliances and of gas appliances, for
industrial and domestic uses. These powers will enable the Government to
implement a number of European Community directives on heat generators
and gas appliances.
Britain’s energy position has been transformed by the discovery of substantial
oil and gas reserves offshore in the United Kingdom Continental Shelf (UKCS).
Seismic prospecting began in the early 1960s and full-scale exploration activi¬
ties in 1964. The total area covered by production licences is some 54,000
square kilometres (20,850 square miles) out of a total designated area of about
651,650 square kilometres (251,600 square miles), over which Britain has exer¬
cised its rights to explore and exploit the seabed and subsoil. Expenditure on
offshore and onshore exploration and development amounts to more than
£35,000 million (at 1982 prices) so far. Expenditure in 1982 was estimated at
about £3,100 million.
The Department of Energy’s Offshore Supplies Office seeks to ensure that
British industry can compete effectively for orders for offshore equipment by
helping firms to identify the needs of offshore operators, assisting operators to
identify British suppliers of offshore equipment and services, and promoting
new ventures to increase British involvement in the industry. British com¬
panies increased their share of the United Kingdom offshore market, worth
£2,260 million in 1982, from between 25 and 30 per cent in 1973 to 73 per cent in
1982 and are increasingly involved in supplying other offshore markets.
During most of the twentieth century Britain has been almost wholly dependent
for its oil supplies on imports, the only indigenous supplies coming from a small
number of land-based oilfields. However, the first discovery of oil in the UKCS
was made in 1969 and the first oil was brought ashore in 1975. Output of crude oil
from the UKCS in mid-1983 was over 2 million barrels (270,000 tonnes) a day
making Britain the world’s fifth largest producer.
There were 24 offshore fields producing crude oil in September 1983: Brent and
Forties, two of the largest offshore oilfields in the world; Argyll; Auk; Beatrice;
Beryl A; Buchan; Claymore; Dunlin; Fulmar; Heather; Magnus; Maureen; Mon¬
trose; Murchison; Ninian; North Cormorant; North West Hutton; Piper; South
Brae; South Cormorant; Statfjord; Tartan; and Thistle. Four more fields are
under development, while another 20 significant finds may prove to have
commercial potential after further appraisal. Production from most large fields
is controlled from production platforms of either steel or concrete which have
been built to withstand severe weather including gusts of wind of up to 260
km/h (160 mph) and waves of 30 metres (100 feet).
Britain s primary oil production, including condensates and petroleum
gases, amounted to more than 103 million tonnes in 1982 (see Table 17), 14 per
cent more than in 1981. Production is expected to continue to rise, reaching
between 95 million and 115 million tonnes in 1983, and between 95 million and
Oil
50
_I_
100 miles
I
50
I
100
150 kilometres
Offshore oilfields in production
or under development
Other named offshore oil finds
Onshore oil finds
Oil refineries (over 1 million
tonnes annual capacity)
Crude oil pipelines
Norway^
Magnus-^
Eider-A
N Cormorant -A
Tern a"
S Cormorant
ClairA
Sullom Voe
Shetland
Islands
Thistle
Murchison
Statfjord
Dunlin
Brent
Hutton
Alwyn N
Ninian
Beryl B
Orkney
.o QV
Islands lotta
Claymore
Beryl A1
ACrawford
S Brae#
er Tiffany
^Toni/Thelma
Scapa* Tartan *-,8aJmoral
Andrew
Forties
»
Montrose
Clyde
Ekofisk
Border of L
Continental
Shelf
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
239
125 million tonnes in 1984. Output should be at its highest levels in the
mid-1980s, although Britain should be a significant producer on a smaller scale
until well into the twenty-first century. The Government’s view is that its oil
policy should encourage exploration and development with the objective of
maximising economic oil production for the foreseeable future. Remaining
proven reserves of oil in the UKCS amount to about 1,000 million tonnes while
the total remaining reserves of the UKCS could be as high as 4,200 million
tonnes.
Structure of the The two leading British oil companies are British Petroleum (BP) and Shell
Oil Industry Transport and Trading, which are the two largest industrial companies in
Britain in terms of turnover. Sales by BP (in which the Government has a 32 per
cent stake) averaged 3 • 1 million barrels (0 • 42 million tonnes) a day of crude oil
and petroleum products in 1982, and its gross income was £35,300 million. It has
about 143,000 employees, of whom 34,000 are employed in Britain.
The British National Oil Corporation (BNOC) is a public corporation set up
under the Petroleum and Submarine Pipelines Act 1975 and a major oil trader.
Under the Oil and Gas (Enterprise) Act 1982, BNOC’s oil-producing business
(covering substantial exploration, development and production activities on
the UKCS) was transferred to Britoil, a new independent private sector
company in which the Government retains a 49 per cent stake. The role of the
Corporation has been redefined as that of securing and disposing of UKCS oil in
a way which contributes to national security of supply and of ensuring that the
national economy receives the maximum benefit from it. However, BNOC
remains the largest single trader in oil from the UKCS by virtue of its rights
through agreements with other oil companies to acquire at market prices up to
51 per cent of oil currently produced, and as agent for the Government in
marketing oil received as royalty payments-in-kind. In 1982 BNOC’s sales
averaged 1 • 2 million barrels (0 • 16 million tonnes) a day of crude oil — some 58
per cent of UKCS production.
There are several other large oil companies operating in Britain or engaged in
work on the UKCS. In total there are about 250 companies with interests in the
North Sea.
Land-based Onshore production of crude oil in Britain is much less significant than offshore
Fields production. In 1982 it amounted to about 250,000 tonnes, including 165,000
tonnes produced from Britain’s largest onshore field at Wytch Farm (Dorset),
which started production in 1979. Eleven other onshore fields are in operation,
notably Bothamsall and Egmanton in Nottinghamshire, Gainsborough in Lin¬
colnshire and Kimmeridge in Dorset.
Refineries At the beginning of 1983 the distillation capacity of Britain’s oil refineries stood
at 113 • 6 million tonnes a year, 11-8 million tonnes less than a year earlier. This
reduction of excess capacity (which included the closure of two refineries)
reflects the continuing adaptation of oil companies to the structural change in
oil demand caused by the crude oil price rises of 1973 and 1979. Existing refiner¬
ies are being adapted to the changing pattern of demand by the construction of
new upgrading facilities (‘catalytic crackers’) which are leading to a higher
output of motor spirit and naphtha at the expense of fuel oil.
Consumption Deliveries of petroleum products for inland consumption (excluding refinery
consumption) in 1982 totalled 67 -2 million tonnes including 16 -2 million
tonnes of fuel oil, 19 • 2 million tonnes of motor spirit, 16 8 million tonnes of gas
and diesel oil (including derv fuel used in road vehicles), and 6 • 2 million tonnes
of kerosene. Deliveries were 1 • 5 per cent more than in 1981, consumption of fuel
240
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
International
Trade
Oil Pipelines
Research
Table 17: Oil Statistics
million tonnes
1972 1977 1980 1981
1982
Oil production: a
land
offshore
Refinery output
Deliveries of petroleum pro¬
ducts for inland consumption
Exports (including re-exports):
crude petroleum
refined petroleum products
and process oils
Imports:
crude petroleum
refined petroleum products
and process oils
0 1 0-1 0-2 0-2 0-3
— 38-1 80-2 89-3 103-1
99-4 86-3 79-2 72-0 70-7
98-5 82-8 71-2 66-3 67-2
2-9 15-3 38-5 52-5 60-4
16-5 15-2 16-1 14-2
14-5
104-3 68-6 44-8 33-0 28-3
23-0
16-3 14-1 14-4 17-2
Sources: Department of Energy and HM Customs and Excise.
a Crude oil plus condensates and petroleum gases derived at onshore treatment plants.
oil and motor spirit having increased, though there were decreases in consump¬
tion of gas and diesel oil (other than derv) and kerosene.
With the growth in offshore oil production, the volume of imports of crude oil
has fallen considerably to about 25 per cent of the level of the peak year of 1973.
The main sources of imports in 1982 were Saudi Arabia (which supplied about
30 per cent by value), Norway (12 per cent) and Egypt (9 per cent). Exports in
1982 of 60 million tonnes offset imports of 28 million tonnes for the second year
running. Virtually all exports went to the markets of Britain’s partners in the
European Community and the International Energy Agency, the largest
markets being the United States, the Netherlands and the Federal Republic of
Germany. Exports of crude oil accounted for over half of UKCS output in 1982.
Some 14 million tonnes of petroleum products were also exported.
Oil pipelines brought ashore about 84 per cent of offshore oil in 1982. Some 580
miles (940 kilometres) of major submarine pipeline have been built to bring
ashore oil from a number of North Sea oilfields (see map). Major crude oil
onshore pipelines in operation from harbours, land terminals or offshore moor¬
ings to refineries include those connecting Finnart to Grangemouth, Angle Bay
to Llandarcy, Tranmere to Stanlow, Amlwch to Stanlow, and Cruden Bay to
Grangemouth. Onshore pipelines also carry refined products to major
marketing areas; for example, a 300-mile (480-kilometre) pipeline runs from
Milford Haven to the Midlands and Manchester.
Research into petroleum technology is carried out mainly by the leading oil
companies, which have extensive research and development programmes in
support of oil exploration and production and on new and improved fuels. All
aspects of production are covered, including the design of production facilities
and enhanced oil recovery techniques. Research centres are at Sunbury-on-
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
241
GAS
Structure
Production
Thames (BP), Ellesmere Port in Cheshire and Sittingbourne in Kent (Shell), and
Abingdon in Oxfordshire (Esso). The main government research and develop¬
ment effort in offshore technology is undertaken by the Department of Energy
with the advice of the Offshore Energy Technology Board. In 1983-84 the
Department expects to spend some £18 million in support of offshore
technology.
Public supply of manufactured gas in Britain began in the early nineteenth
century in Westminster in central London. For many years gas was produced
from coal but during the 1960s, when growing supplies of oil were being
imported, there was a switch to producing town gas from oil-based feedstocks.
However, a more significant change began in the late 1960s following the first
commercial natural gas discovery in the UKCS in 1965 and the start of offshore
gas production in 1967. Supplies of offshore natural gas grew rapidly and
natural gas has now replaced town gas in the public supply system in Great
Britain. Originally used almost exclusively for lighting, gas is now used for dom¬
estic cooking and heating and for industrial and commercial purposes.
The Gas Act 1948 brought the industry in Great Britain under public ownership
and control in 1949. As a result of the change to natural gas necessitating more
centralised control of production and transmission, the British Gas Corporation
was set up in 1973 under the Gas Act 1972 to replace the Gas Council and area
gas boards. The Oil and Gas (Enterprise) Act 1982 gives power to permit the
disposal of assets held by the Corporation, and curtails the Corporation’s
statutory monopoly in the supply of gas for fuel purposes so as to permit private
companies to compete in this supply.
In 1982—83 the turnover of the Corporation and its subsidiary companies
amounted to £5,958 million, of which sales of gas accounted for £5,326 million.
After interest payments and taxation there was a profit of £ 188 million. Recently
the Corporation has been wholly self-financing. It has repaid all its long-term
debt to the Government. The Corporation has a large investment programme,
amounting to £4,200 million (at outturn prices) in the five years from 1982-83, a
large part of which is accounted for by investment in the Rough and Morecambe
fields (see below). The Corporation has about 101,000 employees.
Natural gas is not available in Northern Ireland and the industry there, which
is controlled by nine municipal undertakings and four private sector
companies, uses town gas produced from oil feedstocks. However, the
Governments of Britain and the Irish Republic have negotiated an agreement
under which natural gas from the latter’s offshore Kinsale field will be supplied
to Northern Ireland through a pipeline extension to be built between Dublin and
Belfast.
In 1982 home-produced natural gas accounted for about 77 per cent of total
natural gas supplies, the remainder coming from Norway. Output of natural gas
amounted to 38,285 million cubic metres (mem), of which 2,008 mem were
used for drilling, production and pumping operations offshore, 232 mem
supplied direct to the petrochemical industry and 11 mem supplied direct for
other industry, leaving 36,034 mem available for the public supply gas
industry. Production comes mainly from six major gasfields: Leman Bank,
Indefatigable, Hewett, Viking, Frigg (UK), and West Sole. In addition, a growing
amount of gas produced in association with oil in oilfields is being brought
ashore, particularly from the Piper field. The British Gas Corporation is under¬
taking a major investment programme to develop the Morecambe field in the
Irish Sea, and the first supplies should be brought ashore in 1984-85.
Gas
Norway ^
Border of U
Continental
Shelf
iking
ndefatigable
*SE
/Indefatigabl
Leman
Bank
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
243
Transmission
and Storage
Consumption
Research
Indigenous offshore natural gas supplies are expected to be sufficient to meet
the major part of British requirements into the twenty-first century. Total
proven gas reserves remaining in known discoveries in the UKCS at the end of
1982 amounted to 633,000 mcm and remaining recoverable reserves, including
potential future discoveries, were estimated to be in the range of 1 • 025 million to
1 • 7 million mcm.
The national high-pressure pipeline system of some 3,100 miles (5,000 kilome¬
tres) provides for the distribution of natural gas. It is supplied by feeder mains
from eight North Sea shore terminals and from the Canvey Island terminal
which can receive tankers carrying liquefied natural gas. Four new pipelines
have been built to carry gas from St Fergus (Grampian) to central Scotland and
northern England. In the northern North Sea two 225-mile (362-kilometre)
pipelines have been laid between the Frigg field and St Fergus, while the longest
offshore pipeline in the UKCS, part of the newly commissioned Far-North
Liquid and Associated Gas (FLAG) system, has been laid for 281 miles (452
kilometres) between the Brent field and St Fergus. In 1982 the ‘Western Leg’
pipeline was commissioned to bring gas ashore from the South Cormorant,
North Cormorant and Ninian fields via the Brent pipeline system, while the
‘Northern Leg’ pipeline linking the Magnus, Murchison and Thistle fields to the
Brent system became operational in the summer of 1983. The gas brought
ashore will be separated into natural gas suitable for distribution through the
national pipeline system and other gases such as ethane, propane and butane
which are expected to provide an important new feedstock for the petrochemi¬
cal industry. The Corporation has developed the world’s most advanced com¬
puterised inspection vehicle for high-pressure pipelines that detects flaws as it
travels through them.
Various methods of storage of natural gas to meet peak load conditions are
being developed including additional storage facilities for liquefied natural gas
and the use of salt cavities. The British Gas Corporation has acquired the par¬
tially depleted Rough gasfield and intends to use it to store natural gas. This is
the first time an offshore gasfield will be used for this purpose.
Sales of gas by the public supply industry in Britain totalled 16,657 million
therms in 1982. About half of all gas sold by the British Gas Corporation to its
15-9 million consumers is for industrial and commercial purposes, most of the
remainder being for household use. Gas is used extensively in industries requir-
ing the control of temperatures to a fine degree of accuracy such as the pottery
industry and certain processes for making iron and steel products. In 1982,
5,684 million therms of gas were sold to industry in Britain, 76 million therms to
public supply and transport power stations and 2,178 million therms to
commercial users. The domestic load includes gas for cookers, space heaters,
water heaters and refrigerators, but an increasingly large part of domestic
demand is for gas for central heating. In 1982, 8,719 million therms were sold to
domestic users.
The British Gas Corporation conducts research at five research stations into all
aspects of gas supply and use. Its total expenditure on research and develop¬
ment and on technical service and testing amounted to £67 million in 1982-83.
Work on processes for the manufacture of substitute natural gas (SNG) from
either oil or coal is one of the Corporation’s main research projects and it has a
20-year programme, expected to cost some £300 million, to enable it to produce
commercial quantities of SNG when this is required to augment supplies of
244
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
COAL
The National
Coal Board
Production and
Productivity
Capital
Investment
Consumption
natural gas. A demonstration coal gasification plant (‘slagging gasifier’) has
been built at the Westfield Development Centre in Fife and a prototype plant to
make SNG from oil at Killingholme (Humberside) began operating in 1982.
Coalmining in Britain can be traced back to the thirteenth century. It played a
crucial part in the industrial revolution of the eighteenth and nineteenth cen¬
turies and in its peak year, 1913, the industry produced 292 million tonnes of
coal, exported 74 • 2 million tonnes and employed over a million workers. In
1947 the coal mines passed into public ownership by means of the Coal Industry
Nationalisation Act 1946, which set up the National Coal Board (NCB) as a
statutory corporation to manage the industry.
The NCB has, with limited exceptions, exclusive rights over the extraction of
coal in Great Britain, but is empowered to license private operators to work
small mines and opencast sites. It also has powers to work other minerals,
where discoveries are made in the course of searching for, or working, coal; and
to engage in certain petrochemical activities beneficial to the future of the coal
industry. Retail sales remain largely in private hands, although the NCB makes
bulk sales to large industrial consumers.
In 1982-83 it’s income from sales of coal and other coal mining products
was over £4,500 million; there was a trading loss in the year of £111 million.
At the end of March 1983 there were 190 NCB collieries in operation grouped into
12 areas. The main coal-bearing areas are shown on the map on p 245 and the
main trends in the coal industry are shown in Table 18. In 1982-83 output of
124 -3 million tonnes comprised 104-9 million tonnes from the NCB’s deep
mines, 15 -2 million tonnes from opencast mines and 4 • 2 million tonnes from
licensed mines and other sources. Britain’s coal industry remains the largest in
Western Europe and is one of the world’s most technologically advanced. Sub¬
stantial progress has been made in techniques for mining coal. Developments
are concentrated on the introduction of computerised automatic monitoring
and remote control of machines, together with the increasing use of heavy-duty
equipment, such as powered roof supports, power loaders and armoured flexi¬
ble conveyors, capable of sustained high performance with minimum mainte¬
nance. Productivity in terms of output per manshift rose to 2 -44 tonnes in
1982-83, the most productive areas being in north Nottinghamshire, north
Derbyshire and north Yorkshire (over 3 tonnes).
The NCB’s capital expenditure amounted to £751 million in 1982-83. By far the
largest NCB project is the new mining complex at Selby in North Yorkshire
(which will be one of the world’s most advanced deep mines) where production,
which started in July 1983, should build up to the full rate of 10 million tonnes a
year by the late 1980s.
Although many good seams of coal have now been worked out due to the early
development of the industry, total coal resources in Britain are estimated at
190,000 million tonnes, of which about 45,000 million tonnes (sufficient for at
least 300 years at present rates of consumption) are considered to be recover¬
able using established technology.
In 1982 - 83 internal consumption of coal was 111 million tonnes of which 7 3 per
cent was by power stations, 9 per cent by coke ovens and 7 per cent by domestic
users. With an increasing proportion of coal being used by power stations for
electricity generation, NCB sales of coal to them totalled 87 million tonnes in
Coal
-^Glasgow Edinburgh/ v.
3. \ i
'i) g, Newcastle ,
^ ^ upon Tyne #
•Carlisle
Durham
Workington
Liverpool'
XcLS t.#. Doncaster
^9$ Sheffield j \
(Manchester ( Nottingham
Birmingham#:
London
CardifL
Bristol
Orkney
Islands
Shetland
Islands
20 40 60 80 miles
J 1 1 l
i 1 1—i 1—i
0 20 40 60 80 100 kilometres
1111 Coalfields
Potential coalfields
Swansea
Dover
246
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Research
ELECTRICITY
Table 18: Coal Statistics
year ended March
Unit 1973 1978 1981 1982 1983
Output million tonnes 142 -7 122 -6 128 -4 126 -6 124 -3
of which,
opencast million tonnes 10-6 14-0 15-7 14 -8 15-2
Output per manshift a:
underground tonnes 3-00 2-79 2-94b 3-02 3-06
overall tonnes 2-33 2 -19 2 • 32b 2 -40 2 -44
Inland
consumption million tonnes 130-1 121-6 120-3 117-0 110-5
Average labour forcea ’OOO 268 -0 240 -5 229-8 218 -5 207 -6
Collieries in
operation0 number 281 231 211 198 190
Sources: Department of Energy and NCB.
° NCB mines only.
0 Figures for this and the following years are not directly comparable with those for earlier years.
1982-83. Sales to industry are expected to grow in the long term with increased
application of new coal-utilising technologies and in 1981 the Government
announced a £50 million grant scheme to encourage industry to switch from
oil-fired to coal-fired boilers.
Exports of coal in 1982-83 were 7 • 1 million tonnes, most of which went to
Western European countries, while imports amounted to 3 ■ 4 million tonnes.
In 1982-83 the NCB spent £54 million on research. It has two main research
establishments: the Coal Research Establishment (CRE) at Stoke Orchard (near
Cheltenham), concerned with the combustion and utilisation of coal; and the
Mining Research and Development Establishment at Stanhope Bretby
(Staffordshire), for work on mining methods and equipment, particularly
improving the performance and reliability of existing equipment and
developing systems for remote and automatic control. A new study has begun of
the use of radar to measure stock levels in underground coal bunkers. Two CRE
processes for converting coal to liquid fuels and chemical feedstocks have been
developed on a small scale.
Agreements to exchange technical information have been signed by the NCB
with several countries. Britain is responsible through an NCB subsidiary for
managing a programme of international coal research projects under the
auspices of the International Energy Agency. Five collaborative coal research
projects, including a project to develop pressurised fluidised bed combustion (a
method of steam-raising for power generation), are based in Britain.
The first public supply of electricity in the world was in 1881, at Godaiming
(Surrey). In 1948 all municipal and private undertakings in Great Britain were
acquired under the Electricity Act 1947 and vested in the British Electricity
Authority and 14 regional boards, except in the north of Scotland where they
became the responsibility of the North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board
(NSHEB), which had been set up in 1943. Two subsequent Acts (1954 and 1957)
effected a measure of decentralisation and established the present structure of
public corporations. Electricity from the public supply system is available to all
premises in Britain except for very remote rural households. The public supply
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
247
Structure
Consumption
Generation
industry employed about 164,000 people and invested some £1,650 million in
1982-83. The main transmission system (national grid) in England and Wales
is the largest fully interconnected power network under unified control in the
Western world.
The Energy Act 1983 entitles private generators of electricity to sell their elec¬
tricity to the boards on terms reflecting costs fairly incurred by the boards, and
allows them to use the public transmission and distribution system.
The Electricity Council is the central co-ordinating body of the supply industry
in England and Wales. It has a general responsibility for promoting the develop¬
ment and maintenance of an efficient, co-ordinated and economical system of
electricity supply. Electricity is generated and transmitted by the Central Elec¬
tricity Generating Board (CEGB), which is responsible for the operation and
maintenance of power stations and the national grid. Twelve area electricity
boards are responsible for distribution and for the retail sale of electricity. In
1982-83 the income of the electricity supply industry in England and Wales
was £9,187 million and its operating profit was £868 million.
In Scotland two boards, the NSHEB and the South of Scotland Electricity
Board (SSEB), generate, distribute and sell electricity. The boundary separ¬
ating their areas runs from Dumbarton on the Firth of Clyde to Newburgh on the
Firth of Tay (see map, p248). In 1982-83 the income of the SSEB and the
NSHEB was £755 million and £266 million respectively and their net profits were
£20 • 4 million and £18 -4 million.
In Northern Ireland generation, transmission and distribution are carried out
by the publicly owned Northern Ireland Electricity Service.
Sales of electricity in 1982 amounted to 221,630 gigawatt hours (GWh). Industry
took 36 • 7 per cent of the total, domestic users 37 • 4 per cent and commercial
and other users the remainder. About one-fifth of domestic sales is for space
heating, one-quarter for water heating and one-tenth for cooking. Electricity is
used in industry mainly for motive power, melting, heating and lighting. Elec¬
tricity is supplied to 23-5 million consumers of whom 20 • 8 million are in
England and Wales, 1 • 6 million are supplied by the SSEB, 554,000 by the
NSHEB and 536,000 by the Northern Ireland Electricity Service.
Generation by the public supply electricity industry in Britain amounted to
255,439 GWh in 1982. Conventional steam power stations provided 82 • 2 per
cent of the total, nuclear stations 15 • 7 per cent and gas turbine, hydro-electric
and diesel plant 2 • 1 per cent. Public supply power stations in Britain consumed
107 million tonnes of coal equivalent in 1982 of which coal accounted for 75 per
cent and oil 10 per cent. The output capacity of the 190 generating stations of the
electricity boards in Britain at the end of 1982 totalled 65,074 megawatts (MW)
including 53,855 MW run by the CEGB, 6,356 MW by the SSEB, 2,533 MW by
the NSHEB and 2,290 MW by the Northern Ireland Electricity Service. An
analysis of electricity generation by and output capacity of the public supply
system in Britain is given in Table 19.
Generation of electricity outside the public supply system is relatively small
(16,723 GWh in 1982). The major sources outside the fuel industries are the
chemical, engineering, paper, and iron and steel industries and the nuclear
power plants of the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority (UKAEA) and
British Nuclear Fuels Ltd (BNFL). In 1982 these nuclear plants supplied 3,411
GWh of electricity to the public supply system.
New large-scale power stations are based on units of 500 MW and 660 MW.
Station capacities have increased and there are 11 stations each with a capacity
of 2,000 MW including Kingsnorth (Kent), Europe’s largest mixed-fuel station
K *•/
Electricity
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
249
burning either coal or oil, while Britain’s largest power station is at Longannet
(Fife), a 2,400 MW station. The larger units have a higher thermal efficiency (the
ratio of the net electrical energy output to the heat energy input) than earlier
units and their introduction, coupled with the closure of less efficient plant, has
resulted in a gradual rise in overall thermal efficiency, leading to substantial
savings in fuel consumption. Average thermal efficiency of conventional steam
stations in England and Wales rose from 20-91 per cent in 1947 -48 to 34 • 06 per
cent in 1982-83 when the CEGB’s 20 most efficient stations had an average
thermal efficiency of 35 • 56 per cent.
About 11,000 MW of plant was under construction at the end of March 1983,
including a 2,000 MW coal-fired extension to the Drax station (North Yorkshire)
and five nuclear power stations, three of which have since come on stream (see
below). The pumped-storage station at Dinorwig (Gwynedd), the largest of its
type in Europe, came into operation in 1983 and has an average generated
output of 1,680 MW. (In pumped-storage schemes electricity generated in
off-peak periods is used to pump water to high-level reservoirs from which it
descends to drive turbines, rapidly providing a large supply of electricity at peak
periods or to meet sudden increases in demand.) A programme to study the
potential for combined heat and power (CHP) and district heating in particular
locations in Britain is in progress; approval has been given for two CHP power
stations, in Birmingham and Hereford.
Table 19: Generation by and Capacity of Public Supply Power Stations
Electricity generated Per cent Output
(GWh) capacitya
1970
1980
1982 1982
(MW)
Nuclear plant
Other steam plant
Gas turbines and
oil engines
Pumped-storage plant
Other hydro-electric plant
21,870 33,462 40,001 15-7 5,825
199,868 227,973 209,957 82 -2 53,590
1,517 451 517 0-2 3,315
1,125 1,188 1,080 0-4 1,060
3,856 3,309 3,884 1-5 1,284
Total
228,236 266,383 255,439 100-0 65,074
Electricity supplied (net) b 210,904 247,667 237,787
Source: Department of Energy.
^ At 31 December 1982.
Electricity generated less electricity used at power stations (including electricity used for pumping at pumped-
storage stations).
Nuclear Power Britain has been developing nuclear power for several decades and in 1956 the
world’s first large-scale nuclear power station, at Calder Hall (Cumbria), began
to supply electricity to the national grid. The Government believes that nuclear
power has a vital role in helping to meet Britain’s long-term energy
requirements. There are 14 nuclear power stations in operation controlled by
the electricity authorities, while four other stations also feed electricity to the
national grid: the two original Magnox stations (both with a net capacity of
about 200 MW) operated by BNFL at Calder Hall and Chapelcross (Dumfries and
Galloway); and two experimental or prototype stations run by the UKAEA, at
Winfrith (Dorset) and Dounreay (the site of the Prototype Fast Reactor).
250
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
Nuclear Power
Programme
British Nuclear
Fuels Ltd
Research
Nuclear
Research
Under the first commercial programme, nine Magnox stations with a total gross
capacity of about 4,000 MW were commissioned between 1962 and 1971. They
range in size from Bradwell (Essex) with a capacity of 247 MW to the most
recent, Wylfa (Gwynedd), which has a capacity of 840 MW. The second main
programme was based on the Advanced Gas-cooled Reactor (AGR) and the first
two commercial AGRs, 1,320 MW stations at Hinkley Point B (Somerset) and
Hunterston B (Strathclyde), began operating in 1976. Three more AGRs
(Dungeness B, Kent, 1,200 MW; Hartlepool, Cleveland, 1,320 MW; and
Heysham, Lancashire, 1,320 MW) were brought on stream in 1983. When these
stations are fully operational, nuclear power stations are expected to provide
nearly 20 per cent of electricity generated in Britain. Construction has also
started on two further AGRs, a second 1,320 MW station at Heysham and a 1,320
MW station at Torness (Lothian). The CEGB has also applied for the consent of
the Secretary of State for Energy to build a 1,200 MW pressurised water reactor
at Size well (Suffolk). This application is subject to the results of a public inquiry
and to the necessary consents and safety clearances being obtained.
Government policy on fast reactor development is under review. Any decision
to proceed with a full-scale commercial demonstration fast reactor would be
subject to a full public inquiry.
BNFL provides nuclear fuel services covering the whole fuel cycle: that is,
uranium conversion, uranium enrichment, fuel element fabrication, transport
and reprocessing of spent fuel, and the manufacture of specialised fuel element
components. All of BNFL’s shares are held by the Government. BNFL is
organised into three divisions, covering uranium enrichment, based at Capen-
hurst (Cheshire); fuel manufacture at Springfields (Lancashire); and reprocess¬
ing at Sellafield (Cumbria) where valuable unused uranium and plutonium are
recovered from the spent fuel. The company is engaged on a large-scale invest¬
ment programme costing some £3,500 million (at 1983 prices) over the next ten
years. The major part of this expenditure relates to the Sellafield site and
comprises the refurbishment of facilities for treating spent fuel from Magnox
power stations, the construction of a thermal oxide reprocessing plant (THORP)
which will take spent fuel from Britain’s AGRs and overseas reactors, and the
construction of facilities to process and package radioactive waste. The
remainder of the programme involves the construction of further centrifuge
enrichment plant at Capenhurst, and refurbishment and construction of new
plant at Springfields.
The Electricity Council draws up a general programme of research, some of it
direct research carried out by the Council and electricity boards and some of it
in co-operation with selected industrial research associations and through
research contracts placed with universities and other organisations. Much of
the work is done in collaboration with the SSEB, the NSHEB and the Northern
Ireland Electricity Service which contribute towards its cost (£73 million in
1982-83). Collaboration on research between the supply industry and the plant
manufacturers is co-ordinated by the Power Engineering Research Steering
Committee. The research establishments run by the CEGB comprise the
Central Electricity Research Laboratories at Leatherhead (Surrey), the
Berkeley Nuclear Laboratories in Gloucestershire and the March wood Engi¬
neering Laboratories on Southampton Water. Research on distribution tech¬
nology and electricity utilisation is undertaken at the Electricity Council
Research Centre at Capenhurst (Cheshire) and by the area boards.
Research on nuclear energy in support of the British nuclear power programme
and for overseas organisations is carried out by the UKAEA. Its work is under¬
taken at the Atomic Energy Research Establishment at Harwell (Oxfordshire),
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
251
RENEWABLE
SOURCES OF
ENERGY
the Culham Laboratory in Oxfordshire, the Atomic Energy Establishment at
Winfrith (Dorset), the Risley (Cheshire) and Dounreay Nuclear Power Develop¬
ment Establishments, and a number of other UKAEA establishments. Work
connected with the development of the fast reactor at Dounreay and its fuel
cycle (including the on-site reprocessing of spent fuel) represents the largest
single programme of the UKAEA.
Co-operation in nuclear energy between Britain and other countries takes
place within a framework of intergovernmental agreements and membership of
bodies such as the International Atomic Energy Agency, and through direct
links on research between the UKAEA and equivalent organisations overseas.
Britain takes part in the co-operative research programmes of the European
Atomic Energy Community (Euratom) including one on establishing the
feasibility of achieving controlled thermonuclear fusion. A major component of
this programme is the Joint European Torus (JET) project at Culham which
became operational in 1983.
Research is in progress on assessing the potential contribution of alternative
sources of energy and the ways in which they may be harnessed. These include
wind, tidal, seawave and geothermal (from hot dry rocks) energy for electricity
generation; solar and geothermal (from deep aquifers) energy for low-grade heat
for domestic and industrial uses; and the conversion of biomass (plant tissue or
animal waste) to fuels. Development in Britain is at an early stage and they are
not expected to make a major contribution to energy supplies in the next few
years, although they may have a greater role in the long term as offshore oil and
gas production declines. In 1982-83 the Department of Energy is estimated to
have spent some £13 -9 million in support of its renewable energy programme.
The Department of Energy and an industrial consortium have established the
technical potential for generating electricity from wind power, and are carrying
out further economic and environmental studies on it. This involves the con¬
struction at Burgar Hill (Orkney) of Britain’s first large-scale wind generator, a 3
MW machine which is expected to be in operation by 1985. A smaller machine
with a capacity of 250 kilowatts has entered service on the same site and will
provide useful data for the larger machine. The Central Electricity Generating
Board is operating a pilot 200 kW vertical axis wind generator on the site of a
power station at Carmarthen Bay, Dyfed. The board is also conducting experi¬
ments on wind speed and conditions at three other sites with a view to erecting
a larger generator which could be the forerunner of a cluster of ten or 12
machines.
The solar heating programme is intended to identify its potential contribution
and to stimulate the development of cost-effective solar heating technologies,
particularly on water and space heating in houses (the areas of greatest
potential return). Work is also in progress on assessing the potential of biomass
as a source of solid, liquid and gaseous fuels. Where appropriate, demonstration
facilities are being developed and there is considerable collaboration between
the Department of Energy and industry on promising conversion processes.
Research on geothermal energy involves collection of data in the areas con¬
sidered to have the most suitable conditions and assessment of the markets for
the relatively low-grade heat produced. The first borehole suitable for commer¬
cial use was drilled in Southampton in 1981, following the discovery of a large
aquifer below the city. The Department of Energy is also providing financial
support for a project at the Camborne School of Mines (Cornwall) to improve
ways of extracting heat from crystalline rocks at great depth.
Studies have been made of a project for harnessing the tides in the Severn
Estuary, one of the world’s most suitable sites for tidal power, and the
Government is considering the report of an independent committee (which
252
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Exploration
Production
found that it would be technically feasible) before deciding whether to proceed
with the project.
Wave energy is potentially a large resource for the British Isles, with long
coastlines facing the Atlantic Ocean, but ways of tapping it at reasonable cost
need to be developed. Work is in progress on a number of types of wave energy
device.
Non-fuel Minerals
Although much of Britain’s requirements of industrial raw materials is met by
imports, non-fuel minerals produced in Britain make an important contribution
to the economy. Output of non-fuel minerals in 1981 totalled 270 million tonnes,
valued at £1,112 million. The total number of employees in the extraction
industry was 43,000 in 1981. The geographical locations of some of the more
important minerals produced in Britain are shown on the maps on p 253.
Exploring for and exploiting indigenous mineral resources to meet the needs of
industry are being encouraged by the Government to minimise dependence on
imports. The Mineral Exploration and Investment Grants Act 1972 provides for
financial assistance of up to 35 per cent of the cost of searching for mineral
deposits in Great Britain and on the UKCS and evaluating them for commercial
purposes. Minerals included in the scheme are the ores of non-ferrous metals,
fluorspar, barium minerals and potash. A similar scheme was introduced in
Northern Ireland in 1979. The Institute of Geological Sciences is carrying out a
programme for the Department of Trade and Industry aimed at identifying
areas with the potential for economic extraction of minerals.
The tonnage extracted of some of the main non-fuel minerals produced in
Britain is given in Table 20. In terms of value, production of common sand and
gravel was estimated at £329 million in 1981, limestone and dolomite £272
million, igneous rock £ 109 million, clays (including shale) £ 174 million, salt £49
million, sandstone £37 million, potash £29 million, tin £20 million, fluorspar
Table 20: Production of Some of the Main Non-fuel Minerals
million tonnes
1971 1976 1981
117-8 117-8 97-0
5-6 5-9 4-5
37-3 37-1 30-8
94-5 89-3 79-1
17-8 16-3 11•8 a
11-6 13-6 12-2
3-1 3-3 2-9
n.a. 8-0 6-7
31-7 26-1 18•8a
3-5 3-9 3-5
2-2 1-5 10a
10-2 4-6 0-7
— 0-1 0-5
0-2 0-2 0-2
Source: United Kingdom Mineral Statistics 1982.
n.a. = not available.
a Great Britain only.
Common sand and gravel
Special sands
Igneous rock
Limestone and dolomite
Chalk
Sandstone
Gypsum
Salt including salt in brine
Common clay and shale
China clay, ball clay and
potters’ clay
Fireclay
Iron ore
Potash
Fluorspar
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
253
Some Minerals Produced in Britain
The maps above are based on county or regional boundaries and not those for geological outcrops.
254
England and
Wales
Water
Authorities
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
£19 million, gypsum and anhydrite £15 million and chalk £10 million. Britain
is a major world producer of several important industrial minerals including
china clay, ball clay, fuller’s earth, celestite and gypsum, and also produces
significant amounts of limestone, dolomite, chalk, fluorspar, potash, salt, in¬
dustrial sands, fireclay, common clay and shale, barytes and talc, mostly for
home consumption. Small amounts of diatomite, slate, calcspar, chert and flint,
anhydrite and china stone are also produced. In 1981 the production of metal
from non-ferrous ores totalled 22,200 tonnes, mainly lead mostly from northern
England, and zinc and tin from Cornwall — the Cornish mines satisfying about
half Britain’s demand for primary tin. Small amounts of copper and silver are
produced in association with tin and zinc. Planning permission has been sought
to develop a large open-cast tungsten mine at Hemerdon (near Plymouth).
Production of sand, gravel and crushed rock (from limestone, igneous rock
and sandstone) as aggregates for use in construction constitutes over half, by
value, of Britain’s output of non-fuel minerals. Britain is the world’s second
largest producer of marine-dredged sand and gravel (15 million tonnes in 1981).
Water
Britain’s water resources are normally sufficient for domestic and industrial
requirements. Supplies are obtained partly from surface sources such as moun¬
tain lakes, streams impounded in upland gathering grounds and river intakes
(one-third comes from rivers), and partly from underground sources by means
of wells, adits and boreholes. Water consumption in Britain amounted to about
19,000 megalitres a day in 1981 and average daily consumption per head was
about 340 litres. About 99 per cent of the population in Great Britain and 96 per
cent in Northern Ireland are connected to the public water supply system.
In general, householders pay for their domestic water supply, sewerage and
sewage disposal services through charges based on the rateable value of their
property, whereas industrial users are charged for their water supply according
to actual metered consumption. Since 1983 optional metering for domestic
users has been available throughout England and Wales.
In England and Wales the Secretaries of State for the Environment and for
Wales are jointly responsible for policy in relation to the conservation,
augmentation, distribution and proper use of water resources and provision of
water supplies; the provision of sewerage and sewage disposal services; the res¬
toration and maintenance of the wholesomeness of rivers and other inland
waters; and the use of inland waters for navigation and recreation. The Minister
of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and the Secretary of State for Wales are
responsible for policy relating to land drainage, and the protection and develop¬
ment of fisheries.
Nine regional water authorities in England and the Welsh Water Authority in
Wales are responsible for the management of water services; the development
of water resources; water distribution and supply; the prevention of pollution
(see p 173); sewerage and sewage treatment; river management; land drainage;
sea defences; recreation; and freshwater fisheries. From 1 October 1983, under
the Water Act 1983, the membership of the water authorities in England and
Wales will be reduced to between 9 and 15 members, all to be appointed by
ministers. A reorganisation of the Welsh Water Authority involving a reduction
in its membership became effective in 1982. District councils usually act as
agents of water authorities for the design, construction, operation and mainte¬
nance of public sewers in their areas.
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
255
Statutory Water
Companies
Supplies
Scotland
Northern
Ireland
Development
Projects
Research
There are 29 statutory water supply companies, accounting for about one-
quarter of total supplies, operating under the Water Act 1973. Special arrange¬
ments govern the relationship of these companies to the water authorities.
Some 31,500 megalitres a day were abstracted in England and Wales in 1981, of
which public water supplies accounted for 16,000 megalitres a day. The Central
Electricity Generating Board took 9,300 megalitres a day primarily for cooling
in connection with electricity generation, other industry 5,000 megalitres a day
and the remainder was used in agriculture. Water authorities’ estimated
revenue for 1983-84 is some £2,160 million.
Water authorities have powers to restrict consumption when there are severe
water shortages. Under the Drought Act 1976, passed in the driest period of
weather since records began in 1727, they can limit or prohibit the use of water
and, if necessary, restrict domestic water supplies.
In Scotland responsibility for public water supply, sewerage and sewage dispo¬
sal rests with the nine regional and three islands councils. Additionally the
Central Scotland Water Development Board, established under the Water (Scot¬
land) Act 1967, is primarily responsible for developing large water sources and
supplying water in bulk to its five constituent member authorities, the regional
councils in central Scotland.
Scotland has a relative abundance of unpolluted water from upland sources.
About 826 million cubic metres of water were abstracted in Scotland in 1981 for
public water supplies. The Secretary of State for Scotland is responsible for the
promotion of the conservation of water resources and the provision by water
authorities of adequate water supplies, and also has a duty to promote the clean¬
liness of rivers and other inland waters and the tidal waters of Scotland.
The Water Service of the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland is
responsible for water supply and sewerage in Northern Ireland. The Depart¬
ment is also responsible for the conservation, cleanliness and planned develop¬
ment of Northern Ireland’s water resources. Northern Ireland has abundant
potential supplies of water for both domestic and industrial use. An average of
694 megalitres of water a day was supplied in 1982.
Investment is taking place in projects intended to ensure that there is an ade¬
quate water supply to meet the expected rise in demand. Recent projects have
included the Kielder Reservoir in Northumberland, officially opened in 1982,
one of the largest man-made reservoirs in Europe. In 1982-83 capital expendi¬
ture on water supply, sewerage and sewage disposal amounted to some £720
million in England and Wales, £84 million in Scotland and £27 million in
Northern Ireland.
The central research organisation for the water industry in Britain is the Water
Research Centre. Its membership includes water undertakings, consulting
engineers, manufacturers and overseas organisations. It has three laboratories:
at Stevenage (Hertfordshire), which deals with water treatment: Medmenham
(Buckinghamshire), which is concerned with environmental protection
(including water quality and pollution): and at Swindon (Wiltshire), which is
concerned with instrumentation, water mains and sewers. Other organisations
conducting research include the Hydraulics Research Station Limited,
universities, the Meteorological Office and the Natural Environment Research
Council, which has a number of laboratories including the Institute of Hydro¬
logy and the Institute of Geological Sciences.
Agriculture,
Fisheries
and Forestry
Agriculture
British agriculture is noted for its high level of efficiency and productivity.
Employing less than 3 per cent of the working population, the industry pro¬
duces nearly two-thirds of Britain’s food requirements compared with just
under a half in 1960, and about three-quarters of that which can be grown in a
temperate climate compared with nearly two-thirds in 1960. As befits its long
tradition of innovation and efficient farming, Britain has an important pro¬
gramme of modern research which has increased crop and other yields. It is also
a major exporter of agricultural produce and machinery, fertilisers and food
products.
Just over three-quarters of the land area is used for agriculture, the rest being
mountain, forest or put to urban and other uses. Although the area for farming
is declining by about 20,000 hectares (50,000 acres) a year to meet the needs of
housing, industry and transport, the land in urban use is less than a tenth of the
agricultural land. There are 12 million hectares (30 million acres) under crops
and grass. In hill country, where the area of cultivated land is often small, large
areas are also used for rough grazing. Soils vary from the thin poor ones of
highland Britain to the rich fertile soils of low-lying areas like the fenlands of
eastern England. The cool temperate climate and the even distribution of
rainfall ensure a long growing season; streams rarely dry up and grassland is
green throughout the year.
The average area of a full-time holding (including rough grazing) is some 118
hectares (292 acres). About half of the 242,300 holdings are able to provide
full-time employment for at least one person and account for 90 per cent of total
output. Some 30,000 large farms capable of providing full-time employment for
at least four people account for about half of total output. In Wales and Northern
Ireland the output from small-scale holdings is more significant than in the rest
of Britain.
In England, Scotland and Wales, some two-thirds of holdings are wholly or
mainly owner-occupied. Nearly all the farms in Northern Ireland are owner-
occupied.
The number of persons engaged in agriculture was 605,000 in 1982. The
labour force continues to decline slightly, and the level of mechanisation to
increase, labour productivity rising by over 160 per cent between 1962 and 1982.
Investment has increased the level of capital per person employed in the
industry which is now about the same as in manufacturing industry compared
with only 60 per cent in 1960. Total farming income in 1982 was an estimated
£1,850 million.
There are over half a million tractors and some 57,500 combine harvesters in
use. A wide variety of other machines for harvesting and preservation of grass
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
257
PRODUCTION
Livestock
Cattle and
Sheep
are also employed. Horticultural crops such as blackcurrants and brussels
sprouts are frequently harvested by machine and milking machines are used on
the vast majority of dairy farms. Over 90 per cent of farms have a direct elec¬
tricity supply, the remainder having their own generators. Computers and
Prestel viewdata services are increasingly used in farm management.
Home production of the principal foods is shown as a percentage by weight of
total supplies (that is, output plus imports minus exports) in Table 21.
Table 21: British Production as a Percentage of Total Supplies
Food product 1971-73 1982
average
Meat 75 85
Eggs 98 100
Milk for human consumption (as liquid) 100 100
Cheese 55 71
Butter 20 64
Sugar (as refined) 36 54
Wheat 53 106
Potatoes for human consumption 95 85
Source: Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
Crop production and yields per hectare have risen; between 1972 and 1982 the
output of wheat and barley a hectare increased by some 46 per cent and 21 per
cent respectively, due largely to the introduction of new varieties and the
greater use of fertilisers and pesticides. The yield of potatoes a hectare rose by
30 per cent.
About three-fifths of full-time farms are devoted mainly to dairying or beef cattle
and sheep. The majority of sheep and cattle are reared in the hill and moorland
areas of Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and northern and south-western
England. Beef fattening occurs partly in better grassland areas, as does
dairying, and partly in yards on arable farms. British livestock breeders have
created many of the cattle, sheep and pig breeds with world-wide reputations,
for example, the Hereford and Aberdeen Angus beef breeds, the Jersey, Guern¬
sey and Ayrshire dairy breeds, Large White pigs and a number of sheep breeds.
Because of developments in artificial insemination and embryo transfer,
Britain is able to export semen and embryos from high quality donor animals.
Table 22 shows the number of livestock and output of livestock products.
Most dairy cattle in England and Wales and a significant proportion in Scotland
and Northern Ireland are bred by artificial insemination. The average size of
dairy herds in Britain increased from about 20 in 1962 to 55 in 1982 while the
average yield of milk per dairy cow increased from 3,322 litres (730 gallons) to
4,919 litres (1,081 gallons), a rise of 48 per cent. Average consumption of liquid
milk per head in 1982 was about 2 • 25 litres (3 • 95 pints) per week.
About two-thirds of home-fed beef production derives from the national dairy
herd, in which the Friesian breed is predominant. While pure-bred Friesians
make a substantial contribution to Britain’s beef supplies, many other dairy
cows are crossed with beef bulls for beef production.
Britain has a long tradition of sheep production with more than 40 breeds and
many crosses between them. Research has provided vaccine and serum protec-
258
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Pigs and
Poultry
Crops
Cereals
Table 22: Livestock and Livestock Products
Average
1971-73
1980
1981
1982
Cattle and calves (’OOO head) 13,617 13,426 13,137 13,242
Sheep and lambs (’OOO head) 27,010 31,446 32,091 33,053
Pigs (’OOO head) 8,791 7,815 7,828 8,023
Poultry (’OOO head) 141,641 135,105 132,286 135,363
Milk (million litres) 13,252 15,340 15,237 15,986
Eggs (million dozen) 1,218 1,100 1,068 1,071
Beef and veal (’OOO tonnes) 930 1,096 1,037 994
Mutton and lamb (’OOO
tonnes) 230 286 269 284
Pork (’OOO tonnes) 664 693 712 730
Bacon and ham (’OOO tonnes) 272 210 200 197
Poultry meat (’OOO tonnes) 638 754 745 821
tion against nearly all the epidemic diseases. Although lamb production is the
main source of income for sheep farmers, wool is also important.
Grass supplies 60 to 80 per cent of the feed for cattle and sheep; grass produc¬
tion has been enhanced by the increased use of fertilisers, irrigation and
methods of grazing control, and improved herbage conservation for winter feed.
Rough grazings are used for extensively grazed sheep and cattle, producing
young animals for fattening elsewhere.
Pig production is carried on in most areas but is particularly important in
eastern and southern England, and Northern Ireland. There is an increasing
concentration into specialist units and larger herds. Artificial insemination is
available in England, Wales and Scotland.
The poultry meat and egg industries have continued to benefit from better
husbandry and genetic improvements. Since 1971 poultry meat production has
increased by over a third and reached an estimated 821,000 tonnes in 1982.
Production of broilers from holdings of over 100,000 birds accounts for just over
a half of total production. In 1982, egg production was an estimated 1,071 million
dozen. About 62 per cent of laying birds are in flocks of 20,000 or more. Britain
remains broadly self-sufficient in poultry meat and eggs.
The farms devoted primarily to arable crops are found mainly in eastern and
central southern England and eastern Scotland. Large-scale potato and vege¬
table production is undertaken in the fens (in south Lincolnshire and
Cambridgeshire), the alluvial areas around the rivers Thames and Humber and
the peaty lands in south Lancashire. Early potatoes are an important crop in
south-west Wales, Kent and south-west England. High-grade seed potatoes are
grown in Scotland and Northern Ireland.
Table 23 gives figures on the area, harvest and yield of the main crops.
About a third of the wheat crop is normally used for flour milling, and two-fifths
for animal feed. Between 15 and 25 per cent of the barley crop is used for malting
and distilling and 50 per cent for animal feed. Exports of wheat and barley are
increasing substantially and account for about a quarter of total production.
There has been a rapid increase in the oilseed rape crop; the seed is crushed to
obtain vegetable oil and the solid matter left is used for animal feed.
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
259
Fodder Crops
Sugar
Horticulture
Table 23: Main Crops
Average
1971-73
1980
1981
1982
(forecast)
Wheat: area (’OOO hectares) 1,124 1,441 1,491 1,664
harvest (’OOO tonnes) 4,865 8,472 8,707 10,258
yield (tonnes per hectare) 4-33 5-88 5-84 6-16
Barley: area (’OOO hectares) 2,285 2,330 2,327 2,221
harvest (’OOO tonnes) 8,936 10,326 10,227 10,884
yield (tonnes per hectare) 3-91 4 -43 4 -39 4-90
Oats: area (’OOO hectares) 320 148 144 130
harvest (’OOO tonnes) 1,230 601 619 587
yield (tonnes per hectare) 3 -84 4 • 06 4-30 4 -52
Potatoes: area (’OOO hectares) 231 205 191 191
harvest (’OOO tonnes) 6,894 7,110 6,188 6,818
yield (tonnes per hectare) 29 -84 34-68 32-31 35 • 70
Oilseed rape: area (’OOO hec¬
tares) 9 92 125 174
harvest (’OOO tonnes) 18 300 340 580
yield (tonnes per hectare) 2 -00 3 -26 2 -72 3 -33
Sugar beet: area (’OOO hec¬
tares) 192 213 210 204
sugar production (’OOO tonnes
refined basis) 978 1,106 1,092 1,420
The universal use of combine harvesters has necessitated the installation of
drying and storage facilities, many of which are used on a co-operative basis.
The area of traditional fodder crops (field beans, maize, turnips, swedes and
kale) has declined since 1960, farmers having provided winter feed more
economically by increased grass production and improved methods of con¬
servation.
Sugar from home-grown sugar beet provides about 50 per cent of requirements,
most of the remainder being refined from raw sugar imported from developing
countries under the Lome Convention (see pp 71-2).
In 1982 the land utilised for horticulture was 253,000 hectares (628,000 acres).
Fruit (including dessert apples, pears, cherries, plums, strawberries,
blackcurrants, raspberries and gooseberries) accounted for 60,000 hectares
(149,000 acres), vegetables grown in the open, excluding potatoes, for 179,000
hectares (442,000 acres), flowers, bulbs and nursery stock for 12,500 hectares
(31,000 acres) and protected crops (those grown under glass or plastic) for 3,000
hectares (7,400 acres).
Field vegetables account for some 42 per cent of the value of horticultural
output and are widely grown throughout the country. Most horticultural enter¬
prises are increasing output per unit area with the help of improved planting
material, new techniques and the widespread use of machinery.
260
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Most glasshouses (used for growing tomatoes, cucumbers and lettuce) have
been re-equipped since the mid-1960s. Widespread use is made of automatic
control of heating and ventilation, and semi-automatic control of watering.
Experiments are being made to promote energy efficient glasshouses through
the use of thermal screens and other methods. Low-cost plastic tunnels extend
the season for certain crops previously grown only out of doors.
Under the European Community’s Common Agricultural Policy (see p 261), a
wide range of horticultural produce is subject to common quality standards.
EXPORTS The Government is keen to encourage the growth of exports related to agricul¬
ture; these amounted to £4,431 million in 1982, of which exports of food and
drink accounted for £3,309 million. In 1983 it set up Food from Britain, a national
marketing organisation responsible for improving the marketing of British
produce in home and overseas markets. The British Food Export Council repre¬
sents the export arm of Food from Britain for fresh and processed food and
drinks, and identifies suppliers for customers, organises programmes of visits
and meetings for overseas customers, and with the British Overseas Trade
Board co-ordinates British pavilions at the world’s major agricultural exhi¬
bitions. The British Agricultural Export Council provides a similar service for
agricultural and horticultural supply industries; products and services offered
by its members include all types of machinery, seeds, fertilisers, chemicals,
feedingstuffs, livestock and semen, veterinary preparations and equipment,
and consultancy.
One of the world’s largest agricultural events, the annual Royal International
Agricultural Show held at Stoneleigh in Warwickshire, provides an opportunity
for overseas visitors to see what British agriculture has to offer. A typical atten¬
dance for the four open days is 200,000 including 11,000 from overseas.
Virtually every British agricultural machinery manufacturer is represented at
the show which is also the most important pedigree livestock event in the
country. The show’s specialised sections cover livestock improvement, farm
mechanisation including working demonstrations of agricultural equipment,
electronics, arable cropping, horticulture, forestry, new technology and
research, tropical agricultural applications and a food hall. A second major
display of agricultural interest is the Royal Smithfield Show, held each
December in London, which exhibits agricultural machinery, livestock and
carcasses.
MARKETING Agricultural products are marketed by private traders, producers’ co¬
operatives and marketing boards, the latter being producers’ organisations
(each including a minority of independent members appointed by agriculture
ministers) with certain statutory powers to regulate the marketing of milk, wool
and potatoes. Most boards buy from producers or control contracts between
first buyers; the Potato Marketing Board, however, maintains only a broad
control over marketing conditions leaving producers free to deal individually
with buyers. For home-grown cereals, meat and livestock, apples and pears,
and eggs, there are marketing organisations representing producer, distributor
and independent interests.
Food from Britain is responsible for improving marketing.
Co-operatives Agricultural co-operatives may be concerned with production, storage,
marketing, services, and the supply of farmers’ requirements. There are, in
addition, machinery syndicates. Food from Britain has responsibility for co¬
operative development, a function taken over from the former Central Council
for Agricultural and Horticultural Co-operation.
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
261
ROLE OF THE
GOVERNMENT
Common
Agricultural
Policy
Price Guaran¬
tees, Grants
and Subsidies
Four government departments are responsible for agricultural policy - the Min¬
istry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, the Department of Agriculture and
Fisheries for Scotland, the Welsh Office Agriculture Department and the
Northern Ireland Department of Agriculture.
The main aims of the European Community’s Common Agricultural Policy are
to increase agricultural productivity, to ensure that farmers have a fair stand¬
ard of living, to stabilise the agricultural market, to guarantee regular supplies
of food, and to produce these supplies at a reasonable price. Market arrange¬
ments are administered by the Intervention Board for Agricultural Produce,
which is responsible to the agriculture ministers.
Under the CAP, producers’ returns for most of the main commodities are sup¬
ported by a combination of intervention buying when necessary and charges on
imports into the Community. There are schemes for subsidised disposal of
stocks to consumers within the Community where this can be done without
disrupting internal markets. In addition, export refunds enable Community
exporters to sell on world markets when world prices are below Community
price levels. There is also provision for certain direct payments, including beef
and sheepmeat premiums, to producers. The support price levels, as well as
rates of levy and subsidy, are set in European Currency Units (see p 73) and are
converted into the currencies of the member states at fixed rates of exchange
(commonly called ‘green rates’) which do not vary automatically in line with
changes in real exchange rates. The green rates can thus be out of line with the
market rate of exchange between each currency and the European Currency
Unit giving rise to different real support price levels in the different member
states. Monetary compensatory amounts, based on the percentage difference
between the green and market rates of each currency, are applied to prevent
distortions in trade. They operate as import subsidies and export levies for
countries whose currencies’ market rates are below the green rates, and as
import levies and export subsidies in the opposite case.
Britain is seeking significant improvements in the operation of the Common
Agricultural Policy. In particular, it would like to see restraint in fixing prices
and other measures to help to control surpluses and the cost of their disposal.
The Community’s agricultural expenditure is channelled through the
European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund. The Fund’s guarantee
section finances market support arrangements, while the guidance section pro¬
vides funds for structural reform (for example, contributions to capital and pro¬
duction grants-see below). The CAP accounts for about two-thirds of the
Community’s budget; just over a third of this expenditure is attributable to the
cost of export refunds.
Expenditure in Britain in 1982-83 on price guarantees, grants and subsidies
and on Common Agricultural Policy market regulation was an estimated £327
million and £1,006 million respectively. About £714 million was reimbursed
from the Community budget.
Potatoes and wool are not covered by the Common Agricultural Policy; price
guarantees for potatoes are operated through the Potato Marketing Board and
the Department of Agriculture for Northern Ireland and a price stabilisation
fund for wool is administered by the British Wool Marketing Board.
Producers also receive support through certain capital and production
grants, some based on Community decisions. Grants are available to assist
farmers and horticulturists with their development plans and capital
investment, and there is special financial help for hill farmers in the form of
headage payments on cattle and sheep (known as compensatory allowances).
Community assistance may also be made to help to improve facilities for the
262
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Smallholdings
and Crofts
Tenancy
Legislation
Safety at Work
Advisory
Services
Animal Welfare
marketing and processing of agricultural products and to provide a premium
payment to specialised beef producers, while launching aid is available to pro¬
duction and marketing groups in the horticultural sector.
Local authorities provide some 7,150 smallholdings in England and 985 in
Wales. They make loans of up to 75 per cent of required working capital to their
tenants. Land settlement in Scotland has always been carried out by the
Government, which owns and maintains about 133,820 hectares (330,670
acres) of land settlement estates, comprising some 2,050 crofts and holdings.
Within the crofting areas of Scotland (in Strathclyde, Highland, Western
Isles, Orkney Islands and Shetland Islands) much of the land is held by crofters,
tenants whose holdings are generally either rented at a cost of not more than
£100 a year or have an area not exceeding 30 hectares (75 acres). Crofting is
administered by the Crofters Commission, and benefits from government
grants for land improvements and some other agricultural work.
The agricultural holdings legislation protects the interests and rights of land¬
lords and tenants. Rent is a matter for negotiation between landlord and tenant
and may be varied by agreement or, failing agreement, by arbitration. Most
agricultural tenants have the right to contest a notice to quit, which is then
ineffective unless the landlord obtains consent to its operation from an indepen¬
dent body (in England and Wales the Agricultural Land Tribunal and in Scot¬
land the Scottish Land Court). On termination of tenancy, the tenant is entitled
to compensation in accordance with a special code. There are provisions for
succession of a close relative on the death of a tenant.
Practically all farms in Northern Ireland are owner-occupied, but, under a
system known as ‘conacre’, farmers not wishing to farm all their land let it
annually to others. About one-fifth of agricultural land is so let, and is used for
grazing and potato growing.
The Agricultural Inspectorate of the Health and Safety Executive is responsible
for enforcing regulations relating to the health and safety of workers in agricul¬
ture. These cover such matters as the guarding of field and stationary
machinery, workplaces, the fitting of safety cabs to tractors, and the use of
chemicals.
A wide range of professional, scientific and technical services are given to agri¬
culture and its ancillary industries in England and Wales by the Government’s
Agricultural Development and Advisory Service, in Scotland by three agricul¬
tural colleges and in Northern Ireland by the Department of Agriculture’s advi¬
sory service and specialist divisions, together with agricultural colleges and
research councils. The purpose of the advisory services is to exploit and develop
new technology, to identify problems requiring investigation and research, and
to contribute to possible solutions.
It is an offence to cause unnecessary pain or distress to livestock on commercial
farms. Regulations control such operations as castration and tail docking, and
require owners of intensive units to arrange for the daily inspection of their
stock and the equipment on which it depends. Compliance is monitored by the
State Veterinary Service which in England and Wales is part of the Agricultural
Development and Advisory Service. Other regulations protect the welfare of
farm animals in transit and at markets.
The Farm Animal Welfare Council, an independent body set up by the
Government, keeps under review the welfare of farm animals on agricultural
land, at markets, in transit and at the place of slaughter.
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
263
CONTROL OF
DISEASES AND
PESTS
Animals
Plants
Pesticides
Veterinary
Medicinal
Products
England, Scotland and Wales are free from many serious animal diseases. Foot-
and-mouth disease and swine vesicular disease are combated by a slaughter
policy applied to all infected animals and those exposed to infection, and by
control over animal movements during outbreaks. Rigorous measures are
taken to eradicate sheep scab. The incidence of bovine tuberculosis is very low;
cattle (except for certain categories) Eire tested at regular intervals, and reactors
to the test are slaughtered, compensation being paid to the owners. Because of
compulsory measures to eradicate brucellosis, begun on an area basis in 1972,
England and Wales were declared free of the disease for all practical purposes in
1981, following a similEir declaration for Scotland in 1980. Newcastle disease in
poultry has been eradicated by means of vaccination, mainly with live vaccines;
their use is now prohibited and a slaughter policy operates in the event of
outbreaks.
Strict controls are exercised on the import of animals, meat and meat pro¬
ducts, live poultry and other captive birds, and poultry meat, so as to prevent
the introduction of animal or poultry diseases. Special measures apply to non-f¬
arm animals, which are subject to import licence and six months’ quarantine as
a precaution against the introduction of rabies, and there are severe penalties
for breaking the law. There has been no case of rabies in Britain since 1970.
Northern Ireland has been kept free from the major animal diseases, includ¬
ing rabies, foot-and-mouth disease, and swine vesicular disease, andin 1971 was
declared brucellosis-free.
Professional advice and action on the control of animal disease and the
welfare of farm livestock is the responsibility of the State Veterinary Service
which in England and Wales has extensive laboratory facilities and investiga¬
tion centres performing specialist work and advising private practitioners. In
Scotland the equivalent duties and services are undertaken and provided partly
by the State VeterinEiry Service, on a statutory basis, and partly by the three
regional agricultural colleges on an advisory basis. In Northern Ireland the
Department of Agriculture has its own veterinary service, supplemented by a
central veterinary laboratory.
The agricultural departments are responsible for limiting the spread of plant
pests and diseases and for preventing the introduction of new ones. They also
issue the health certificates required by other countries to accompany plant
material exported from Britain. Certification schemes are operated to encou¬
rage the development of healthy, vigorous and true-to-type planting stocks.
Legislation covering pesticides before they are marketed is handled through the
Pesticides Safety Precautions Scheme and an approved products list is drawn
up through the Agricultural Chemicals Approvals Scheme. The secretariats for
both schemes are located in the Agricultural Development and Advisory
Service Laboratory at Harpenden. The Government, advised by the indepen¬
dent and expert Advisory Committee on Pesticides, gives safety clearance for
marketing only if it is satisfied that, as long as recommended precautions are
followed, the product can be used without risk to people, livestock and domestic
animals and with minimal risk to wildlife.
The manufacture, sale and supply of veterinary medicinal products is prohi¬
bited except under licence. Licences are issued by the agriculture ministers,
who are advised on safety, quality and efficacy by the Veterinary Products Com¬
mittee comprising independent experts.
264
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
University and other degree and postgraduate courses provide training in the
scientific and technological aspects of agriculture and horticulture, the empha¬
sis being on science and economics. There are also degree and post-graduate
courses in veterinary medicine. Science-based sandwich courses, leading to a
Higher National Diploma and available at agricultural colleges, are designed for
students wishing to enter farming or horticulture with a good knowledge of the
managerial and technological aspects of the industry. The three-year Ordinary
National Diploma, also organised on a sandwich basis, is a general course in
agriculture with some colleges offering special subjects such as arable farming,
livestock production, dairy farming and farm mechanisation. Both diploma
courses, validated by the Business and Technician Education Council,
normally require 12 months’ previous practical experience. In addition, there
are one-year full-time National Certificate courses providing a basic education
in agriculture or horticulture, and a one- or two-year part-time practical course
in the basic principles of agriculture, horticulture or forestry followed by more
specialised study. In Scotland new and restructured courses have replaced the
Higher and Ordinary National Diplomas.
In Great Britain the Agricultural Training Board runs an apprenticeship and
craft training scheme for young people entering agriculture and horticulture,
which includes release to attend part-time courses. Shorter courses in craft
skills training are available for others working in agriculture and horticulture.
In Northern Ireland agricultural training courses are the responsibility of the
Department of Agriculture.
AGRICULTURAL Hundreds of research projects are being carried out by the agricultural research
RESEARCH service, many being of international importance.
The Agricultural and Food Research Council, the Government and private
industry are responsible for the research effort. An autonomous body, the
Council conducts its own research and supports projects in universities and
elsewhere. It has eight institutes dealing with research in animal breeding,
food, weeds, animal physiology, animal diseases, meat and poultry, and has
four units associated with universities. In addition, the Council is responsible
for 15 independent state-aided research institutes concerned with such topics
as plant breeding, glasshouse crops, grassland, animal viruses, fruit and vege¬
table growing, dairying, poultry, soils and agricultural engineering. In Scotland
the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries is responsible for seven grant-
aided institutes; four of these are concerned primarily with animal-related re¬
search, one with plant breeding and crop research, one with soil research, and
the other with agricultural engineering. Research in Northern Ireland is carried
out by the Department of Agriculture in association with the Queen’s Uni¬
versity of Belfast. Three teaching agricultural colleges also cover applied re¬
search in agricultural science and food technology.
Among research achievements of international importance are the high
yielding wheats developed at the Plant Breeding Institute and in wide use in
Europe, and the foot-and-mouth disease vaccines developed by the Animal
Virus Research Institute and used throughout the world. The National Vegeta¬
ble Research Station, in association with Oxfam, maintains a gene bank
designed to preserve seed varieties so that plants with better growth and disease
resistant characteristics can be kept to meet agricultural needs in different
areas of the world in the long term. The National Institute of Agricultural Engi¬
neering has developed machinery more suitable for use in countries with labour
intensive agriculture.
The Ministry of Agriculture’s Chief Scientists’ Group provides advice on
scientific and technical matters and commissions research and development
work. Work is also undertaken in collaboration with the Food Science Division
EDUCATION
AND
TRAINING
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
265
Fish Caught
The Fishing
Fleet
Administration
to provide advice on scientific aspects of food, particularly on its safety, quality
and nutritional value.
The State Veterinary Service’s central laboratory carries out research and
development on the control of diseases of farm animals. The four central labora¬
tories of the Agricultural Development and Advisory Service’s Agricultural
Science Service undertake research in insects, mites and fungi affecting food
storage and on harmful mammals and birds. Work is also undertaken on the
detection of pesticide residues and on plant health.
Fisheries
Britain is one of Europe’s most important fishing nations. The fishing industry
provides about 68 per cent of British fish supplies, and is an important source of
employment and income in a number of ports. In 1982 there were 16,300 fisher¬
men in regular employment and about 6,700 occasionally employed. It is esti¬
mated that for every fisherman there are between two and four jobs in
associated trades. The maintenance of fishing opportunities through conser¬
vation of stocks and the preservation of British fishermen’s access to traditional
grounds are prime government concerns.
Demersal fish caught on or near the bottom of the sea account for about 58 per
cent by weight of total British landings, pelagic fish caught near the surface for
34 per cent and shellfish for 8 per cent. In 1982 landings of all types of fish
(excluding salmon and trout) by British fishing vessels totalled 710,000 tonnes.
Cod accounted for 33 per cent of the total value of demersal and pelagic fish
landed while haddock (23 per cent), mackerel (9 per cent) and plaice (6 per cent)
were the other most important sources of earnings to the industry. Home pro¬
duction of fish meal in 1982 was about 56,000 tonnes and fish oil production
about 10,000 tonnes.
The British fish farming industry is a substantial and expanding business
mainly concerned with the production of salmon and trout although shellfish
and eel farming are growing. Estimated production in 1982 was 10,000 tonnes of
trout and 2,000 tonnes of salmon.
Imports of fresh, frozen, cured and canned fish and shellfish in 1982 totalled
325,000 tonnes, those offish meal 213,000 tonnes and those of fish oils 249,000
tonnes. Exports and re-exports of fish and fish products amounted to 269,000
tonnes. Following a British initiative, member states of the European Com¬
munity banned from January 1982 the import of primary whale products in
order to help to conserve whale populations.
Some 71 per cent of the British catch is taken by the 6,600 vessels of the inshore
fleet employing a variety of catching methods. The deep-sea fleet, comprising
239 larger vessels, has been reduced in number as fishing opportunities and the
profitability of operations in distant waters have declined. Recently the mack¬
erel and herring stock off the west coast have provided alternative fisheries for
the larger vessels.
The fisheries departments are responsible for the administration of legisla¬
tion concerning the fishing industry and for fisheries research. The safety and
welfare of crews of fishing vessels and other matters common to shipping gen¬
erally are provided for under legislation administered by the Department of
Transport.
The Sea Fish Industry Authority provides financial aid for the purchase of
new fishing vessels, vessel improvements, the provision and improvement of
processing plants, cold stores and ice plants and towards the formation of
fishermen s co-operatives. Other functions include research and development.
266
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Fishery Limits
Common
Fisheries Policy
Fisheries
Research
Freshwater
Fisheries
training, dissemination of information, publicity and promotion and the provi¬
sion of consultancy services.
Community countries, and certain non-Community countries having fishery
agreements with the Community, may fish up to Britain’s 12-mile limit. Desig¬
nated Community countries may also fish in specified areas of Britain’s 6-to-12
mile zone. The only non-Community country which may fish in this zone is
Norway, which has very restricted rights in some areas off the Scottish coast. No
foreign vessels may fish within Britain’s 6-mile limit.
Fishery relations between the European Community and other countries are
governed by long-term framework agreements which have been concluded
with ten countries. In 1983 reciprocal agreements were in force with Norway,
the Faroe Islands, Sweden, Spain and Finland. Non-reciprocal agreements were
in force with Canada, the United States, Senegal, Guinea-Bissau and Guinea.
Quotas were also established in international waters in the north-west Atlantic.
With the extension of fishery limits to 200 miles, new arrangements became
necessary to control Community fishing in the greatly extended area. Britain
has a particularly strong interest in such control, since a sizeable proportion of
the total catch within the 200-mile limits of member states is taken in British
waters, while the loss of fishing opportunities in distant waters (such as Iceland)
has reduced the British industry’s total catch more than that of other Com¬
munity states.
In January 1983 member states reached an agreement on a common fisheries
policy providing for new arrangements on access to coastal waters applicable
for a period of at least 20 years. Its other features include a revised marketing
regime, regulations covering technical conservation measures such as mesh
sizes for nets, the allocation of catch quotas among member states within each
year’s total allowable catch, effective enforcement of the rules and financial aid
to promote the adaptation and development of the Community fishing fleet and
the fish farming industry.
The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has a research directorate
comprising laboratories dealing with marine and freshwater fisheries, shellfish,
marine pollution, fish farming, and diseases. Work on the utilisation of fish is
undertaken by a research station at Torry, Aberdeen. There are also three
seagoing research vessels. In Scotland the Department of Agriculture and
Fisheries maintains laboratories on marine and freshwater fisheries research as
well as three seagoing vessels. The two research programmes are co-ordinated.
Department of Agriculture laboratories in Northern Ireland monitor marine and
freshwater fisheries.
The most valuable freshwater fish are salmon and sea-trout. Sea fishing for
salmon is prohibited in waters outside a limit of six miles from the coasts of the
British Isles. Within six miles, drift netting and certain other methods are prohi¬
bited off the coast of Scotland but are permitted under licence off England,
Wales and Northern Ireland. In Scotland, salmon fishing is a private right. In
England and Wales, water authority licences are required for coastal and
estuary netting.
Forestry
Woodland covers an estimated 2 • 1 million hectares (5 • 1 million acres): about 7
per cent of England, 12 per cent of Scotland, and 11 per cent of Wales. The
Government supports the continued expansion of forestry in order to reduce
dependence on imports.
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
267
The area of productive forest in Great Britain is 1,791,000 hectares (4,426,000
acres), just under half of which is managed by the Forestry Commission and the
rest by private owners. The rate of new planting in 1982 was 11,000 hectares
(27,000 acres) by the Commission, mainly in Scotland, and some 12,600 hec¬
tares (31,000 acres) by private woodland owners. The Commission’s pro¬
gramme includes considerable planting in upland areas, and consists mainly of
conifers because of difficult site conditions. The rate of planting by the Commis¬
sion is expected to fall and planting by private owners to increase.
Total employment in state and private forests in Great Britain was estimated
at about 18,000 in 1982.
Except during the two world wars, when felling was abnormally heavy, home
woodlands have until recent years made only a limited contribution to the
nation’s consumption of wood and wood products, as less than half of the Com¬
mission’s woodlands are yet in production. Britain imports over 90 per cent of
its needs.
The Forestry The Forestry Commission is the national forestry authority in Great Britain.
Commission and The Commissioners give advice on forestry matters and are responsible to the
Forestry Policy Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and the Secretaries of State for Scot¬
land and Wales. In pursuing timber production, forestry policy also takes into
account amenity, environmental and employment criteria, and the Commis¬
sion’s activities include wildlife conservation, the landscaping of plantations,
and the provision of facilities for recreation. The Commission has also encou¬
raged the setting up of new timber-using industries.
The Government has asked the Commission to sell some of its land and plan¬
tations to reduce its call on public funds. The Commission is financed partly by
the Government and partly by receipts from sales of timber and other produce
and rents. Income from timber will increase as production doubles in the next 15
years, probably leading to a reduction in grant-in-aid.
A substantial number of private woods are in ownerships of under 100 hectares
(250 acres) in extent. The Government encourages private forestry by favoura¬
ble tax arrangements. There is also a forestry grant scheme under which the
Commission aids planting by private owners.
Degree courses in forestry and associated studies are provided at three universi-
Education and ties and there are supervisory, craft and managerial level courses. The Forestry
Research Training Council, set up by the Forestry Commission, assists the development
of systematic training and the co-ordination of training in the state and private
sectors. The Furniture and Timber Industry Training Board is concerned with
training for private-sector employees in the home timber trade.
Forestry research, including that on ‘Dutch’ elm disease, is carried out by the
Commission at two research stations. Aid is also given for research work in
universities and other institutions, including the Commonwealth Forestry
Institute in Oxford.
Private
Forestry
Forestry
Forestry in
Northern
Ireland
The Department of Agriculture may acquire land for afforestation and give
financial and technical assistance for private planting. Financial provision is
made annually by Parliament.
The state forest area has grown steadily since 1945. By 1982,59,833 hectares
(147,850 acres) of plantable land had been acquired, of which 55,186 hectares
(136,370 acres) were planted. There were about 13,000 hectares (32,110 acres)
of privately owned forest. Some 667 people work in state forests.
15 Transport and
Communications
Major improvements in the movement of passengers and freight have resulted
from the construction of a network of motorways, the extension of fast inter-city
rail services (such as those operated by high speed trains), the modernisation of
many ports, the increased use of containers and other modern methods in
shipping, the use by airlines of larger or speedier aircraft (including the Con¬
corde supersonic aircraft) and expansion schemes at many airports. Communi¬
cations are benefiting from developments in microelectronics, computer and
satellite technology, and advances in materials, for example, the application of
optical fibres in telecommunications.
While major sectors of transport and communications operations are pub¬
licly owned, the Government is arranging for the introduction of private capital
into a number of them as part of its policy of reducing state involvement as
much as possible.
Inland Transport
Passenger and freight traffic is carried mainly by road. At the end of 1982 there
were 19 -8 million vehicles licensed for use on the roads of Great Britain, of
which 15 -7 million were motor cars, 1 • 7 million goods vehicles, 1 -4 million
motorcycles, scooters and mopeds, and 111 ,000 public road passenger vehicles
(including taxis). Private ownership of cars has been growing rapidly for many
years and the car is the most popular form of travel. Buses and coaches account
for about 8 per cent of passenger mileage within Great Britain, rail for 7 per cent
and air 0 • 6 per cent. Road haulage has a dominant position in the movement of
inland freight, accounting for about 82 per cent of tonnage carried and for some
two-thirds of tonne-kilometres. Railways and, to a lesser extent, pipelines and
inland waterways are important in carrying certain types of freight, particu¬
larly bulk goods. The railways and much of the bus industry are publicly
owned, but road haulage is in the hands of private enterprise.
Transport policy rests on the fundamental aims of promoting economic
growth and higher national prosperity, and ensuring a reasonable level of per¬
sonal mobility, while improving safety, particularly on the roads, minimising
damage to the environment and using energy economically. Britain is taking an
active part in the development of a common transport policy by the European
Community.
ROADS Motor vehicle traffic in Great Britain amounted in 1982 to some 296,783 million
vehicle-kilometres, of which cars and taxis accounted for nearly 81 per cent.
Improvements are continually being made in the network of trunk roads (which
form a basic network linking major centres of population, industrial areas and
ports) to accommodate the growth in traffic. A number of motorways (roads
specially designed for high speed traffic) have been built, while other
improvements, such as the construction of by-passes, have helped to make
travelling easier and faster, particularly over long distances and between cities.
Congestion on inter-urban roads has been reduced and many towns and vil¬
lages have been relieved of heavy through traffic. Although motorways account
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
269
Administration
for less than 1 per cent of road mileage, they carry nearly 10 per cent of traffic
including over one-fifth of heavy goods vehicle traffic. In 1982 the road network
totalled over 227,760 miles (366,544 kilometres), of which some 1,726 miles
(2,778 kilometres) were motorways (see Table 24). Motorways and other major
roads are shown on the map at the end of the book.
Table 24: Road Mileage
(as at April 1982)
Public Trunk roads
roads (including
motorways)
Trunk
motorways a
England
Scotland
Wales
Northern Ireland
162,296
30,880
19,908
14,683
6,214
1,939
1,096
409
1,386
132
74
70
Britain
227,767
9,658
1,662
Sources: Department of Transport, Northern Ireland Department of the Environment, Scottish Development
a Department and Welsh Office.
In addition, there were 49 miles (79 kilometres) of local authority motorway in England and 15 miles (24 kilo-
En gland'n Sc0t and'In Apnl 1983 some 83 miles (134 kilometres) of trunk motorway were under construction in
The main aims of the Government’s programme to improve trunk roads are to
meet the needs of industry and to keep heavy lorry traffic away from towns and
villages. In England the main priorities are the M25 London orbital route (which
should be completed by 1986) and routes to serve industry and the major ports.
In Wales the priorities are to reconstruct the coast road in north Wales and
improve roads which are important for industrial redevelopment. Although
most of the motorway and dual carriageway network in central Scotland has
been completed, an extension is planned to the southern end of the M74. Other
priorities are the improvement of strategic routes such as those to the north and
north-east (which are important for North Sea oil-related activities), some of the
west-coast routes, and the construction of more by-passes. In Northern Ireland
the emphasis is on building new links to the motorway network, constructing
more by-passes, and improving roads in the Belfast area and other urban areas.
Priority for new roads in urban areas of Great Britain is being given to those
designed to meet the needs of industry and commerce, serve new industrial or
housing estates, provide links to the national trunk road network or to comple¬
ment traffic management schemes.
Responsibility for trunk motorways and other trunk roads in Great Britain rests
in England with the Secretary of State for Transport, in Scotland with the Secre¬
tary of State for Scotland and in Wales with the Secretary of State for Wales. The
costs of construction, improvement and maintenance are paid for by central
Government. The highway authority for non-trunk roads in England and Wales
is, in general, the county council in whose area the roads lie, and in Scotland the
regional or islands council. In Northern Ireland the Northern Ireland Depart¬
ment of the Environment is responsible for public roads and their maintenance
and construction.
270
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Research into all aspects of road construction, traffic engineering and safety,
and into problems associated with transport is carried out by the Transport and
Road Research Laboratory, the research arm of the Department of Transport.
Road Safety Great Britain’s accident record is considerably better than that of most other
countries even though it has one of the highest densities of road traffic in the
world. In 1982, 5,900 people were killed on the roads, about 79,700 seriously
injured and 248,600 slightly injured. A comprehensive framework of legis¬
lation embodied in recent Road Traffic and Transport Acts and summarised in
the Highway Code (which sets out the standard of conduct for road users) has
contributed to the decline in casualty rates. Other factors have been better road
design and construction, segregating vehicles from pedestrians, and cam¬
paigns conducted nationally by government departments and the Royal
Society for the Prevention of Accidents and locally by local authorities to per¬
suade people to take greater care on the roads.
Comprehensive regulations govern the design of vehicles, their use on the
roads, and the maintenance and testing of their mechanical condition. Under a
national ‘type approval’ scheme in Great Britain, all new cars must be of a type
that has been certified as meeting the required standards. Private cars and light
vans which are three or more years old must be tested annually at private
garages authorised as test stations. (In Northern Ireland private cars seven or
more years old are tested at official vehicle inspection centres.) A compulsory
type approval scheme for goods vehicles has been introduced in Great Britain
and applies to virtually all goods vehicles manufactured from 1 October 1982 and
first used on or after 1 April 1983. Heavy goods vehicles are subject to annual
tests carried out at special testing stations.
Minimum ages are laid down for driving: 16 for riders of mopeds and disabled
drivers of specially adapted vehicles; 17 for driving cars and other passenger
vehicles with nine or fewer seats (including that of the driver), motorcycles and
goods vehicles not over 3 • 5 tonnes gross laden weight; 18 for goods vehicles over
3 • 5 but not over 7 • 5 tonnes; and 21 for passenger vehicles with over nine seats
and goods vehicles over 7 • 5 tonnes. All drivers of motor vehicles, except new
residents holding certain non-British licences, are required to pass the driving
test before being granted a full licence to drive. Learners must display ‘L’ plates
on their vehicle and be accompanied while driving (with certain exceptions) by
a qualified driver. There are national speed limits of 70 mph (113 km/h) on
motorways and other dual carriageway roads, and 60 mph (97 km/h) on single
carriageway roads, while in built-up areas a general limit of 30 mph (48 km/h)
applies.
Other measures directed primarily towards road safety include legislation
and publicity to discourage drinking and driving, computer-controlled warning
signals on most busy motorways to inform motorists of advisory speed limits in
adverse conditions and of lane closures, and regulations governing the carriage
of dangerous goods by road. A number of provisions designed to improve road
safety have been implemented under the Transport Act 1981. Breath testing has
become the main means of determining a driver’s alcohol level, largely
replacing the need for blood and urine samples; the statutory limit of breath
alcohol concentration for drivers is 35 microgrammes of alcohol in 100 millili¬
tres of breath. Provisions to improve the safety of motorcyclists include the
restriction of learner drivers to the less powerful machines, a new two-part
motorcycle driving test and a limit on the duration of the motorcycle provisional
licence. Regulations governing the compulsory wearing of seat belts in the front
seats of cars and light vans took effect on 31 January 1983. The totting-up pro¬
cedure of licence endorsements for driving offences was replaced in 1982 by a
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
271
more discriminating system whereby drivers are given penalty points, varying
in number according to the severity of the offence, and are liable to disqualifi¬
cation from driving for a period if they incur a set number of points within three
years.
Traffic in
Towns
ROAD
HAULAGE
Traffic management schemes are being operated in many city and town centres
to minimise congestion and its environmental effects, and to improve road
safety. They may include one-way systems, streets reserved for pedestrians,
bus priority measures, parking controls and limited road construction. In most
town centres parking is restricted and waiting limits apply. Major city centres
often have controlled parking zones, where payment is required for on-street
parking. Many towns have shopping precincts, some of them enclosed, which
are specially designed for pedestrians and from which motor vehicles are
excluded.
Urban traffic control systems, with traffic signals controlled by a central
computer, are in operation in 33 cities in Britain. Systems developed by the
Department of Transport and British firms have achieved international repute
and are the most commonly used in the world. The most modern of these
systems, which continuously measures and responds to the flow of traffic on the
roads, is in operation in Coventry and Maidstone and is about to be installed in
Southampton, Worcester, Wolverhampton and Cambridge. It has also been
installed in central London in the first stage of converting the present control
system covering 1,200 sets of traffic signals.
Road haulage traffic amounted to 89,200 million tonne-kilometres in 1982.
There has been a move towards larger and more efficient vehicles carrying
heavier loads — about 70 per cent of the traffic, in terms of tonne-kilometres, is
carried in vehicles of over 28 tonnes gross laden weight. Much of the traffic is
moved over short distances, with just under half of the tonnage being carried on
hauls of 50 kilometres (31 miles) or less. Public haulage (private road hauliers
carrying other firms’ goods) accounts for 62 per cent of freight carried in Great
Britain in terms of tonne-kilometres. The growth in road haulage has been con¬
centrated on long-distance traffic, particularly international road haulage.
The environmental problems caused by lorries have become a matter of
public concern. The Government has introduced a number of measures to bring
economic benefits and increased protection to the environment and the public.
In May 1983 the maximum permitted weight of articulated lorries was increased
from 32 • 5 to 38 tonnes, subject to the lorries having five axles. Safeguards on
the design of lorries include restrictions on their dimensions, while a number of
measures have been taken to improve the enforcement of lorry weights and
safety. More by-passes are being built to keep lorries away from residential
areas. In April 1983 the maximum noise limit for the heaviest new lorries was
reduced, while there is a programme of research and development, involving
vehicle and engine manufacturers, to reduce the noise from heavy lorries to less
than half the 1981 level and produce a quiet heavy vehicle for the 1990s. To
encourage the use of railways and inland waterways for the carriage of freight,
grants of up to 60 per cent are available towards the cost of construction or
modernisation of privately owned facilities where there are significant environ¬
mental benefits by the removal of heavy goods vehicle traffic from the roads.
Structure of the Road haulage is predominantly an industry of small, privately owned busi-
Industry nesses. Many of the 126,900 holders ofan operator’s licence in 1982 had only one
vehicle and the average size of a vehicle fleet is only about four. The biggest
272
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Licensing and
Other Controls
PASSENGER
SERVICES
Buses and
Coaches
Services
operator in Great Britain is the National Freight Consortium set up by a consor¬
tium of managers and employees to ac quire the National Freight Company from
the Government. The acquisition, which was completed in 1982, was the largest
staff/management ‘buy-out’ ever undertaken in Britain and the first for a
nationalised industry.
Those operating goods vehicles over 3 • 5 tonnes gross weight (with certain
special exemptions) require an operator’s licence, obtained on showing good
repute and ability to maintain vehicles properly and control loading and
drivers’ hours. Licences are divided into restricted licences for firms carrying
their own goods and standard licences, sub-divided into ‘national only’ and
‘international’, for hauliers operating for hire or reward. (In Northern Ireland
operators carrying their own goods do not require a licence.) Proof of profes¬
sional competence is required to obtain a standard licence. Regulations lay
down limits on the hours worked by drivers of goods vehicles, and there are also
minimum rest periods. Under a European Community regulation a tachograph
(a device which automatically records a vehicle’s speed and distance covered,
driving time and stopping periods) must be fitted and used in most goods
vehicles over 3-5 tonnes gross weight in Great Britain. International road
haulage is governed mainly by bilateral agreements which are in force with 26
other countries.
Local bus and urban railway services in Britain are provided mainly by publicly
owned operators, coach services partly by publicly owned bodies, and taxis and
hire cars almost entirely by privately owned businesses.
The largest single public sector bus and coach operator in Britain is the National
Bus Company, which operates in England and Wales through more than 40
locally based subsidiaries and has a network of long-distance coach services; it
has a fleet of some 14,000 vehicles. V chicles run by other public sector operators
include 3,200 run by the Scottish Transport Group (which operates the main
bus services in Scotland outside the major cities and also runs ferries to the
islands off the west coast of Scotland), 10,000 by the seven passenger transport
executives (responsible for the day-to-day management and operations of local
transport in Strathclyde and the metropolitan counties of Greater Manchester,
Merseyside, West Midlands, Tyne and Wear, South Yorkshire and West
Yorkshire), 6,200 by the London Transport Executive and 5,500 by other local
authority undertakings. There are some 5,400 privately owned undertakings
(of which the majority have fewer than five vehicles) comprising about 29,700
vehicles; only a small proportion of these operators provide scheduled local bus
services. Double-deck buses are the main type of vehicle used for urban road
passenger transport in Britain and there are some 25,200 in operation. In
addition, there are 44,700 single-deck buses and coaches, and some 82 trams
(at Blackpool and Llandudno which have Britain’s only remaining tramway
systems).
In Northern Ireland almost all road passenger services are provided by sub¬
sidiaries of the Northern Ireland Transport Holding Company. Citybus Ltd
operates services in the city of Belfast and Ulsterbus Ltd operates most of the
services in the rest of Northern Ireland. These companies have some 350 and
1,000 vehicles respectively.
There has been a long-term decline in the use of local bus services, mainly
because of the growth in ownership of private cars, and in 1982 buses or coaches
covered some 6,100 million vehicle-kilometres in Great Britain, 28 per cent
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
273
Taxis
Urban
Railways
RAILWAYS
Operations
fewer than in 1972. Bus operators have taken action to contain costs and to
improve productivity by increasing the proportion of bus services operated by
one man and reducing or rationalising services. Many uneconomic bus services
have been withdrawn, particularly in the rural areas. As an alternative to
uneconomic bus services, encouragement has been given to the promotion of
unconventional services in rural areas, such as community buses operated by
voluntary drivers, postbuses (Post Office vehicles carrying mail and
passengers), and social car-sharing schemes.
One of the aims of the Transport Act 1980, which contained the biggest series
of reforms in road passenger transport for 50 years, was the encouragement of
competition and the provision of new services. It removed restrictions on oper¬
ating long-distance express coach services and excursions and tours, allowing
free competition between operators. This had a noticeable effect on long¬
distance express coach services, bringing about reductions in fares, the provi¬
sion of more services and an increase in the number of passengers carried.
Great Britain is divided into 11 traffic areas, each with a body of traffic commis¬
sioners responsible for licensing operators of buses and coaches to ensure their
suitability for carrying the public safely. In addition, local bus services cannot
be provided except under road service licences. The commissioners are
required to grant applications for licences unless satisfied that to do so would be
against the public interest.
There are about 35,000 licensed taxis and 70,000 licensed taxi drivers in Great
Britain, mainly in urban areas; London has some 13,000 and 18,000
respectively. In London and a number of other cities taxis must be purpose-built
to conform to very strict requirements and drivers must have passed a test of
their knowledge of the area. Hire cars with drivers may be booked only through
the operator and not hired on the street; in most areas outside London hire cars
are licensed.
There are underground railway services in three British cities: London,
Glasgow and Liverpool. London Transport has 4,100 railway cars and serves
268 stations, while its trains operate over 250 miles (402 kilometres) of railway,
of which about 102 miles (164 kilometres) are underground. A new light rapid
transit system, 34 miles (55 kilometres) long with over 40 stations, is in opera¬
tion on Tyneside. The project, the largest provincial urban transport scheme in
Britain in the twentieth century, involved the electrification of two suburban
railway lines, linked by new tunnels under Newcastle upon Tyne and
Gateshead, and a new bridge over the Tyne. A seven mile (11-kilometre) light
railway is planned for London’s Docklands, linking the Isle of Dogs with the City
of London and Mile End.
Railways were pioneered in Britain, and the Stockton and Darlington Railway,
opened in 1825, was the first passenger public railway in the world to be worked
by steam power. Under the Transport Act 1947 the four large railway companies
in Great Britain were brought under public ownership and in 1962 the British
Railways Board was set up to manage railway affairs and subsidiary activities
In Northern Ireland the Northern Ireland Railways Company Ltd, a subsidiary
of the Northern Ireland Transport Holding Company, operates the railway
service on some 200 miles (322 kilometres) of track.
British Rail’s operating statistics are shown in Table 25. In 1982 the Board’s
turnover, including financial support and income from other activities but
excluding internal transactions, was £2,816 million and there was a net deficit of
274
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Passenger
Services
£173-6 million. Financial support for British Rail includes compensation for the
financial burden of operating as a public service those parts of the rail passenger
system which would not otherwise cover their costs, research grants and grants
for level crossings. In 1982 the British Railways Board received £887 million
from the Government and the passenger transport executives in respect of the
public service obligation. At the end of 1982 the British Railways Board
employed some 212,700 people. A report, published in January 1983, reviewed
the finances of British Rail, identified a number of opportunities for improved
efficiency and reductions in costs, and set out broad illustrations of the costs of
component parts of the railway system.
Table 25: Railway Statistics
1977
1980
1981
1982
Passenger journeys (million) 702 760 719 630
Passenger-miles (million) 18,200 19,700 19,100 17,000
Freight train traffic (million
tonnes) 171 153 154 142
Freight train traffic (million net
tonne-miles) 12,600 10,961 10,877 9,867
Assets (at end of year):
Locomotives 3,610 3,379 3,131 3,016
HST power cars and passenger
carriages 378 772 845 906
APT power cars and passenger
carriages — 36 36 36
Other coaching vehicles 21,580 20,408 18,268 16,889
Freight vehicles 166,935 119,507 88,327 71,452
Stations 2,848 2,787 2,742 2,711
Route open for traffic (miies) 11,168 10,964 10,831 10,706
Source: British Railways Board.
The passenger network (see map, p 275) comprises a fast inter-city network,
linking the main centres of Great Britain; local stopping services; and
commuter services in and around the large conurbations, especially London
and south-east England. The introduction of faster trains, together with track
and signalling improvements, has brought significant reductions in journey
time on many routes. Inter-city rail services in Great Britain are among the best
in the world in speed, frequency and comfort. Two major projects, the High
Speed Train (HST) and the Advanced Passenger Train (APT), have been
designed to raise speeds using existing track. British Rail introduced the
world’s fastest diesel rail service, known as Inter-City 125 and operated by HSTs
travelling at maximum sustained speeds of 125 mph (201 km/h), in 1976 on the
route from London to Bristol and south Wales. Similar services have also been
introduced on the London-Edinburgh-Aberdeen route, the London-Plymouth-
Penzance route, the London-Sheffield route and the route linking Edinburgh,
Newcastle upon Tyne, Birmingham and south-west England or south Wales.
British Rail is continuing to develop the APT, also capable of speeds of 125 mph
(201 km/h) but with the ability to take curves up to 40 per cent faster than
conventional trains.
Main Railway Passenger Routes
276
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Freight
Other
Activities
Private
Railways
INLAND
WATERWAYS
Electrification is continuing, with the introduction in July 1983 of electrified
services between London and Bedford, while a £25 million scheme will extend
electrified services to Ipswich and Harwich in 1985 and to Norwich in 1987. The
Government has invited British Rail to draw up a ten-year programme of
schemes for electrifying potentially profitable main line routes, following a
review by the Department of Transport and British Rail. Government approval
of particular electrification projects will depend on the profitability of the invest¬
ment and on the achievement of improvements in productivity.
British Rail has developed ways of reducing costs on its local passenger
services by the installation of automatic level crossings and radio signalling,
track rationalisation, and replacing existing diesel multiple-unit trains by light¬
weight vehicles which are cheaper to build and maintain.
The most important freight commodities handled in 1982 were coal and coke
(88 -4 million tonnes), iron and steel (14-3 million tonnes), earth and stones
(12-5 million tonnes), and petroleum (11-6 million tonnes). British Rail is con¬
centrating on traffic particularly suitable for carriage by rail, especially long¬
distance and bulk trainload traffic.
N ew types of wagon are being introduced which have larger capacities and are
capable of higher speeds. A network of some 85 scheduled ‘Speedlink’ high¬
speed freight services using these new wagons has been established between
the major industrial centres. A computer-based total operations processing
system, which monitors all consignments and freight train and wagon
movements in Great Britain, has reduced costs by allowing the more intensive
use of rolling stock and the withdrawal of many obsolete wagons.
British Rail has a group of other subsidiary companies, of which British Rail
Engineering Ltd (BREL) has the largest number of employees, about 29,000.
BREL constructs locomotives and rolling stock as well as undertaking heavy
maintenance and overhauls for British Rail; an important part of its activities is
the manufacture of locomotives and railway rolling stock for railway admin¬
istrations overseas. The Railway Technical Centre at Derby is the largest of its
type in the world. Transmark provides consultancy services overseas on
railway and associated operations. Travellers-Fare is responsible for catering
facilities at 185 stations and on 850 trains each weekday.
British Rail’s main non-railway interests (shipping, hovercraft, hotels and
non-operational property) were transferred in 1981 to British Rail Investments
Ltd, a holding company set up by British Rail to implement the policy agreed
with the Government of introducing private capital into the major non-railway
operations. Under the Transport Act 1981 the British Railways Board has powers
to dispose of its interests in these subsidiary businesses and has already priva¬
tised its hotels and hovercraft businesses and disposed of considerable amounts
of property. The Board may decide to keep a minority interest in a few cases, but
the intention is that the businesses should be transferred to the private sector,
with their future investment financed by private capital.
There are over 40 small privately owned passenger-carrying railways in Great
Britain, mostly operated on a voluntary basis and providing limited services for
tourists and railway enthusiasts. The main aim of most of these railways, such
as the Bluebell Railway in East Sussex, is the preservation of steam traction.
The inland waterways of Great Britain are popular for recreation, make a valua¬
ble contribution to the environment and play an important part in land
drainage and water supply. They are also used to a limited extent for carrying
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
277
Port Traffic
freight. The first official survey of inland waterway freight traffic reported that
63 million tonnes of freight were carried on inland waterways and estuaries in
1980, covering some 2,300 million tonne-kilometres (1 -5 per cent of freight
traffic by tonne-kilometres in Great Britain). Some 60 per cent of internal tonne-
kilometres were carried out on the River Thames and associated waterways. Of
the 2,000 miles (3,219 kilometres) of canal and river navigations controlled by
the publicly owned British Waterways Board, some 340 miles (547 kilometres)
are maintained as commercial waterways for use by freight-carrying vessels,
andin 1982some5 • 1 milliontonneswerecarriedontheBoard’swaterways.The
Board also operates docks, warehouses and inland freight terminals, and has
two barge fleets, although most of the traffic on its waterways is conveyed by
independent carriers. In 1982 the Board’s turnover amounted to £17 • 8 million,
and it received government grants of £33 • 6 million to maintain its waterways to
statutory standards. The Board’s £16 million scheme to improve the Sheffield
and South Yorkshire Navigation between Doncaster and Rotherham was
officially opened in June 1983. The improvements have raised the barge
capacity above Doncaster, previously limited to 90-tonne payloads, with the
result that suitably designed craft of up to 700-tonne payloads can navigate
between Rotherham and the Humber ports.
Ports
There are over 300 ports in Great Britain, but the large majority are small har¬
bours of only local significance and many do not handle cargo regularly. Most
port authorities operate with statutory powers and responsibilities under
private Acts of Parliament. They are of four broad types: public trusts, local
authorities, statutory companies and nationalised ports (those belonging to the
British Railways Board and the British Waterways Board).
Major ports controlled by public trusts include London, Milford Haven, Tees
and Hartlepool, Medway, Forth, Clyde and Belfast. Local authorities own about
one-third of Britain’s ports including Bristol, Portsmouth and the new oil ports
in Orkney and Shetland. Port undertakings owned by statutory companies
include Felixstowe, Manchester and Liverpool.
The Transport Act 1981 provided for the introduction of private capital into
Britain’s main nationalised port undertaking, the British Transport Docks
Board. It has become Associated British Ports, a wholly owned subsidiary of
Associated British Ports Holdings PLC, a company in which the Government
has a substantial minority shareholding. Associated British Ports (Britain’s
largest ports undertaking) owns and operates 19 ports including Southampton,
Immingham, Hull, Newport, Cardiff and Swansea. The Act also provides
powers for the British Railways Board to introduce private capital into its ports,
which include Folkestone, Newhaven and Parkeston Quay at Harwich.
In 1982 traffic through the ports of Great Britain amounted to 420 million tonnes
comprising 124 million tonnes of imports, 130 million tonnes of exports and 166
million tonnes of domestic traffic (including ‘one-port’ traffic which comprised
offshore traffic, landings of sea-dredged aggregates and material shipped for
dumping at sea). About 65 per cent of the traffic was in fuels, mainly petroleum
and petroleum products. Some 79 per cent of the 12 million tonnes of traffic (9 • 7
million tonnes of imports and 2 • 3 million tonnes of exports) which entered or
left Northern Ireland by sea in 1982 represented traffic with the rest of Britain.
Britain’s main ports, in terms of total tonnage handled, are given in Table 26.
Offshore oil developments have had a substantial effect on port traffic by greatly
increasing the flow through certain North Sea ports, such as Tees and Hartle¬
pool and the Forth ports, creating new oil ports at Flotta in Orkney and Sullom
278
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Development
Voe in Shetland, and reducing oil traffic at many traditional oil importing termi¬
nals. There has also been a decline in the volume of conventional cargo handled
by traditional major ports, such as London, Liverpool and Manchester, and a
growth in traffic through other ports including Dover, Felixstowe and Harwich,
due to containerisation and the use of roll-on/roll-off facilities, and to the
increasing proportion of Britain’s trade with the rest of Europe. While non-fuel
traffic has been growing only slowly, container and roll-on traffic has doubled
since 1972 to 45 million tonnes in 1982 and now accounts for about one-third of
non-fuel foreign and coastal traffic. The leading ports for container traffic are
London, Felixstowe and Southampton and for roll-on traffic are Dover,
Grimsby/Immingham, Felixstowe, Harwich and Hull.
Table 26: Traffic through the Principal Ports of Great Britain
million tonnes
1972 1977 1980 1981 1982
Shetland na 0-4 29 • 0
Milford Haven 45-7 37-3 38-7
London 48-2 43-1 39-4
Tees and Hartlepool 22 -7 28 -2 37-7
Grimsby and Immingham 19 -8 22 -5 21 • 1
Forth 9-6 24-9 28-5
Southampton 29 0 23 -7 21-8
Orkney na 9 0 15-7
Medway 26-7 20-2 16-9
Manchester 15-5 12-8 110
Liverpool 25-8 16-4 11-8
39
31
35
34
25
26
20
15
15
9
10
46-9
36 0
35-4
32-7
27-5
27-2
19-9
15-9
12-1
10-4
9- 1
Source: Department of Transport.
na = not available.
Notes: Foreign and coastal traffic only; excludes one-port traffic.
Belfast and Larne are the main ports in Northern Ireland and handled 5 • 2 million tonnes and 3 • 4 million tonnes
respectively in 1982.
Modernisation of Britain’s ports has been carried out primarily to accommodate
the increase in the proportion of goods carried in container ships and roll-on
vessels, and the changing nature and direction of Britain’s trade. Most current
developments are concerned with specific energy or industrial needs or to
accommodate specialised container or roll-on services rather than with general
purpose port facilities. Major schemes have included a £32 million scheme to
provide two deep-water container berths at Felixstowe, which became opera¬
tional in 1981, and a £10 million scheme at the port of Tyne to build a coal¬
handling terminal.
Purpose-built terminals for oil from the British sector of the North Sea have
been built at Hound Point on the Forth, on the Tees, at Flotta and Sullom Voe.
Sullom Voe is expected to become the largest oil exporting port in Europe by the
mid-1980s. Three of the four jetties can handle oil tankers of up to 350,000
deadweight tons. The fourth jetty handles the export of liquefied petroleum
gases and can accommodate vessels with a capacity of up to 75,000 cubic
metres. A natural gas liquids terminal is being built at Braefoot Bay in the Firth
of Forth. Supply bases for offshore vessels have been built at a number of ports
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
279
THE
MERCHANT
FLEET
Ownership
SERVICES
Cargo Services
mostly on the east coast, including Great Yarmouth, Leith, Dundee, Montrose,
Aberdeen, Peterhead Bay, Invergordon and Lerwick in Shetland.
Shipping
The British merchant fleet in mid-1982 at 22 • 5 million gross tons1 (36 million
deadweight tons) was the sixth largest in the world. The oil tanker fleet (10-4
million gross tons) was the fifth largest and the fleet of fully cellular container
ships (1-5 million gross tons) was the third largest. In common with the fleets of
other developed countries, the British fleet has been adversely affected by the
world recession in shipping and increasing international competition, and has
declined substantially since its peak of 33 • 2 million gross tons in 1975. A large
tonnage of ships, particularly of tankers, has been scrapped or sold.
In July 1982, 28 • 9 million deadweight tons of trading vessels of 100 gross tons
and over were both owned and registered in Britain: 18 • 1 million tons usually
employed as tankers, 7 • 6 million tons as tramps and 3 • 2 million tons as cargo
or passenger liners or cellular container ships. The merchant fleet figure of 36
million deadweight tons also includes non-trading vessels, such as fishing
vessels, tugs and dredgers, and shipping registered in Britain but owned in
other Commonwealth countries.
Virtually all of the British merchant fleet is privately owned. Nearly two-thirds
oi the tanker fleet belongs to the oil companies, although there are a few
independent tanker operators. British liner tonnage is dominated by a relatively
small number of large groups, the largest liner company being the Peninsular
and Oriental Steam Navigation Company (P & O). Some shipowners have dele¬
gated the management of their fleets to specialist ship management companies.
Several companies are participating in consortia, particularly where heavy
investment is required, as with container vessels. Chartering of ships of all
nationalities takes place on the Baltic Exchange, the largest market of its type in
the world. The representative body for shipowners (excluding owners of fishing
vessels) is the General Council of British Shipping.
About 95 per cent of Britain’s overseas trade by weight, about three-quarters by
value, is carried by sea, while the proportion of passengers travelling to or from
Britain by sea is more than one-third, compared with about one-half in the earlv
1960s. ^
In 1981 British seaborne trade amounted to 243 million tonnes (valued at £81,183
million) or 680,600 million tonne-miles (1 • 1 million million tonne-kilometres).
Ships registered in Britain carried 28 per cent by weight, 23 per cent in terms of
tonne-miles and 36 per cent by value. Tanker cargoes accounted for nearly half
this trade by weight, but only 19 per cent by value, and foodstuffs and manufac¬
tured goods accounted for three-quarters by value.
Container and roll-on/roll-off vessels are responsible for a growing propor¬
tion of general cargo trade. Many of the deep-sea liner services from Britain are
operated by container ships. Roll-on services, accommodating passengers and
their cars and, in some cases, commercial vehicles, are increasing in number,
One gross ton = 100 cubic feet (2 • 83 cubic metres). One deadweight ton = 1 tonne (1,000 kilo¬
grammes or 2,205 lb). Gross tonnage indicates the total capacity of the enclosed space on a ship.
Deadweight tonnage denotes the maximum load which a vessel can carry before submerging the
280
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Passenger
Services
ROLE OF THE
GOVERNMENT
particularly between Britain and the continent of Europe. Several freight-only
roll-on services operate to the Irish Republic, the continent of Europe, and to
more distant countries.
British shipping companies operating liner services have associated with
each other and with the companies of other countries operating on the same
routes in a series of ‘conferences’ designed to secure standardisation and stabi¬
lity of rates, and to maintain frequency and regularity of services. The essential
principle of a conference is a common tariff of freight rates and other conditions
of service to be applied by each member line. There are about 100 conferences
dealing with trade to and from Britain, many of which will be subject to the
terms of the United Nations Code of Conduct for Liner Conferences, due to come
into operation in October 1983.
Almost all of the 26-4 million passengers who arrived at or departed from
British ports in 1982 travelled to or from the continent of Europe or the Irish
Republic, services on other routes having been withdrawn as a result of the
growth of air services. Remaining long-distance passenger ships are used for
cruising and in 1982 some 43,000 passengers embarked on pleasure cruises
from British ports. Services from British ports are shown on the map at the end
of the book.
Cross-Channel traffic accounts for a substantial proportion of traffic to the
continent of Europe. Sealink UK Ltd, a subsidiary of the British Railways Board,
is the largest short-sea ferry operator in Europe. The company and its continen¬
tal partners (Societe Nationale des Chemins de Fer Francais of France, Regie
des Transports Maritimes Beiges and Stoomvaart Maatschappij Zeeland of the
Netherlands) operate about 60 ships on short-sea routes. Sealink UK Ltd and
the other major British operators, including Townsend Thoresen and P & O
Ferries, have invested heavily in new ships in recent years, resulting in a sub¬
stantial increase in cross-Channel ferry capacity. Competition between the
operators has led to reductions in fares on many routes.
Cross-Channel hovercraft services are provided by Hoverspeed Ltd, with
routes between Dover and Boulogne, and Dover and Calais. A hovercraft
crossing takes about one-third of the time taken by ships, and hovercraft carry
over one-quarter of the traffic on the short-sea crossings to the continent of
Europe. Hoverspeed operates seven hovercraft including two British Hovercraft
Corporation SR.N Super 4s which have been structurally enlarged so that each
accommodates 418 passengers and 55 cars, making them the largest hovercraft
in the world.
Passenger and freight ferry services are also operated to many of the offshore
islands, such as the Isle of Wight, Orkney, Shetland and a number of other Scot¬
tish islands.
The Department of Transport is the government department responsible for
most matters connected with merchant shipping, including general policy
towards the industry and Britain’s relations with other governments and inter¬
national organisations on shipping matters. The general policy is one of
minimum intervention by the Government and the encouragement of free and
fair competition. Under the Merchant Shipping Acts the Department does,
however, administer many regulations for marine safety and welfare, and for
preventing and cleaning up pollution from ships. For instance, it certifies the
load-line (or Plimsoll line) that shows that a ship is not overloaded; ensures that
standards of safety are observed in ship construction; ensures the provision of
adequate life-saving, fire-fighting and radio equipment; and deals with the
discipline, professional standards, health and accommodation of seamen. The
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
281
SAFETY AT
SEA
Acts also contain certain reserve powers for protecting shipping and trading
interests from measures adopted or proposed by overseas governments.
Outside London the Department’s responsibilities for the enforcement of
marine safety are carried out from marine offices located at various ports. In the
offices of the Registrar General of Shipping and Seamen, at Cardiff, a record is
kept of all ships registered in Britain and its dependencies.
Britain’s merchant fleet is one of the safest in the world with a lower record of
ship losses than the world average.
The Coastguard Service, administered by the Department of Transport, is
responsible for initiating and co-ordinating civil marine search and rescue
action in the United Kingdom Search and Rescue Region (SRR). This is divided
into six coastguard SRRs, each controlled by a maritime rescue co-ordination
centre (MRCC) supported by sub-centres, all of which maintain continuous tele¬
communications watch on marine distress frequencies. In addition, at times of
casualty risk a watch is kept at some 250 other stations around the coast. The
Coastguard Service is able to call upon the lifeboats of the Royal National Life¬
boat Institution (a voluntary body which operates 250 lifeboats). Ministry of
Defence aircraft (including helicopters from 11 airfields around the coast), a long-
range civilian helicopter based at Sumburgh (Shetland), and any other ships or
aircraft available to assist in search or rescue action. In 1982 the Coastguard
Service took action in 4,187 incidents (including cliff rescues) in which over
6,900 people were assisted.
The lighthouse authorities (for England and Wales the Corporation of Trinity
House, for Scotland the Northern Lighthouse Board and for Ireland the Com¬
missioners of Irish Lights) control about 350 lighthouses, many minor lights
and buoys, and a number of lightships, some of which are being replaced by
unattended sea marks or by light towers. In Britain there are 47 pilotage
authorities for the 87 pilotage districts and about 1,300 licensed pilots. Trinity
House is the largest pilotage authority, licensing some 600 pilots in 40 districts
in England and Wales. In some cases the harbour authority or local council is
the pilotage authority.
Compliance with traffic separation schemes around the shores of Britain is
mandatory for all vessels of countries party to the 1972 International Collision
Regulations. The most important scheme affecting British waters is in the
Dover Strait, the world’s busiest seaway. It consists of traffic lanes for shipping
passing through the strait and inshore traffic zones for use by local shipping.
The number of collisions in the strait has fallen considerably since the scheme
was introduced. Britain and France operate radar surveillance of the strait to
keep watch on ships not conforming to the scheme and, through the Channel
Navigation Information Service, broadcast navigational information to ships in
the Dover Strait. The MRCC at Dover, which monitors ships passing through
the strait, has a data processing system for detecting and tracking vessels
automatically, making it one of the most advanced centres in the world.
Civil Aviation
Britain’s substantial civil air transport industry is continuing to develop to meet
the generally increasing demand for air travel, particularly international travel.
Airline services are operated by British Airways and by a number of indepen¬
dent airlines. Their fleets contain some of the most modern types of equipment
including wide-bodied aircraft and the Concorde supersonic aircraft with which
British Airways inaugurated in 1976, jointly with Air France, the world’s first
scheduled supersonic passenger services. Many airports are being substan¬
tially modernised and extended.
282
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Role of the
Government
Civil Aviation
Authority
Air Traffic
British Airways
Airline
Operations
The Secretary of State for Transport is responsible for international matters
(including negotiation of air service agreements with more than 100 other
countries, the licensing and control of public transport operations into Britain
by overseas operators and British participation in the activities of international
aviation bodies), airports policy, amenity matters (such as aircraft noise),
aviation security policy and investigation of accidents.
The Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) is an independent statutory body, respon¬
sible for the economic, technical and operational regulation of the industry. It is
also responsible for the aerodrome navigation services at certain British
airports and, jointly with the Ministry of Defence, for the provision by the
National Air Traffic Services of air navigation services. The CAA also operates
eight aerodromes in Scotland. Members of the CAA are appointed by the Secre¬
tary of State for Transport.
Under the Civil Aviation Act 1980 the Authority’s primary objectives are to
ensure that British airlines provide air services to satisfy all major categories of
public demand at the lowest charges consistent with a high standard of safety
and an economic return for efficient operators, and to further the reasonable
interests of air transport users. Other duties are to ensure that British airlines
compete effectively on international routes, to secure the most efficient use of
airports in Britain and to have regard to the need to minimise the adverse effects
of civil aviation on the environment.
In 1982 a total of some 44 • 2 million passengers travelled by air (international
terminal passengers) to or from Britain, 1 • 1 per cent more than in 1981. Total
capacity offered on all services by British airlines amounted to 11,848 million
capacity-tonne-kilometres in 1982: 9,068 million tonne-kilometres on
scheduled services and 2,780 million tonne-kilometres on non-scheduled
services. British Airways accounts for some 75 per cent of scheduled services
flown by British airlines, whereas the charter market is dominated by the
independent companies.
In 1982 the value of Britain’s overseas trade carried by air was some £17,700
million and the proportions carried by air amounted to approximately 16 per
cent of the value of exports and 15 per cent of imports. Air freight is important for
the carriage of goods with a high value-to-weight ratio, especially where speed of
movement is essential. Precious stones, live animals, medicinal and phar¬
maceutical products, clothing, leather and skins, and scientific instruments are
major categories where a relatively high proportion of exports is sent by air.
British Airways is one of the world’s leading airlines, and in terms of interna¬
tional passengers carried and of international passenger-kilometres flown it is
the largest in the world. During 1982-83 British Airways’ turnover was £2,497
million (including £2,044 million from airline operations) and it recorded a net
profit of £77 million. The Civil Aviation Act 1980 makes legislative provision for
the Government’s intention to change British Airways from a nationalised
industry to a private sector company. At the appropriate time the Government
will effect this change and it intends to sell a controlling shareholding in the new
company to private investors.
British Airways’ route network, covering some 567,000 kilometres (352,000
miles) of unduplicated route, is among the largest in the world. The airline
serves 120 destinations in 60 countries and in 1982-83carried 14 • 6million pas¬
sengers on scheduled services. International scheduled services are operated to
the rest of Europe, the Middle East, the Far East, Australasia, East and South
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
283
Independent
Airlines
Aircraft and Helicopters Operated by British
Airways in March 1983
24 Trident Threes
17 TriStars
>)-
21 Sikorsky 61Ns
Other aircraft
4 Boeing 707s
5 HS 748s
1 Trident One
Other helicopters
4 Sikorsky S76s
6 Boeing V234s
1 Jet Ranger
2 Bell 212s
2 Westland 30s
Africa, and North America. Within Britain it runs 1,090 services a week to 14
towns and cities. Scheduled Concorde services are operated from London
(Heathrow) to New York and to Washington, covering these routes in about half
the time taken by subsonic aircraft. Other activities carried out include heli¬
copter services, engine overhaul work and investments in a number of hotel
companies and air companies in other countries.
British Airways operated 148 aircraft and 36 helicopters in March 1983 (see
diagram, above). A large investment programme is under way to replace the
older aircraft, and orders for new aircraft include a further 13 Boeing 757s.
The independent airlines carry 5 • 6 million passengers a year on scheduled
services and 12 -7 million on charter flights. The main independent scheduled
airline is British Caledonian Airways, which operates a fleet of 27 aircraft and
carried 2 million scheduled service passengers in 1982. Its scheduled services
are primarily to the continent of Europe; North, West and Central Africa; South
America; the United States; and the Middle East and Hong Kong. Other oper¬
ators of scheduled passenger services include British Midland Airways, Air UK
and Dan-Air Services. Britannia Airways, Dan-Air Services, Monarch Airlines
and Air Europe are the leading independent airlines operating charter passen¬
ger services.
Helicopters are engaged on a variety of work, but are mainly employed on the
large-scale operations connected with the development of Britain’s offshore oil
and gas resources. Bristow Helicopters, which operates a fleet of more than 50
284
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Safety
Air Traffic
Control and
Navigation
Services
Airports
helicopters in Britain, is the world’s largest helicopter contracting business.
There are a small number of scheduled helicopter passenger services in Britain,
including a link between Heathrow and Gatwick airports, and routes between
Penzance and the Isles of Scilly, and Glasgow and Fort William. Light aircraft
and helicopters are also involved in other activities, such as charter operations,
search and rescue services, crop-spraying, and aerial survey and photography.
The CAA is responsible for air safety, both airworthiness and operational safety.
Its Operations Division deals with the preparation and application of safety
requirements concerning airline and private aviation operations, flight crew
licensing and training, aerodromes, and fire and rescue services. The
Airworthiness Division is responsible for the airworthiness standards of aircraft
registered in Britain, the licensing of aircraft maintenance engineers and the
approval of work schedules to which British transport aircraft are maintained.
The CAA is advised in its airworthiness duties by the Airworthiness
Requirements Board.
Every company operating aircraft used for public transport must possess an
Air Operator’s Certificate which is granted by the CAA when it is satisfied that
the operator is competent to secure the safe operation of its aircraft. The CAA’s
flight operations inspectors (who are experienced airline pilots) check that satis¬
factory operating standards are maintained.
Each member of the flight crew of a British registered aircraft must hold the
appropriate official licence issued by the CAA. Except for pilots with acceptable
military or other qualifying experience, all applicants for a first professional
pilot’s licence must have undertaken a full-time course of ground and flying
instruction at a training body approved by the CAA.
Responsibility for civil and military air traffic control over Britain and the sur¬
rounding seas rests with the National Air Traffic Services (NATS). The Con¬
troller of the NATS reports to both the CAA and the Ministry of Defence. The
function of the NATS is to secure the safe, orderly and expeditious flow of air
traffic within British airspace. It also provides air traffic services for aircraft
flying over the north-eastern quarter of the North Atlantic. At some 20 civil
aerodromes, including most of the major British airports, the NATS provides
the navigation services necessary for the operation of aircraft taking off and
landing, and integrates them into the flow of traffic within British airspace. To
provide its services, the NATS uses radar, some 100 navigational beacons,
landing aids, air/ground communications and an extensive telecommuni¬
cations network.
Of the 128 licensed civil aerodromes in Britain, about one-fifth each handles
more than 100,000 passengers a year. In 1982 Britain’s civil airports handled a
total of 60 million passengers (58 -8 million terminal passengers and 1 • 2 million
in transit), and 692,700 tonnes of freight. London’s Heathrow airport is the
world’s busiest airport for international travel, and is Britain’s most important
airport for passengers and air freight, handling 26 • 7 million passengers and
435,700 tonnes of freight in 1982. Gatwick, the second major airport in the
London area, and the world's fifth busiest international airport, handled 11-4
million passengers in 1982. Other leading airports were Manchester, Glasgow,
Luton, Aberdeen, Birmingham, Belfast and Edinburgh.
Ownership and The British Airports Authority (BAA), a statutory body, owns and manages
Control seven airports — Heathrow, Gatwick and Stansted in south-east England, and
Glasgow, Edinburgh, Prestwick and Aberdeen in Scotland — which handle
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
285
Development
BRITISH
TELECOM
about 73 per cent of air passengers and 86 per cent of air cargo traffic in Britain.
In 1982-83 the BAA’s income was £284 million and it recorded a pre-tax profit of
£35 million.
Sumburgh airport and seven small aerodromes in the Highlands and Islands
of Scotland are controlled by the CAA and Belfast’s airport (Aldergrove) is
managed by Northern Ireland Airports Ltd. a subsidiary of the Northern Ireland
Transport Holding Company. Most of the other public airports are controlled by
local authorities. Except for those controlled by the CAA, all airports used for
public transport and training flights must be licensed by the CAA. Stringent
requirements, such as the provision of adequate fire-fighting, medical and
rescue services, suitable physical characteristics and visual aids, must be satis¬
fied before a licence is granted. Strict aviation security measures are in force.
The Government’s policy is that the growing demand for air transport facilities
in south-east England should be met by the provision of additional capacity at
existing airports, especially at Heathrow, Gatwick and Stansted. It is also
encouraging the maximum use of other main regional airports.
A fourth major terminal to be built at Heathrow will raise the airport’s
capacity from 30 million to 38 million passengers a year and should be open by
1986. At Gatwick a £ 100 million redevelopment programme has been completed,
increasing the airport s annual capacity to some 16 million passengers. A
second passenger terminal, which will ultimately increase Gatwick’s capacity
to about 25 million passengers a year, should be in operation by 1987. The BAA
is proposing to build a new terminal and associated facilities at Stansted which
would increase the airport’s capacity to 15 million passengers a year. Its plann¬
ing application has been examined at a public inquiry.
Work is in progress to develop facilities at several of Britain’s other airports. A
new terminal complex, which will be able to handle up to 3 million passengers a
year, is being built at Birmingham airport at a cost of over £50 million and is
expected to be open in 1984. An £8 million extension of the terminal at Newcastle
upon Tyne airport was completed in 1982 and major expansion of existing ter¬
minals is being implemented at Luton and Belfast airports. An extension of the
runway at Manchester airport was completed in 1982 and a similar extension
scheme is in hand at Leeds — Bradford airport.
Communications
A new framework for the structure of communications services was established
under the British Telecommunications Act 1981. This provided for the separa¬
tion of the Post Office into two corporations, one for postal and banking services
and the other for telecommunications, both of which are responsible to the
Secretary of State for Trade and Industry.
Britain has the world’s fourth largest public telecommunications business.
There are some 29 million telephones, 19 million exchange connections, 93,000
telex connections and 99,000 data transmission terminals (more than in any
country except the United States). British Telecommunications (known as
British Telecom), established under the British Telecommunications Act 1981 to
operate telecommunications and data processing services, employs 246,000
people, has assets of £9,300 million, and runs eight factories. In 1982-83 its
turnover totalled £6,377 million and profits, after interest payments, amounted
to £365 million.
286
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Telephone
Services
Exchanges
The British Telecommunications Act 1981 provided for a relaxation of the
statutory monopoly in telecommunications in the interests of encouraging
competition. Private sector firms are able to supply, install and maintain equip¬
ment attached to the telecommunications network with certain exceptions.
They are also able, under licence, to provide a wide range of value added
services offered via the public network. In addition, a licence has been granted
enabling Mercury Communications Ltd, formed by a consortium of Cable and
Wireless, British Petroleum and Barclays Merchant Bank, to run an indepen¬
dent telecommunications network in competition with British Telecom.
Legislation is being introduced to change British Telecom from a nationalised
industry to a company operating under the Companies Acts and the
Government plans to offer up to 51 per cent of the shares on the market. A new
licensing system would be established under which all telecommunications
undertakings would operate under licences issued by the Secretary of State for
Trade and Industry or, subject to his authority, by the Director General of Tele¬
communications (head of a new Office of Telecommunications). The Director
General would have a duty to monitor activities related to telecommunications
in Britain, and be responsible for ensuring that licensees complied with the con¬
ditions of their licences and for considering the interests of telecommunications
users, including the investigation of complaints. In British Telecom’s case the
conditions of its licence would contain certain obligations, such as the provision
of services throughout Britain including essential services such as emergency
services, telephone kiosks and services in rural areas. The legislation would
replace the Telegraph Acts 1863-1916 (under which telecommunications oper¬
ators install their plant) by a modern Telecommunications Code.
In 1982-83 some 22,000 million telephone calls were made in Britain compris¬
ing 17,800 million local calls, 3,603 million trunk calls and 322 million interna¬
tional calls. Customers dial virtually all local and trunk telephone calls, and
about 97 per cent of international calls. Britain’s telephone customers can dial
direct to 131 countries.
Several specialised services are available by telephone, including the ‘999’
emergency dialling service enabling customers to be connected rapidly and free
of charge to the police, ambulance or fire services. British Telecom provides a
number of‘Guidelines’ services, the most popular being Timeline (the Speaking
Clock). A radiopaging service, providing direct dialling access over the public
telephone network to small lightweight portable receivers, has been extended
to the whole of Britain to form one of the largest networks of its kind in the world.
Similar facilities will be offered to licensed private sector operators providing
radiopaging services over the British Telecom network. The Government is
encouraging the development of radiotelephone services and has decided to
license two national cellular radiotelephone services: one to be operated by a
joint venture between British Telecom and Securicor (a private sector security
firm) and one to be run by a private sector group (Racal-Millicom Ltd). British
Telecom’s international facsimile service, known as ‘Bureaufax’, provides
high-speed facsimile links from a number of cities to 61 other countries.
Over 1,750 electronic exchanges are in use and some 380 more have been
ordered. They are more reliable than conventional electro-mechanical
exchanges; they have very few moving parts and so require less maintenance.
Most electronic exchanges are of the TXE2 type, with a capacity of up to 7,000
lines. Larger TXE4 exchanges, with a capacity of up to 40,000 lines, have been
brought into service since 1976, and the first of an improved version, the
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
287
Transmission
Overseas
Services
Prestel
TXE4A, was brought into service in 1981. A series of new switching and associ¬
ated systems for telephone exchanges, known as System X, using microelectro¬
nics technology, integrated digital transmission and switching, stored program
(software) control and common channel signalling, has been developed. Four
System X exchanges are in operation and nearly 50 are on order. A smaller
electronic exchange, the UXD5B, will bring the advantages of digital switching
to smaller rural communities; 400 have been ordered for installation over the
next three years.
Digital transmission, in which telephone speech signals flow as a stream of
on/off electrical impulses, is being increasingly used instead of traditional ana¬
logue transmission because of its many advantages, such as improved speech
quality, reliability and the ability to combine voice and data transmission over
the same links. British Telecom is extending digital transmission through
Britain’s cable and microwave transmission links and already has one of the
world’s most extensive digital transmission networks. There are more than
8,000 digital systems in the junction network interconnecting local exchanges,
amounting in length to nearly 200,000 kilometres (125,000 miles).
Optical fibres (very thin strands of glass capable of carrying large numbers of
telephone calls simultaneously) are helping to improve transmission; they are
smaller than conventional cables and require less amplifying equipment to
boost long-distance calls. By mid-1983 some 27,500 kilometres (17,050 miles) of
fibre had been ordered, to be made up into over 3,400 kilometres (2,100 miles) of
cable. Over 375 kilometres (230 miles) of cable have been brought into service,
including one of the world’s longest optical fibre links, stretching 205 kilome¬
tres (127 miles) from London to Birmingham, with the remainder due to begin
operation by 1984-85.
The demand for international calls is doubling every four or five years and
British Telecom has increased the amount of equipment in its international
exchanges substantially. At the end of 1982 there were some 26,000 cable and
satellite circuits linking Britain with other countries compared with nearly
3,000 in 1970. A substantial proportion of the intercontinental telephone traffic
to or from Britain is carried by satellite. Britain has the second largest interest in
the International Telecommunications Satellite Organisation (INTELSAT) and
is the third largest shareholder in the International Maritime Satellite Organi¬
sation (INMARSAT). Satellite earth stations at Goonhilly in Cornwall and
Madley near Hereford provide access to the geostationary satellites which form
the basis for both systems. Between them the earth stations operate about
7,000 circuits via five satellite paths to over 80 countries. Britain is also the
largest shareholder in EUTELSAT, a European organisation with over 20
members established to manage the European Communications Satellite
project. The system is planned to be fully operational in 1984.
There are 30 submarine cables from Britain to the continent of Europe, the
Irish Republic and the Faroe Islands, and three cables from Britain to North
America.
British Telecom s Prestel , the world’s first public viewdata service, was
inaugurated in 1979. It enables information and messages to be transmitted
through the telephone network from a computer for display on a suitably equip¬
ped television set in words, figures and simple graphics. About 275,000 ‘pages’
of information are being provided from over 1,000 sources on a wide range of
subjects. Prestel has more than 30,000 sets attached to its network and is the
largest information service of its kind in the world. Its ‘Gateway’ facility, which
288
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Data
Communi¬
cations
Telex
Telegrams
THE POST
OFFICE
connects private computer databases to the Prestel database and allows a wide
range of services (such as booking holidays and travel tickets or placing an
immediate order with a mail order company), came into operation in 1982.
‘Homelink’, a joint venture between Prestel, the Nottingham Building Society
and the Bank of Scotland for an electronic home banking service, was
inaugurated in December 1982. Other new Prestel services include ‘Skytrack’,
an airline reservation system for travel agents, and ‘Micronet 800’, a telesoft¬
ware service whereby microcomputer users can obtain access to a library of
software programs held on Prestel.
Prestel software has been sold to telecommunications authorities in a
number of countries. In 1981 British Telecom opened Prestel to overseas access
as the first international public viewdata service. Direct access is available from
anywhere in the world and the service is being used in 24 countries.
British Telecom’s Datel services provide for transmission of information for
computers and other automatic processors at speeds from 200 up to 9.600 bits a
second over the public telephone network and up to 48,000 bits a second on
private networks. Datel services are available internationally at speeds up to
2,400 bits a second. The services consist of a suitable telegraph or telephone line
and, when necessary, a modem (which converts digital signals into voice fre¬
quencies for transmission). In 1982 British Telecom inaugurated a new range of
digital transmission services known as X-Stream to meet business needs.
Packet SwitchStream, its commercial packet switching service for computer
data, covers all the main centres of Britain and an international packet switch¬
ing service is also available with a number of other countries including Canada,
the Federal Republic of Germany, Japan and the United States. Other X-Stream
services include MegaStream, a private circuit service for wideband voice and
data communications, and KiloStream (a private circuit service with additional
facilities), while a second SwitchStream service is due to be introduced later in
1983 and SatStream Europe, a service offering private digital communications
across Western Europe using small-dish earth terminals located on or near cus¬
tomers’ premises to provide satellite access, will start early in 1984.
The telex service is fully automatic. Customers can dial direct to 178 countries
and over 99 per cent of all international calls are dialled direct. Britain’s first
computer-controlled telex exchange handling international automatic calls
was installed in London in 1978 and a second was brought into operation in
1982. Teletex, a very fast form of telex capable of transmitting messages at up to
3,500 words a minute (as against 80 for telex), will be inaugurated later in 1983.
International telegrams are transmitted through a computer-controlled Tele¬
gram Retransmission Centre in London. It is one of the largest in the world, and
has direct access via satellite, cable and radio circuits to 92 terminals in 81
countries.
The Post Office, founded in 1635, pioneered postal services and was the first to
issue adhesive postage stamps as proof of advance payment for mail. The Royal
Mail provides deliveries to 22 million addresses and handles more than 37
million letters and parcels each working day (10,000 million items a year). Mail
is collected from over 100,000 posting boxes, as well as from post offices and
large postal users. The Post Office has a monopoly on the conveyance of letters,
but under the British Telecommunications Act 1981 the Secretary of State for
Trade and Industry has the power to suspend the monopoly in certain areas or
for certain categories of mail and to license others to provide competing
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
289
Specialist
Services
services. The Secretary of State has relaxed the monopoly on letters subject to a
minimum fee of £ 1, and has issued general licences enabling mail to be transfer¬
red between document exchanges and charitable organisations to carry
Christmas and New Year cards.
Mechanisation of mail handling is in progress and more than 56 of the 84
offices planned to take over the work of hundreds of sorting offices handling
letters manually are in operation. All addresses in Britain have a postcode and
the British system is the most sophisticated in the world, allowing mechanised
sorting down to part of a street on a postman’s round and, in some cases, to an
individual address. Some 35 large parcel centres, each serving a group of
counties, have taken over the work of 1,200 offices which handled parcels
manually.
There are 22,500 post offices, of which 1,600 are operated directly by the Post
Office and the remainder on an agency basis by sub-postmasters. Besides using
postal and National Girobank facilities at a post office, a person may, among
other transactions, draw a pension or a family allowance, buy a dog licence or
television licence, renew a motor vehicle licence, obtain a British visitor’s
passport, buy national insurance stamps, and use the facilities of the National
Savings Bank. In much of its counter service the Post Office acts as agent for
government departments and local authorities.
The Post Office provides a range of specialist services. ‘Datapost’, a door-to-door
delivery service, has overnight links throughout Britain and international
services to 29 countries including most of Europe, North America and the
People’s Republic of China. An ‘Expresspost’ messenger service provides a
rapid delivery within or between some 80 main cities and towns in Britain.
Intelpost, the world’s first international public facsimile transmission service
sending letters and other documents by satellite, was inaugurated in 1980
between London and Toronto. The system has been expanded to provide high¬
speed electronic mail links between 100 towns and cities in Britain as well as to
and from the United States and a number of other countries. The Philatelic
Bureau in Edinburgh handles about one-third of the Post Office’s philatelic
business, much of it involving sales to overseas collectors or dealers. The British
Postal Consultancy Service offers advice and assistance on all aspects of postal
business to overseas postal administrations, and over 30 countries have used
its services since 1965.
16 Employment
TRENDS IN
EMPLOYMENT
UNEMPLOY¬
MENT
As a major industrial country, Britain has a labour force with high levels of
technical and commercial skill, but it is acknowledged that the increasing pace
of technological change calls for even greater flexibility in the workforce and
improvements in training, which are being made. With developments in
microtechnology affecting much of industry and commerce, there is consider¬
able public discussion about the balance between employment opportunities
created by new technology and jobs lost as a result of increasingly rapid auto¬
mation. Britain, in common with other industrialised countries, has suffered in
recent years from high levels of unemployment (in September 1983, 3.2 million
or 13.3 per cent of the working population were unemployed), and the
Government has introduced a range of measures to provide temporary
employment and retraining in technological skills during a period of decline of
traditional industries, which is seen as an unavoidable process in the restruc¬
turing of industry and employment on a technologically advanced basis.
Market forces are considered to be a major determinant in this, but the
Government plays an important role in the labour market by providing
employment services; by policies to promote regional development and labour
mobility; by measures to alleviate unemployment and promote better use of
manpower; through legislation to regulate terms and conditions of employment
and improve industrial relations; and through legislation relating to health and
safety at work.
The total workforce in September 1982 was 26 • 5 million, 60per cent of the total
population aged 16 and over. If the unemployed, the self-employed and the
armed forces are omitted from the working population, there remained 21 mil¬
lion employees (11-9 million men and 9 million women) in employment. The
percentage of women in employment (particularly those working part-time)
continues to rise, although at a reduced rate compared with previous years. The
great majority of the working population work for a wage or salary, but over 2
million are self-employed. Despite the increase in the population of working
age, the labour force has not grown in the early 1980s. (See Table 27.)
The distribution of employees by industry in 1972 and 1982 is shown in Table
28. There has been a substantial change in the pattern of employment during
the last decade, with the growth of employment in service industries and its
decline in manufacturing industries. Higher living standards and technological
developments have stimulated the growth of a number of service industries (see
Chapter 12). Within manufacturing, over the same period, there has been a rise
in the proportion of non-manual workers from 27 per cent in October 1972 to
30 • 6 per cent in September 1982.
With some fluctuations unemployment rose sharply during the 1970s and by
1983 reached the highest level since the 1930s, although the rate of increase
slowed during 1983. While remaining relatively low in parts of the south of
England, it has been consistently higher in areas with the greatest dependence
on traditional industries and, latterly, in areas like the West Midlands with a
high concentration of manufacturing industry. Government measures to assist
EMPLOYMENT
291
Table 27: Manpower in Britain 1972-82
Thousands
Year Employees Self- Unem-
(Sept) in employed ployedb
employ¬
ment0
Armed
Forces
Total
working
population
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982c
22,254
22,753
22,935
22,720
22,601
22,692
22,903
23,175
22,621
21,614
20,964
2,006
2,023
1,996
1,983
1,938
1,904
1,903
1,930
2,037
2,118
2,118
810
531
622
1,093
1,388
1,514
1,418
1,292
1,891
2,749
3,066
375
358
347
340
338
328
320
319
332
335
323
25,445
25,665
25,900
26,136
26,265
26,438
26,544
26,716
26,881
26,816
26,471
Source: Department of Employment
a Part-time workers are counted as full units.
b Excluding adult students,
c Provisional.
the unemployed have been expanded and are expected to cost nearly £2,000
million in 1983-84
Special emphasis has been placed on those for unemployed young people and
especially school leavers, whose numbers are growing partly because of the
birth-rate ‘bulge’ of the 1960s but mainly due to the general increase in unem¬
ployment. Intended primarily as a measure to improve vocational education
and training, the Youth Training Scheme, introduced in 1983, guarantees a full
year s vocational training to every 16-year-old school-leaver who cannot find a
job. The scheme is expected to cater for 460,000 youngsters in its first year and
to cost some £873 million in 1983-84 (including provision in England and Wales
for the Technical and Vocational Education Initiative, see p 295), and £1,100
million in 1984-85.
One of the ultimate aims of the new training initiative (see p 294), of which the
Youth Training Scheme is part, is to reach the position where all young people
under 18 have the opportunity of continuing in full-time education or entering a
period of planned work experience combined with work-related training and
education. A Young Workers’ Scheme encourages employers to take on more
young people at wage rates which reflect their lack of training and relative inex¬
perience. Employers who satisfy the criteria of the scheme can claim £ 15 a week
for each young employee earning £42 or less a week, and £7.50 for each young
employee earning more than £42 but not more than £47 a week. There is also the
Community Industry scheme for unemployed young people who suffer
additional personal or social disadvantages. Young people in the scheme under¬
take projects of benefit to the community; the scheme is mainly financed
through a grant to the National Association of Youth Clubs, which employs both
the adult staff and young people.
While it recognises that special measures cannot achieve as much for the
adult unemployed as for the young, the Government wants to ease the transi¬
tion as far as possible to a situation where new jobs can be founded on sound
economic development. The emphasis in adult schemes is placed on work of
292
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Table 28: Analysis of Civil Employment in Britain 1972 and 1982
Industry or Service
June 1972
Thousands Per cent
June 1982°
Thousands Per cent
Other production industries
Construction
Gas, electricity and water
1,685 7 0
356 1-5
Services
Transport and communications 1,621 6-7
Distributive trades 3,122 12-9
Professional, financial, scientific
and miscellaneous services13 6,764 28-0
National and local government
service 1,552 6-4
2-7
1-4
Primary sector
Agriculture, forestry and fishing 723 3 • 0
Mining and quarrying 379 1-6
Manufacturing industries
Chemicals and allied industries 468 1 • 9
Metal manufacture 517 2-1
Textiles, leather and clothing 1,119 4-6
Engineering and allied industries 3,492 14 -5
Food, drink and tobacco 762 3 • 2
Other manufactures 1,557 6 • 5
632
327
420
297
635
2,697
632
1,214
1,447
340
1
1
2
11
2
5
6-2
1-5
1,509 6-5
3,182 13-7
8,338 35-9
1,549 6-7
Total in civil employment 24,118 100 23,221 100
of whom: employees 22,121 92 21,103 91
Self-employed 1,997 8 2,118 9
Source: Department of Employment
a Provisional estimates.
b Excludes private domestic service.
The differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
environmental improvement, with encouragement for projects arranged by
voluntary agencies. The Community Programme for the longer-term unem¬
ployed was introduced in 1982; it is based upon projects for community work
put forward by sponsors such as local authorities, voluntary organisations and
the churches. Other measures for the adult unemployed include: a scheme to
encourage employers to use short-time working as an alternative to redundan¬
cies; a ‘job release’ scheme to encourage older workers to take early retirement
and release jobs for unemployed people; a ‘job introduction’ scheme for disa¬
bled people; a scheme to encourage job ‘splitting’ or sharing; and support for
training places in industry. Following an experimental period in five areas, the
Enterprise Allowance Scheme, to encourage the growth of new businesses, has
been extended to the whole of Britain. Under the scheme longer term unem¬
ployed people can claim an allowance of £40 a week while they start a new busi¬
ness. Various other government measures to stimulate economic activity by
assistance and encouragement to small firms (see p 199) and the establishment
of enterprise zones (see pi 60) may assist job creation.
EMPLOYMENT
293
FINDING
EMPLOYMENT
Employment
Services
Servicesfor
Disabled People
In Great Britain the Department of Employment is generally responsible for
employment policy and for the payment of unemployment benefit, but the Man¬
power Services Commission (MSC) advises the Government on manpower
policy issues.
The MSC, on which employers, trade unions, local authorities and edu¬
cational interests are represented, is separate from the Government but
accountable to the Secretaries of State for Employment, Scotland and Wales.
Scottish and Welsh committees of the MSC consider special Scottish and Welsh
aspects of manpower issues. Most of the MSC’s activities are financed from
public funds. It is advised by a network of area manpower boards on which
employers, employees and other local interests are represented.
The MSC’s main duty is to help people to select, train for, obtain and retain
jobs, and to assist employers to obtain employees. The services an Northern
Ireland are run on similar lines by the Department of Economic Development.
The main public employment services (other than the careers service) are pro¬
vided in Great Britain by the MSC’s Employment Division which offers a
comprehensive service for employers needing Staff and for people, whether or
not already in employment, seeking jobs. It operates through a network of about
1,000 local jobcentres which handle all occupations except professional, scienti¬
fic, technical and managerial, for which the MSC’s Professional and Executive
Recruitment is responsible. Jobcentres, where the provision of self-service
facilities for job-seekers is a standard feature, have largely replaced
employment offices where such facilities do not always exist.
Since October 1982 registration for employment has been voluntary for all
unemployed people, whether or not they wish to claim benefits. Employers will
continue to notify vacancies on a voluntary basis. In the year to March 1983,1 -5
million people registered for employment, 2 million vacancies were notified and
1 • 6 million people were placed in employment: these statistics include job¬
seekers who were registered for work and placed in a job more than once during
the year.
The public employment service has long provided a resettlement service to
disabled people. Over 500 specially trained Disablement Resettlement Officers
advise on rehabilitation and training courses and on the comprehensive range
of special schemes and facilities available. They can also advise employers
about employing disabled people, and the grants available for adaptation to
premises and equipment so that they can employ or retrain a disabled person.
In 1982-83 the MSC found jobs for some 35,600 disabled people. The Disabled
Persons (Employment) Act 1944 requires employers who employ 20 or more
people to include 3 per cent registered disabled people within their workforce.
As part of its ‘Fit for Work’ campaign to improve the employment prospects of
disabled people, the MSC runs a scheme of annual awards to give public recog¬
nition to firms which excel in carrying out constructive policies on the
employment of disabled people.
The MSC’s Employment Division runs a network of 27 Employment Rehabili¬
tation Centres, which provide facilities for those who have been ill or injured or
are handicapped to return to working fitness (some 16,000 a year). The Division
also supports a mamber of agency centres run by local authorities and voluntary
bodies specialising in the employment rehabilitation of the blind, the mentally
ill and people with cerebral palsy.
Sheltered employment is provided for the severely disabled in Great Britain
by Remploy Ltd, a non-profit-making company, and in Northern Ireland by
Ulster Sheltered Employment Ltd, a company constituted similarly to
294
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Geographical
Mobility
Schemes
Professional
and
Executive
Recruitment
Careers Service
TRAINING
SERVICES
Remploy, and by local authorities and voluntary organisations. Sheltered
Employment Procurement and Consultancy Services is a unit of the MSC set up
to offer consultancy, and other services, to sheltered workshops.
In order to help to fill vacancies which cannot be filled locally, the MSC can
provide grants, allowances and other financial help under the Job Search and
Employment Transfer Schemes to assist people who are unemployed, or under
threat of redundancy, to look for and move to jobs in other areas. The help
available includes the cost of attending interviews, visiting new areas to look for
work, and living away from home and moving home to the new area. The
National Mobility Scheme (see p 164) makes movement easier for public sector
housing tenants in England and Wales. Similar aims in Scotland are promoted
by provisions in the Tenants’ Rights (Scotland) Act 1980.
Professional and Executive Recruitment (PER) is a specialist branch of the MSC
which helps employers looking for professional, managerial, scientific or
technical staff and assists people seeking employment at this level. PER oper¬
ates nationally, through a network of offices, and offers a comprehensive
recruitment service based on a weekly jobs newspaper which is issued to all
enrolled job-seekers. For them the service is free, while employers are charged a
fee based on the type of service used.
Local education authorities must under the Employment and Training Act 1973
provide a careers service to include vocational guidance for people attending all
educational institutions (except universities, which have their own careers
service) and an employment service for those leaving them. Authorities also
provide an employment service for people, especially young people, in their
early years at work. They work closely with the MSC’s Employment Division
which also caters for those who have left school and choose to use its facilities in
preference to those of the careers service.
In Northern Ireland the careers service is an integral part of the Department of
Economic Development.
The MSC Careers and Occupational Information Centre publishes a wide
range of material to help people looking for jobs to make an informed choice, and
distributes careers literature to some 15,000 schools, careers offices and other
centres.
The main responsibility for carrying out industrial and commercial training lies
with individual employers, but in recent years the MSC, with government
support, has evolved a comprehensive strategy to help to improve the supply of
trained manpower needed by the economy to provide opportunities for people
to acquire new skills, and to improve the effectiveness of training generally. The
MSC’s Training Division is responsible for putting those programmes into
effect. In 1981 the Government announced a new initiative on training, spelling
out three important objectives for the 1980s and beyond: better arrangements
for skilled training to agreed standards; improving the vocational education
and training of all young people; and opening up more opportunities for adults
to train. This was followed by a White Paper setting out the Government’s plans
for achieving these objectives. The new Youth Training Scheme is seen as an
important step towards improving vocational education and training for young
people; in addition, a target date of 1985 has been set for achieving general
acceptance of recognised standards for all the main craft, technical and profes¬
sional skills to replace time-serving and age-restricted apprenticeships. There
is also an Open Tech Programme to make training at a technical and supervi¬
sory level accessible to all adults who can benefit from it. The programme has
EMPLOYMENT
295
features in common with the Open University (see p 149), in particular, flexi¬
bility over timing and location of study, and the use of a wide range of learning
materials including printed texts, audio-visual components and direct personal
tuition.
Technical and Under a new Technical and Vocational Education Initiative a number of pilot
Vocational projects were established in England and Wales in September 1983 to last at
Education least five years, providing full-time integrated courses of general technical and
vocational education for 14- to 18-year-olds, and leading to recognised technical
qualifications. Entry to the projects, which are run by the MSC in co-operation
with local education authorities and make use of existing schools and colleges,
is voluntary.
There are a number of statutory training boards, which raise funds by a levy
on employers within the industry, and other industrial training organisations
concerned with the promotion of training within their respective industries.
In Northern Ireland the Youth Training Programme guarantees a place to
every young person who leaves school at the minimum age (16) and is unable to
find a job. Some 14,000 places are being provided in 1983-84.
The Training Opportunities Scheme (TOPS) complements the training given in
industry and commerce by providing people aged 19 and over with the oppor¬
tunity to acquire new skills. Training is carried out in a nationwide network of
skillcentres under the control of the MSC’s Skillcentre Training Agency and at
many colleges and employers’ establishments. Skillcentre courses concentrate
mainly on engineering and electrical and electronic trades and those elsewhere
on clerical and commercial, management, technician and other skills. Special
priority has been given to expanding and developing technician training and, in
particular, electronics engineering courses biased towards microprocessor
applications. In all, about 500 different courses are available in a wide range of
occupations. Trainees are paid allowances which vary with domestic responsi¬
bilities and which may include travelling expenses and lodging and meals
allowances. Some 59,300 adults were trained under TOPS in 1982-83.
Through its training services to employers the MSC provides training in a wide
range of trades designed to equip selected employees with new or improved
skills of direct and immediate benefit to their companies. This training,
specially tailored to the employer’s needs, is carried out either at the local skill-
centre or in the company’s own workshop. The MSC also provides regular
courses in instructional techniques for skilled craftsmen and programmes of
training in supervisory skills in the broad areas of leadership and safety.
Training services at skillcentres and courses at instructor training colleges are
also available to trainees from overseas.
CONDITIONS OF Britain has been a pioneer in the introduction of protective legislation for the
EMPLOYMENT safety, health and welfare of employees. The determination by statute of mini¬
mum wages, holidays and holiday pay is limited to certain trades and industries
where the organisation of employers or workers, or both, is inadequate to
negotiate collective agreements and to ensure their observance. The
Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act 1978 provides considerable safe¬
guards for employees in their terms of employment.
An employer must give employees written information on their terms and
conditions of employment, the disciplinary rules applicable to them and the
procedure available to employees wishing to raise complaints; minimum
periods of notice when employment is to be terminated are also laid down for
Training
Opportunities
Scheme
Training
Services to
Employers
296
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Immigrant
Workers
Discrimination
both employers and employees. Employees with a minimum period of service of
two years are entitled to lump-sum redundancy payments if their jobs cease to
exist (for example, because of technological improvements or a fall in demand)
and their employers cannot offer suitable alternative work, the cost being partly
met from a fund subscribed to by both sides of industry. Protection against
unfair dismissal is provided by machinery under which an employee who has
been in continuous employment for one year or more may complain against an
employer of unfair dismissal, and, if successful, obtain reinstatement, re¬
engagement or compensation; under the Employment Act 1980, however, new
employees in companies employing 20 or fewer people must be employed for
two years before they have the right to complain of unfair dismissal. Legal
support is given to the right to trade union organisation by making it unfair to
dismiss a person because of membership or participation in the activities of an
independent trade union; rights of employees are also protected in regard to
penalisation short of dismissal because of trade union membership or activities.
Other rights include limited payment when work is not available for reasons
other than as a result of trade dispute, and maternity rights for female
employees, including protection from dismissal because of pregnancy, time off
for antenatal care, maternity pay for the first six weeks of absence, and the right,
within certain limits, to return to work after confinement.
In general, people coming to Britain for employment need a work permit issued
by the Department of Employment. People admitted as holders of work permits
may change their jobs only with the approval of the Department of
Employment, but the Home Office will consider an application to remove the
conditions attached to their stay after four years in approved employment, and,
if granted, a worker may change employment without restriction. Among other
conditions, work permits are issued only for work requiring a recognised profes¬
sional qualification, or a high degree of skill or experience, where the Depart¬
ment of Employment is satisfied that the worker is necessary and there is no
suitable worker in Britain or in other European Community countries to fill the
post, and where the wages and conditions are not less favourable than for simi¬
lar work. In general, the age limits for permits in most categories are 23-54
years.
People coming for certain kinds of specialist employment (for example,
doctors or dentists taking up professional appointments; ministers of religion;
representatives of overseas newspapers, news agencies or broadcasting organi¬
sations; the self-employed) do not require work permits but may require entry
clearances issued by a British Consulate or High Commission.
Permits are also issued under the Training and Work Experience Scheme for
nationals of countries outside the European Community who are undertaking
limited periods of training or work experience leading to the acquisition of a
particular occupational skill or qualification and to young people from outside
the European Community to undertake short periods of employment to
broaden their industrial or commercial experience and, if appropriate, to
improve their knowledge of English.
European Community workers entering another member state have the
same rights as nationals of that state as regards facilities of the national
employment services, pay and working conditions, trade union rights, voca¬
tional training and retraining facilities, access to housing and property, and
social security and industrial injury benefits.
The Race Relations Act 1976 (see p 27) makes it unlawful to discriminate on
grounds of colour, race, nationality (including citizenship) or ethnic or national
origin, in employment, training and related matters. The Department of
COMPUTER TEACHING AIDS
Above: The ‘Buggy’ for children and adults has
detectors to explore objects, follow lines and seek
out light sources as well as read bar codes. It ran
be fitted with a pen drawing mechanism and a
robot arm for more advanced programs.
Below: The ‘Turtle’ is an entertaining introduction
to basic computer concepts. By observing its
movements in response to typed commands, a
young child can learn to state plans precisely in a
given sequence. The manoeuvres are viewed on a
visual display.
ARCHITECTURE
The Royal Institute of British Architects celebrates its 150th anniversary
in 1984. Below are two prize-winning entries in RIBAs 1983 award scheme.
Above: New housing at
Castle Hill, Stamford,
Lincolnshire.
Right: The refurbished
Grand Opera House,
Belfast.
GLYNDEBOURNE FESTIVAL OPERA
The Glyndeboume Festival Opera was started 50 years ago in the heart of
the Sussex countryside. John Christie, the founder, built a theatre for opera
adjoining his manor house. Opera-lovers travel long distances to enjoy
performances of the highest international standards in a unique setting.
Top: The large and versatile stage.
Above: The original manor house.
During the extended interval
opera-goers picnic on the lawns and
stroll in the beautiful grounds.
SPORT
Two gold medallists at the 1983
World Athletic Championships
held in Helsinki: Above right,
Daley Thompson (decathlon) and,
above left, Steve Cram (1,500
metres).
Right: Jane Torville and
Christopher Dean, ice dance
champions of the world in 1981,
1982 and 1983.
EMPLOYMENT
297
Employment of
Women and
Children
Earnings
Employment operates a Race Relations Employment Advisory Service with
advisers based in the main areas where ethnic minorities have settled. Its gen¬
eral aim is to promote equal opportunity in employment and its advisers offer
help and guidance to employers and unions on a wide range of issues which
arise in the employment of a multiracial workforce. A government code of prac¬
tice is to be introduced for the elimination of racial discrimination and the pro¬
motion of equality of opportunity in employment.
Legislation forbids any employment of children under 14 years of age, and
employment in any industrial undertaking of children who have not reached
the statutory minimum school-leaving age (16); of women and young people
underground in mines and in certain other dangerous occupations (for
example, certain processes connected with lead manufacture); and of women in
factories and workshops within four weeks after childbirth. It also limits and
defines the permissible hours of employment for women and young people.
The employment provisions of the Sex Discrimination Act (see p 26) make it
unlawful to discriminate on the grounds of sex or marital status in employment,
training and related matters. The Equal Pay Act 1970 requires that a woman
doing the same or broadly similar work as a man, or work that has been given
equal value by job evaluation, should receive equal pay and conditions of
employment.
Pay for manual occupations, and increasingly for non-manual occupations, is
normally set by collective bargaining (see p 303). In a few industries and trades
legally enforceable minimum rates are set by wages councils.
Basic rates of pay vary widely, and in private industry rates paid locally often
exceed the rates specified in national agreements. Higher rates are usually paid
for overtime and shift work, and weekly earnings may be further increased by
incentive bonus schemes. Piecework, or payment-by-results, is still common,
though of declining importance as production methods in many industries
increasingly influence the pace of work.
According to the latest annual survey conducted by the Department of
Employment into earnings and hours of work, the average weekly earnings in
April 1982 offull-time male workers aged 21 and over were, including overtime,
£154.50, while for full-time female workers aged 18 and over they were £99.
Women’s earnings are thus markedly lower than those of men, partly because
on average they work shorter hours, with less overtime paid at premium rates,
and partly because they tend to be concentrated in the less well-paid jobs.
Remuneration in commercial, technical and professional careers is normally
by annual salary paid monthly, often on a scale carrying annual increments.
Starting salaries may be in the range of £3,500 to £4,000 (lower for 16- to 18-year-
old trainees and higher for some graduates entering industry). Most of the
senior posts in business, the professions and the Civil Service command sala¬
ries in the range of £15,000 to £25,000 a year gross before tax. The posts with
salaries in the range of £25,000 to £75,000 a year include those of Cabinet
Ministers, top-ranking judicial appointments, the highest positions in
government departments and the largest municipal authorities, editors of daily
newspapers, leading members of professions and the higher managerial posts
in industry, commerce and banking. Salaries of chairmen of major companies
may exceed £75,000 a year gross, and other people such as star entertainers
often receive more through fees or fixed contracts. The range of net incomes in
the country as a whole is to some extent reduced by a system of progressive
direct taxation.
298
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Hours of Work
Holidays with
Pay
Additional
Benefits
Employers’
Health Service
Other
Amenities
The basic working week in Britain is in the range 37 • 5 to 40 hours for manual
work and 35 to 38 for non-manual work; a five-day week is usually worked.
Actual hours worked in manual occupations differ from their basic hours; in
1982 they were 44 • 3 for men compared with 39.3 for women. Men and women
in non-manual occupations generally work less overtime than manual workers.
National legislation limits and defines permissible hours of work for women
and young people in industrial work — the maximum, with limited exceptions,
being 48 hours a week and 10 hours a day (9 hours a day for 6-day-week workers)
in premises covered by the Factories Act for adult women over 18 and young
people between 16 and 18. The employment of women and young people at night
is in principle prohibited in industrial undertakings, except for young men over
16 working in some continuous-process industries (subject to certain condi¬
tions). The Health and Safety Executive can make exemptions from these
restrictions to maintain or increase efficiency. In general, the hours of work of
adult men, or of people not working in factories, are not restricted by statute.
Apart from industries where conditions are controlled by wages councils (see
p 304), there are no general statutory entitlements to holidays and holiday
entitlements are normally determined by collective agreements. These gen¬
erally provide for at least four weeks’ paid holiday a year, and more than 60 per
cent of manual workers covered by agreements have entitlements of more than
four weeks. Non-manual workers tend to have longer holidays than manual
workers. Additional holidays, dependent upon length of service, are also quite
common.
Additional benefits exist in varying degrees. About half of employees in
employment are covered by pension schemes provided by their employers.
Many employees are also covered by occupational sick pay schemes which are
additional or complementary to the state schemes, and by schemes to provide
private medical treatment. A smaller number are covered by schemes for
redundancy payments above the statutory minimum. Such benefits are more
usual among clerical and professional employees receiving a standard salary
than among manual workers. Employees may have use of a company car and
some firms provide profit-sharing and share-saving schemes. In accord with its
view that share ownership and profit-sharing can help in developing
employees’ understanding of, and commitment to, business and industry, the
Government has extended fiscal measures designed to encourage profit-
sharing.
Social security benefits, which include unemployment, sickness and indus¬
trial injury benefits, are described in the Social Welfare chapter.
Many employers voluntarily maintain medical services for their employees
over and above the statutory requirements. Large employers have taken the
lead but a number of smaller factories also provide medical services and in a few
cases have joined together in group medical services.
An increasing number of firms pay part or all of the cost of recreational facilities.
Some have their own rehabilitation centres or support convalescent homes.
The provision of low-priced meals at the place of employment has become usual
in large undertakings and quite common in smaller ones. Many offices and
shops which are unable to provide canteen facilities for their staff have adopted
luncheon voucher schemes.
EMPLOYMENT
299
Human
Relations in
Industry
TRADE UNIONS
Research has been sponsored or conducted by the Social Science Research
Council and the Medical Research Council into the factors affecting human rela¬
tionships and efficiency in industry. A number of independent bodies also
research and advise on matters such as management and job satisfaction. The
Department of Employment’s Work Research Unit, advised by a steering group
chaired by a minister on which the CBI (for industry) and the TUC (for trade
unions) are represented, advises employers and trade unions on improving the
quality of working life.
In nearly all industries and occupations some workers (and in some industries
nearly all workers) are organised into trade unions. These have grown up grad¬
ually and independently over many years and, consequently, their form and
organisation vary considerably, as do their traditions. During the 1970s trade
unionism increased particularly among clerical, supervisory, technical and
administrative workers, but rising unemployment has led to a decline in union
membership, especially in unions representing manual workers. Trade unions
may be organised either by occupation (for example, they may recruit clerks or
fitters wherever employed) or by industry. Some are based on a combination of
both principles. In some companies membership of the relevant trade union is
required by agreement between the employer and union (‘closed shops’). At the
end of 1981 the total membership of British trade unions was 12 • 3 million. There
were 461 unions, but nearly 80 per cent of all trade unionists were in the 25
largest unions.
Among the largest unions are the Transport and General Workers Union (1-7
million members), the Amalgamated Union of Engineering Workers (1-3
million) and the General, Municipal, Boilermakers and Allied Trades Union
(985,000); of the non-manual workers’ unions, the largest is the National and
Local Government Officers’ Association (796,000 members).
The Certification Officer appointed under the Employment Protection Act
1975 is required to maintain a list of trade unions. To be eligible for entry on the
list a trade union must show that it consists wholly or mainly of workers and
that its principal purposes include the regulation of relations between workers
and employers, or between workers and employers’ associations. Certain rights
and privileges are reserved for independent trade unions.
The central organisation of most large unions consists of a national executive
council, usually elected by and responsible to the annual conference of dele¬
gates from local branches. Between conferences, councils are the highest
authority of unions, and carry out policy decisions made by the conference dele¬
gates. Most unions also have regional and district organisations. At the level of
the individual member there are local branches, covering one or more work¬
places. Members may attend branch meetings, make suggestions about terms
and conditions of employment, discuss the work of the union, and, in some
unions, take part in the election of the union’s officers. The branch takes action on
certain matters considered to be entirely, or mainly, of local interest and forwards
its views on wider issues for action by the union’s national or regional bodies.
The organising of members in individual places of work, and the negotiation
of local pay agreements with managements at the factory or plant, may be done
by full-time district officials of the union, or, increasingly, by ‘shop stewards’,
who are chosen by their fellow members in the place of work to represent them.
Trade unions vary in the degree to which shop stewards are integrated into their
organisation. Where two or more unions have members in the same workplace,
shop stewards’ committees may be formed to discuss matters of common
concern.
Many unions provide ‘strike pay’ for members involved in official industrial
action which may vary from an amount equal to full net pay to a largely nominal
300
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Trades Union
Congress
Scotland and
Northern
Ireland
sum. They also provide legal advice for members who suffer injury or contract
diseases at work, and may pay members’ legal costs where a case for compensa¬
tion goes to court. Some unions pay benefits in case of illness, accident, death
and retirement (additional to those payable under the national insurance
scheme) financed out of membership contributions.
Many trade unions are affiliated to the Labour Party. Any trade union wishing
to use money for political purposes must set up a separate fund, subject to
special rules, one of which must allow any member who objects to contributing
to the fund to opt out. The working of this system of ‘contracting out’ has been
questioned, and during 1983 the Government issued two consultative docu¬
ments on this and other aspects of trade union democracy with the aim of intro¬
ducing legislation.
In Britain the national centre of the trade union movement is the Trades Union
Congress (TUC), which was founded in 1868. The TUC’s objects are to promote
the interests of its affiliated organisations and to improve the economic and
social conditions of working people. Its affiliated membership comprises 105
trade unions which together represent 11 million workpeople, or 87 per cent of all
trade unionists in Britain, and it exercises power through influence rather than
through sanctions. The TUC deals with all general questions which concern
trade unions both nationally and internationally and gives assistance on ques¬
tions relating to particular trades or industries. Through membership of the
National Economic Development Council (see p 183), it participates in discus¬
sions relating to the national economy; it also represents employees on the Man¬
power Services Commission and the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration
Service. There are eight TUC regional councils for England, and a Wales Trades
Union Council.
The annual Congress convenes in September to discuss matters of concern to
trade unionists and to employees generally. It elects a General Council which
represents it between Congresses and is responsible for carrying out Congress
decisions, watching economic and social developments, providing educational
and advisory services to unions, and presenting to the Government the trade
union viewpoint on economic, social and industrial issues. The council is also
empowered to mediate in inter-union disputes in certain circumstances, and
uses its authority to deal with unauthorised and unconstitutional stoppages of
work, as well as official disputes.
The TUC, as well as many individual unions, conducts extensive educational
services for members, mainly concerned with industrial subjects, trade
unionism and the principles and practice of industrial relations.
The TUC plays an active part in international trade union activity, through its
affiliation to the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions and the
European Trade Union Confederation. It also nominates the British workers’
delegation to the annual International Labour Conference.
Trade unions in Scotland also have their own national central body, the Scot¬
tish Trades Union Congress, which in many respects is similar in constitution
and function to the TUC. Trade unions in Northern Ireland are represented by
the Northern Ireland Committee of the Irish Congress of Trade Unions (ICTU),
though the majority of trade unionists in Northern Ireland belong to unions
based in Great Britain. About 85 per cent of Northern Ireland trade unionists are
members of organisations affiliated to the ICTU, while the majority belong to
unions which are also affiliated of the TUC. The Northern Ireland Committee of
the ICTU has no political affiliations and enjoys a high degree of autonomy.
EMPLOYMENT
301
Legal
Framework
The beginnings of the present law on industrial relations were established a
century ago, when trade union members were freed from charges of criminal
conspiracy; at the same time trade unions were granted certain immunities,
including immunity for liability to damages for the economic effects of strike
action. Picketing during strikes was also made legal. At the beginning of the
present century unions were given a wide degree of immunity from legal action
under the civil law, and the immunities of those organising industrial action
were also strengthened.
The Employment Protection Act 1975 placed the Advisory, Conciliation and
Arbitration Service on a statutory basis, provided for the appointment of a Certi¬
fication Officer and for the setting up of the Central Arbitration Committee. It
also established an Employment Appeal Tribunal to hear appeals concerning
decisions of the Certification Officer and of industrial tribunals. (Industrial
tribunals are independent judicial bodies which deal, in general, with
complaints from employees on infringements of individual rights under a
number of Acts concerning, for example, redundancy payments, contracts of
employment, equal pay, unfair dismissals and sex discrimination.)
The Employment Acts 1980 and 1982 were designed to obtain a better balance
between rights and responsibilities in industrial relations. The 1980 Act enabled
the Government to make funds available to encourage the wider use of secret
union ballots and to produce codes of practice to promote good industrial rela¬
tions. It limited lawful picketing to the picket’s own place of work and restricted
the scope for secondary action such as blacking and sympathetic strikes. It pro¬
vided greater protection for the individual in relation to the closed shop and
removed legal protection from any new closed shop which had not been
approved in a secret ballot by 80 per cent of the employees affected. As provided
for in the Act, the Government has published codes of practice on the conduct of
picketing and the closed shop.
The 1982 Act is designed to carry the process further. It increases the compen¬
sation for employees unfairly dismissed for non-membership or membership of
a union and introduces compensation (from government funds) for certain
employees dismissed because of non-membership of a union in a closed shop
between 1974 and 1980, when they had no protection. The Act also removes
legal protection from all closed shops (not only from new ones, as in the 1980 Act)
where within one or two years of the legislation taking effect the closed shop has
not been supported in a secret ballot held in the previous five years by 80 per
cent of the employees affected or by 85 per cent of those voting in the ballot.
Where legal protection is removed, any dismissal for non-membership of a
union is unfair. Terms in commercial contracts specifying the use of union
labour only are made unenforceable and discrimination on the basis of union
membership in the awarding of contracts is made unlawful. Industrial action
which seeks to persuade employers to discriminate in this way or to interfere
with the supply of goods or services on grounds of union membership is unlaw¬
ful. The Act also ends the position which gives trade unions almost complete
immunity from all civil actions by bringing their position into line with that of
their individual officials and members. This means that trade unions now have
immunity only for action taken in furtherance or contemplation of a lawful
trade dispute. There are also changes to the definition of a trade dispute upon
which immunity for civil actions depends. Disputes between employer and
employees (that is, most industrial action) continue to qualify as lawful trade
disputes. Disputes which have become unlawful are those where there is no
disagreement between employer and his or her employees, or those which have
little to do with the normal subject of a trade dispute (such as terms and condi¬
tions of work) or concern matters wholly outside Britain, and other such
disputes which do not involve employers.
302
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
EMPLOYERS’
ORGANI¬
SATIONS
Confederation
of British
Industry
INDUSTRIAL
RELATIONS
Northern Ireland has a broadly similar but separate system of industrial rela¬
tions legislation.
Many employers in Britain are members of employers’ organisations, some of
which are wholly concerned with labour matters although others are also con¬
cerned with commercial matters or trade associations. The primary aims of
such organisations are to help to establish suitable terms and conditions of
employment, including a sound wage structure and proper standards of safety,
health and welfare; to promote good relations with employees and the efficient
use of manpower; and to provide means of settling any disputes which may
arise. Combined employers’ organisations and trade associations may also
represent members’ points of view as manufacturers or traders to the
Government on commercial matters.
Employers’ organisations are usually organised on an industry basis rather
than a product basis, for example, the Engineering Employers’ Federation. A
few are purely local in character or deal with a section of an industry or, for
example, with small businesses; most are national and are concerned with the
whole of an industry. In some of the main industries there are local or regional
organisations combined into national federations, while in others, within which
different firms are engaged in making different principal products, there is a
complex structure with national and regional federations for parts of an
industry as well as for the industry as a whole. Altogether there are 390
employers’ associations known to the Certification Officer. Those which are
national organisations negotiate the national collective agreements for their
industry with the trade unions concerned; most of these national organisations
belong to the Confederation of British Industry.
The Confederation of British Industry (CBI) is the largest central employers’
organisation in Britain, representing directly or indirectly some 300,000 com¬
panies which together employ about half the working population. It exists pri-
marily to ensure that Government, national and international institutions and
the public understand the needs, intentions and problems of businessmen.
Membership ranges from the smallest to the largest companies, private and
nationalised, and covers a broad spectrum which includes manufacturing, agri¬
culture, construction, distribution, mining, finance, retailing and insurance.
Most national employers’ organisations, trade associations and some chambers
of commerce are members. Policy is determined by a council of 400 members,
and there is a permanent staff of 350 including regional offices and an office in
Brussels. The CBI is the British member of the Union of Industries of the
European Community. The CBI nominates the employers’ representatives on
the National Economic Development Council, and on the Manpower Services
Commission, the Health and Safety Commission and the Advisory, Conciliation
and Arbitration Service.
The structure of industrial relations in Britain has been established mainly on a
voluntary basis. The system is based chiefly on the organisation of employees
and employers into trade unions and employers’ associations, and on freely
conducted negotiations at all levels. The State is ready to provide assistance
where the organisation of employees, employers, or both, is inadequate to con¬
duct negotiations, or where the usual methods of resolving disagreements have
failed. The number of stoppages of work due to industrial disputes in 1981 was
the lowest since 1941, while the number of working days lost was well below the
1980 figure and less than a third of the annual average for the period 1971-80.
EMPLOYMENT
303
Because of the publicity they receive, strikes are commonly thought to occur
much more frequently in Britain than in other countries. International compa¬
risons show, however, that Britain’s record on industrial disputes is better than
those of a number of other major industrial countries, ranking about half-way in
a list of 20 countries drawn up by the International Labour Office.
Collective
Bargaining
and Joint
Consultation
In most industries terms and conditions of employment and procedures for the
conduct of industrial relations are settled by negotiation and agreement
between employers or employers’ associations and trade unions. Agreements
may be industry-wide, often supplemented by local agreements in companies
or factories (plant bargaining). In the public sector, agreements are generally
reached at industry level. In some industries, companies and factories, negotia¬
tions are conducted by meetings held when necessary, while in others, joint
negotiating councils or committees have been established on a permanent
basis. The scope of the various bodies (from national joint industrial councils for
whole industries to works councils and committees in individual workplaces)
varies widely, and can cover such additional matters as production plans,
absenteeism, training, education, welfare and safety. Normally these arrange¬
ments for collective bargaining suffice to settle all questions which are raised,
but there is often provision for matters not so settled to be referred for settlement
to independent conciliation or arbitration. The Employment Protection Act
1975 made provision for information needed for collective bargaining purposes
to be disclosed by employers to trade unions, subject to certain safeguards.
There has been a recent trend for pay agreements in some industries and firms
to cover several years rather than a single year.
Advisory,
Conciliation
and
Arbitration
Service
The Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service (ACAS) has the general duty
of promoting the improvement of industrial relations, and in particular of
encouraging collective bargaining and the development and (where necessary)
of reform of collective bargaining machinery. AC AS is under the control of a
council consisting of an independent chairman and nine other members experi¬
enced in industrial relations, of whom three are nominated after consultation
with the CBI, three after consultation with the TUC, and three are independent.
The service conciliates in industrial disputes in both the public and private
sectors of industry on a voluntary basis. ACAS assistance is sought in nearly
2,000 disputes each year. In addition there are requests for ACAS to provide
arbitration in a further 250 disputes, which it may do either by appointing
single arbitrators or boards of arbitration or by referring cases to the Central
Arbitration Committee (see below). Although ACAS has prime responsibility
for helping to resolve disputes, and has also set up major committees of inquiry,
the Secretary of State for Employment retains powers to appoint a court of
inquiry or committee of investigation into a dispute, but these are rarely used.
The service gives advice on all aspects of industrial and employment policies
to employers, managers, trade unions and employee representatives, and it
handles more than 284,000 enquiries a year. Specialist staff make some 12,000
advisory visits a year, and the involvement of both employers and employees in
diagnosing problems and finding remedies is encouraged. It carries particular
responsibility for attempting conciliation on complaints of infringement of indi¬
vidual employee rights (such as individual complaints of unfair dismissal,
complaints under the Equal Pay Act 1970 and complaints on employment
matters under the Sex Discrimination Act 1975 and the Race Relations Act
1976). There are over 45,000 such cases each year.
The Central Arbitration Committee is an independent standing arbitration
body. It provides boards of arbitration for the settlement of trade disputes
referred to it with the consent of the parties concerned and adjudicates on
304
Office of
Manpower
Economics
Statutory
Negotiating
Machinery
HEALTH AND
SAFETY AT
WORK
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
claims, including those made under the disclosure of information provisions of
the Employment Protection Act and under the Equal Pay Act.
The Office of Manpower Economics is an independent non-statutory organi¬
sation responsible for servicing independent review bodies which advise on the
pay of various public-sector groups. These are the Top Salaries Review Body
(covering the higher judiciary, senior civil servants and senior officers of the
armed forces), the Armed Forces’ Pay Body (covering more junior ranks) and
the Doctors’ and Dentists’ Review Body. The Office also services the Pharma¬
cists’ Review Panel, the Police Negotiating Board, the Civil Service Arbitration
Tribunal, and other bodies of inquiry, convened as necessary.
In a small number of industries and trades where the organisation of employers
or employees or both is not strong enough to provide a basis for successful
voluntary arrangements, there are statutory wage-regulating bodies, known as
wages councils. These are composed of equal numbers of representatives of
employers and employees in the respective sectors of industry, with three
independent members. Wages councils publish proposals for minimum pay,
holidays, holiday pay and other terms and conditions of employment. After con¬
sidering any representations the councils make orders giving the proposals
statutory force. The Department of Employment’s Wages Inspectorate enforces
the provision of these wages orders. About 2 • 7 million workers are covered by
such arrangements.
Agricultural wages boards (one for England and Wales and one each for Scot¬
land and Northern Ireland) perform similar functions in relation to employment
in agriculture.
Employers have a duty at civil and criminal law to take reasonable care of their
employees, and others affected by their work activities, and to provide a safe
system of working, while employees have a duty of care towards each other and
also to take care of their own safety. The principal legislation is the Health and
Safety at Work Act 1974. Its purpose is to secure the health, safety and welfare of
people at work and to provide for the protection of the public whose health and
safety might be affected by work activities. The Act places general duties on
everyone concerned with work activities, including employers, the self-
employed, employees; manufacturers, designers, suppliers, importers of
articles and substances for use at work; and those in control of premises.
The 1974 Act is superimposed on earlier health and safety legislation, such as
the Mines and Quarries Act 1954, the Factories Act 1961 and the Offices, Shops
and Railway Premises Act 1963 and the various regulations made under them.
The earlier legislation imposes specific obligations and standards on, for
example, occupiers of particular types of premises or employers engaged in par¬
ticular activities and covers such matters as the fencing of machinery, precau¬
tions against the exposure of people to toxic dusts and gases, precautions
against fire, dangerous substances and special risks, the safe condition of
premises, and cleanliness, lighting, temperature and ventilation.
Some of the earlier legislation was replaced immediately by the 1974 Act, but
the remainder continued in force pending its progressive replacement by regu¬
lations and codes of practice approved by the Health and Safety Commission.
Replacement regulations have been introduced to require the notification of
accidents and dangerous occurrences and to control work with lead, each set
being supported by either an approved code of practice or other guidance mater¬
ial, and there are others in the course of development.
EMPLOYMENT
305
The Health and
Safety
Commission
The Health and
Safety
Executive
The Health and Safety Commission, established by the Health and Safety at
Work Act and accountable to Parliament through the Secretary of State for
Employment, has responsibility for developing policies, including guidance,
codes of practice, or proposals for regulations to further the implementation of
the Act. In the case of proposals for changes in legislation, the Commission con¬
sults the people who will be affected by them and makes recommendations to
the Secretary of State concerned. The Commission has an independent chair¬
man, three members appointed after consultation with the Confederation of
British Industry, three after consultation with the Trades Union Congress, and
two after consultation with local authority associations. The Commission has
three subject advisory committees (on toxic substances, on dangerous
substances and the Medical Advisory Committee), two committees concerned
with particular hazards (major hazards and nuclear installations), and nine
industry advisory committees, for agriculture, ceramics, construction, foun¬
dries, health services, oil, paper and board, printing and railways.
The Act also set up the Health and Safety Executive, which includes
government inspectorates covering a range of work activities: the Factory
Inspectorate (which also deals with a large number of activities outside factories
such as hospitals and educational establishments) and inspectorates for mines
and quarries, agriculture, major sources of industrial air pollution, nuclear
installations, and hazardous installations. It also includes the Employment
Medical Advisory Service and the Research and Laboratory Services Division.
The inspectors, who have powers of entry and enforcement, seek compliance
with health and safety legislation in individual workplaces and give advice. The
Employment Medical Advisory Service provides a nationwide service of advice
on the medical aspects of employment problems to employers, employees,
trade unions, doctors and others. It carries out medical examination of workers
in hazardous occupations and surveys of employment hazards, advises the staff
of the Manpower Services Commission on medical aspects of job placement,
rehabilitation and industrial training, and co-operates with school medical
officers and careers officers in helping to solve the employment problems of
handicapped school leavers.
The Research and Laboratory Services Division provides scientific and
medical support and testing services, and carries out research both in its own
laboratories and through universities and other institutions on a contract basis,
often jointly funded by industry. Areas of study include explosion risks, fires,
protective equipment, methods for monitoring and measuring airborne conta¬
minants, occupational medicine and hygiene, and the safety of engineering
systems.
Health and safety legislation is enforced in most offices and shops by
inspectors appointed by local authorities, working under guidance from the
Health and Safety Executive. Some other official bodies work under agency
agreement with the Health and Safety Executive, for example, the Railway
Inspectorate (concerned with worker safety on railways), the Industrial Pollu¬
tion Inspectorate for Scotland and the Department of Energy (concerned with
health and safety in the oil and gas industries).
A basic principle underlying the Health and Safety at Work Act is that
employers, in consultation with their employees, should have the responsi¬
bility of working out health and safety arrangements, within the broad obliga¬
tions of the law, to suit their own workplaces. Employers with five or more
employees must draw up a written policy for safety and health, including
arrangements for implementing it and keeping it up to date, and communicate
it to their employees. Recognised and independent trade unions may appoint
safety representatives to be the employees’ official channel for representation
306
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and consultation over safety matters. Two safety representatives may make a
written request to the employer to establish a safety committee, which must
then be set up within three months.
Northern Ireland In Northern Ireland, the Health and Safety Agency, roughly corresponding to
the Health and Safety Commission, and an Employment Medical Advisory
Service, were set up by the Health and Safety at Work (NI) Order 1978. The
Northern Ireland Department of Economic Development, through its Health
and Safety Inspectorate, is responsible for seeking compliance with health and
safety legislation, which is broadly similar to that for Great Britain.
17 Public Finance
THE PUBLIC
SECTOR
Through the public finance system government raises money from individuals
and companies by taxation, borrowing and other means, and spends it on
behalf of the community in the provision of goods and services such as
education, health and defence, in payments to people and organisations, and in
capital investment. The term public finance also covers the raising of revenue
and its expenditure by local authorities and certain other public bodies and the
financial relationship between these agencies and central government.
The broad principle of public finance is based on an assessment of the
revenue expected and proposals for expenditure, taking account of the impli¬
cations for borrowing. Public expenditure plans are normally published
annually, since 1983 in the early part of the year, in advance of the Budget, in
which the emphasis is on proposals for changes in taxation. Tax revenue and
other receipts are paid into the Consolidated Fund, the Government’s account
at the Bank of England from which most of the Government’s sterling expendi¬
ture is financed. Any excess of expenditure over receipts is met by borrowing,
most of it from the National Loans Fund, also operated as an official sterling
account at the Bank of England.
The public expenditure planning total includes the planned current and capital
expenditure of central government and local authorities (collectively known as
general government), finance for the nationalised industries and the capital
expenditure of certain other public corporations. This definition is used for
published figures of public expenditure totals, in particular for the
Government’s annual public expenditure White Paper. The planning total also
includes a contingency reserve to cover essential unforeseen or unquantifiable
expenditure. It does not include payment of debt interest. The estimated
outturn for the 1982-83 planning total was £ 113,000million; net debt interest is
estimated to have been £6,000 million.
Expenditure by central government (including finance for the nationalised
industries) accounted for about three-quarters of the planning total in 1982-83
and that by local authorities for about one-quarter. Social security accounted
for 29 per cent of the total, defence for 13 per cent and health and personal social
services for 12 per cent. The planning total for 1983-84 is £120,000 million.
Current expenditure in 1982-83 accounted for 90 per cent of total expendi¬
ture (excluding certain minor adjustments) and capital expenditure for 10 per
cent. The major item of current expenditure was grants to individuals (mainly
social security benefits), closely followed by wages and salaries. Fixed invest¬
ment accounted for 42 per cent of capital expenditure.
The planned rate of increase of public expenditure between 1982-83 and
1983- 84 is 5 • 8 per cent, with planned increases of 5 ■ 7 per cent in 1984- 85 and
4 • 7 per cent in 1985-86. Public expenditure as a proportion of gross domestic
product (GDP) in 1982-83 is estimated at 44 per cent.
Since 1982 the public expenditure White Paper has expressed the plans in
cash instead of the volume terms used in previous years. This change embodies
the principle, already well established in the system of cash limits, that levels of
service must be determined in the light of the finance available. It is also consis-
308
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
tent with the Government’s financial strategy to bring down inflation and
create conditions for sustainable growth, and with the objectives of efficiency
and value for money in the public sector.
The Estimates Each December government departments submit to the Treasury estimates of
their cash requirements for the financial year beginning in the following April.
After approval by the Treasury the Supply Estimates are presented to Parlia¬
ment at the same time as the Budget (see p 309), which is introduced in March or
April. They are approved in July as the annual Appropriation Act, expenditure
between April and this date being covered by a Vote on Account before the start
of the financial year. Supplementary Estimates may also be presented to Parlia¬
ment during the course of the year. If any Vote is overspent the Public Accounts
Committee (see p 309) will consider the provision of an Excess Vote and may
ask for evidence from the department concerned. In each parliamentary session
there are three ‘Estimates’ days which are devoted to debates and votes on the
Supply Estimates, following examination by select committees of the House of
Commons.
Some items of expenditure, for example, the salaries and pensions of judges,
are not subject to annual approval by Parliament but are paid directly from the
Consolidated Fund in accordance with Acts of Parliament which allow
payments to continue from one year to the next.
Public Each year, a survey is made of the whole range of projected public expenditure
Expenditure over the medium term. This culminates in the publication of the public expen-
Surveys diture White Paper, which gives the expected outturn for the current financial
year (ending on 31 March) together with plans for the following three years.
Control and
Examination of
Public
Expenditure
Control of public expenditure additional to control inherent in parliamentary
approval of the estimates is exercised through the system of cash limits and by
the Comptroller and Auditor General. Examination of public expenditure is
carried out by select committees of the House of Commons.
Cash Limits Some 40 per cent of public expenditure is subject to control by cash limits
(external financing limits in the case of nationalised industries). Another 40 per
cent consists of ‘demand-determined’ services (for example, social security
benefits) on which, once policy and rates of payment have been determined,
expenditure in the short run depends on the number of eligible recipients. The
remaining 20 per cent is current expenditure of local authorities, which central
government does not directly control; however, the major part of the contri¬
bution by central government to such expenditure, the rate support grant (see
p 63), is subject to cash limits. Once fixed, cash limits are not usually revised
during the course of the year unless a decision is taken to alter the level of provi¬
sion for the service concerned. The general policy is that, if any overspending
occurs, a corresponding deduction is made from the cash limit for the following
year. As in the case of overspending on votes, the Public Accounts Committee
may ask for evidence from the department concerned when overspending
occurs.
Comptroller and The Comptroller and Auditor General, a crown official independent of the
Auditor General Government, has two functions. As Comptroller General he has the duty to
ensure that all revenue and other public money payable to the Consolidated
Fund and the National Loans Fund is duly paid and that all payments out of
these funds are authorised by statute. As Auditor General he audits, on behalf of
the House of Commons, accounts of the transactions of the Consolidated Fund
PUBLIC FINANCE
309
Select
Committees
of the House of
Commons
Contingency
Reserve
THE BUDGET
and the National Loans Fund, Appropriation Accounts and various other
accounts of government departments and statutory boards and authorities.
With the aim of strengthening parliamentary control and supervision of public
expenditure, a National Audit Office (with the Comptroller and Auditor General
as its head) was set up in 1983.
Public expenditure is also examined by select committees of the House of
Commons, which study in detail the activities of particular government depart¬
ments and require the attendance of ministers and officials for cross-examin¬
ation. The Public Accounts Committee considers the accounts of each
government department and the Comptroller and Auditor General’s reports of
them and on the economy, efficiency and effectiveness of departmental expen¬
diture. The Committee takes evidence from officials and submits to Parliament
reports which carry considerable weight, and its recommendations are taken
very seriously by the departments and organisations that it examines. The
Government’s formal reply to the reports is presented to Parliament by the
Treasury in the form of a Treasury minute and the reports and minute are
debated annually in the House of Commons.
Planned expenditure includes an unallocated reserve for contingencies and
other requirements that cannot be quantified when plans are being drawn up.
The reserve is a control figure for the financial year ahead; any new decisions to
incur expenditure which cannot be met from programme allocations are
accommodated within the reserve.
The Budget incorporates the Government’s proposals for changes in taxation,
and is normally the main occasion for a review of general economic policy. The
proposals are announced to the House of Commons, usually in March or April,
although supplementary budgetary measures may also be introduced at other
times of the year. The Budget speech by the Chancellor of the Exchequer is
followed by the moving of a set of Ways and Means (or Budget) resolutions in
which the proposals are embodied. These resolutions, when passed by the
House, give temporary effect (under the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act) to
certain of the Government’s tax proposals and become the foundation of the
Finance Bill, in which the proposals are set out for detailed consideration by
Parliament, becoming law as the Finance Act, usually in July.
A major function of the Budget is to act as an instrument of economic manage¬
ment. Fiscal (taxation) and monetary policy influence the general level of
economic activity, as well as the price level and interest rates, and, by increas¬
ing incentives, may be able to improve the long-term performance of the
economy.
The bulk of taxation proposals in the Budget are concerned with changes in
the rates or coverage of existing taxes, the introduction of new taxes or the
abolition of existing ones and changes in the administrative machinery relating
to taxation. In two cases (income tax and corporation tax), however, annual
Ways and Means resolutions followed by a Finance Act clause are necessary to
maintain the taxes in existence at all, since they are annual taxes. Thus a
Budget at or about the beginning of each financial year is a necessity.
The Provisional Collection of Taxes Act enables the Government to collect
certain taxes provisionally (usually from Budget day or from the start of the tax
year), income tax, for example, either at the rates previously in operation or at
new rates following the passage of the appropriate Ways and Means resolutions.
Some changes affecting expenditure, such as increases in child benefit, are
usually announced in the Budget statement. Such measures, however, are gen-
310
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
SOURCES OF
REVENUE
Taxes on
Income
Income Tax
erally given effect by separate legislation, statutory instruments or administra¬
tive action. Other ways of changing taxation are by special legislation or the use
of the regulator, which permits limited changes between Budgets in value
added tax (by up to 25 per cent) and the main excise duties (by up to 10 per cent).
Table 29 shows estimated total revenue from taxation and other sources in
1982-83 and the forecasts for 1983-84.
The Budget proposals are published in the Financial Statement and Budget
Report, which accompanies the Budget Statement. This report also contains
one of two economic forecasts which the Government is required to publish
each year under the Industry Act 1975 (the other, appearing in the Autumn
Statement, brings together and expands decisions on National Insurance con¬
tributions and other matters) and the medium-term financial strategy which,
introduced in 1980, sets out the fiscal and monetary framework within which
economic policy is operated.
The three principal sources of tax revenue are: taxes on income, which include
income tax and corporation tax; taxes on capital, which include capital transfer
tax and capital gains tax; and indirect taxes, which include customs and excise
duties, value added tax (VAT), the National Insurance surcharge, local rates
(see p 63), stamp duties and licence duties (for example, on motor vehicles).
Taxes on individual incomes are progressive in that larger incomes bear a pro¬
portionately higher rate of tax. Thresholds and rate bands for income tax, capi¬
tal transfer tax and capital gains tax are raised automatically each year in line
with the rise in retail prices unless the Government proposes otherwise and
Parliament approves. The Inland Revenue assesses and collects the taxes on
income and capital and the stamp duties. The Customs and Excise collects the
most important taxes on expenditure (the customs and excise duties and VAT),
while a variety of authorities is responsible for the collection of the remainder.
Income tax is imposed for the year of assessment beginning on 6 April. The
basic rate of 30 per cent applies to the first £14,600 of taxable income. A rate of 40
per cent applies to the £14,601-£17,200 band of taxable income, 45 per cent to
the £17,201-£21,800 band, 50 per cent to the £21,801-£28,900 band and 55
per cent to the £28,901 -£36,000 band, ending with a maximum rate of 60 per
cent on taxable income over £36,000. These rates apply to both earned and
investment incomes. Investment incomes are also liable to a surcharge of 15 per
cent on their excess over £7,100. The tax imposed on an individual is graduated
by means of personal allowances (£1,785 for a single person or a wife and £2,795
for a married man) and reliefs. Among the most important reliefs are those for
mortgage interest payments and for life assurance premiums, both of which are
given by deduction at source. Also, under the business expansion scheme,
certain investors in companies (usually small ones) without a Stock Exchange
quotation are able to obtain relief on up to £40,000 invested in any one year.
In general, the income of married couples is taxed as one but a husband and
wife may choose to have the wife’s earnings charged separately for tax on condi¬
tion that the husband receives the single instead of the married personal allow¬
ance. Any investment income is taxed jointly.
In 1983 - 84 a single person earning £ 10,000 a year pays £2,465 in income tax
while a married man with the same earned income pays £2,162. The amount of
tax payable by a single person varies from, for example, £965 on an earned
annual income of £5,000 to £16,274 on one of £40,000.
Most wage and salary earners pay their income tax under a Pay As You Earn
(PAYE) system whereby tax is deducted (and accounted for to the Inland Reve¬
nue) by the employer, thus enabling them to keep as up to date as possible with
their tax payments.
PUBLIC FINANCE
311
Table 29: Sources of Tax and Other Receipts 1982-83 and 1983-84
1982-83 1983-84
outturn Budget Percentage
forecast of total a
£m £m
Inland Revenue b
Income taxc 30,479 31,400
Corporation taxd 8,044 6,200
Petroleum revenue taxe 3,214 5,250
Supplementary petroleum duty 2,395 —
Capital gains tax 632 600
Development land tax 65 55
Estate duty-f 12 10
Capital transfer tax 500 540
Stamp duties 869 975
35-8
7-1
60
0-7
0- 1
0-6
1 • 1
Total Inland Revenue
46,210
45,030
51-3
Customs and Excise
Value added tax
Oil
Tobacco
Spirits, beer, wine, cider and perry
Betting and gaming
Car tax
Other excise duties
European Community own
resources 9
Customs duties, etc
Agricultural levies
13,840
5,239
3,447
3,020
602
598
8
1,016
225
15,500
5,675
3,700
3,900
610
615
20
1,130
250
17
6
4'
4'
O'
0-
1-3
0-3
Total Customs and Excise
27,995
31,400
35-8
Vehicle excise duties
National Insurance surcharge
1,823
2,831
1,944
1,697
2-2
1-9
Total taxation
Miscellaneous receipts h
78,859
7,188
80,071
7,751
91-2
8-8
Total
86,047
87,822
100 0
Sources: Financial Statistics and Financial Statement and Budget Report 1983-84.
b The totals of percentages may not equal sums of the sub-totals because of rounding.
The breakdown for Inland Revenue taxes shows the amounts received by the Inland Revenue. The totals of
these do not equal exactly the total paid into the Consolidated Fund.
Including surtax. This was absorbed with income tax into a unified form of personal taxation in 1973 but sums
are still due from before the time of abolition.
Receipts include payments of advance corporation tax:
Net of repayments 2.480 2,270 2-6
' Including advance payments of petroleum revenue tax.
Superseded by capital transfer tax in 1975 but sums are still due in respect of deaths that occurred before
abolition.
I Customs duties and agricultural levies are accountable to the European Community as 'own resources’.
Includes broadcast receiving licences, interest and dividends, gas levy, oil royalties, proceeds from special sales
of assets and other miscellaneous receipts.
312
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In general, income tax is charged on all income which originates in Britain
and on all income arising abroad of persons resident in Britain. Interest on
certain British government securities belonging to persons not ordinarily
resident in Britain is exempt. Britain has entered into agreements with many
countries providing for relief from double taxation; where such agreements are
not in force unilateral relief is often allowed. Individuals who are resident in but
domiciled outside Britain and who work for non-resident employers are entitled
to a special allowance under which only half of their gross salary (or three-quar¬
ters after nine years of residence) is considered for purposes of British taxation.
Corporation Companies pay corporation tax on their profits, but the amount of taxable profit
Tax is that remaining after deduction of allowances for investment in assets used for
the business and certain other costs. Only a proportion of any capital gains is
included in total profits, with the result that chargeable gains as a whole are
subject to a lower effective rate of tax. A company which distributes profits to its
shareholders is required to make to the Inland Revenue an advance payment of
corporation tax. In general, this payment is set against a company’s liability to
corporation tax on its income and the recipient of the distribution in respect of
which the advance payment was made is entitled to a tax credit, which satisfies
his or her liability to income tax at the basic rate.
The rate of corporation tax is fixed retrospectively in the Budget for the past
financial year; for the financial year 1982 (1 April 1982-31 March 1983) it is 52
per cent with a reduced rate of 38 per cent for lower levels of profits. The system
of corporation tax is designed to encourage expansion and reinvestment, parti¬
cularly when an enterprise is relatively new, and substantial incentives and
reliefs are available. Companies are encouraged to invest in assets for their
trade by generous tax allowances while stock relief reduces the liability to tax by
taking account of increases in the cost of holding stock. As part of its policy for
encouraging small businesses the Government has raised the qualifying profits
limits for the small companies rate of corporation tax to £100,000 for full relief
and £500,000 for marginal relief. If all allowances and reliefs are taken into
account, British companies in aggregate pay only about 20 per cent of their
historic cost profits in corporation tax (excluding advance corporation tax). The
tax is assessed on the profits of accounting periods, the rate of tax being the rate
for the financial year in which the accounting period falls. Where an accounting
period straddles 31 March the profits are apportioned on a time basis.
Petroleum Under the Oil Taxation Act 1975, petroleum revenue tax (deductible in comput-
Revenue ing profits for corporation tax) is charged on profits from the production, as
Tax opposed to the refining or other forms of processing, of oil and gas under licence
in Britain and on its continental shelf. The rate of tax is 75 per cent. Each licen¬
see of an oilfield is charged on the profits from that field after deduction of
certain allowances and reliefs, extended in 1983 in order to encourage
exploration, appraisal and future field development. The tax is computed at
half-yearly intervals. Under provisions effective from 1983, advance payments
of petroleum revenue tax can be made in the early years of production from a
field. These payments can be credited against petroleum revenue tax subse¬
quently due with any balance repaid five years after the first payment.
However, this system of advance petroleum revenue tax is to be phased out by
the end of 1986. The bulk of both taxes is collected in monthly instalments.
Taxes on Capital transfer tax applies to transfers of personal wealth in three main areas:
Capital lifetime gifts; transfers on death; and transfers relating to settled property (that
Capital Transfer is any property held in trust). The tax is chargeable on a cumulative basis in
Tax respect of lifetime transfers as they occur and on death as if the deceased had
PUBLIC FINANCE
313
Capital Gains
Tax
Development
Land Tax
Taxes on
Expenditure
Value Added
Tax
given away the whole of his or her estate immediately before death. In both
cases the tax on a particular transfer is arrived at by adding to it the value of the
chargeable transfers made within 10 years up to the date of the transfer in ques¬
tion. The rates of tax applicable are progressively higher on successive slices of
the cumulative total of chargeable transfers, with a lower scale of tax for lifetime
transfers than for transfers on death. The higher scale applies to transfers made
on death or up to three years before the transferor’s death. Under both scales the
first £60,000 of transfers is exempt. The rates on amounts over this figure rise
from 30 per cent (higher scale) and 15 per cent (lower scale) on the slice between
£60,000and £80,000 to 75 per cent (higher scale) and 50 per cent (lower scale) on
the excess over £2 • 65 million.
Capital gains accruing on the disposal of assets are liable to capital gains tax or,
in the case of companies, to corporation tax. The rate of tax is 30 per cent but
individuals are exempt from tax in respect of total net gains of up to £5,300 in
any one year and most trusts on gains of up to £2,650. The effects of inflation can
be partly allowed for when measuring gains. The tax on gifts and certain
deemed disposals of assets may be deferred until the assets are sold. Certain
assets, including the principal private residence, chattels worth less than
£3,000 (and any chattels, except those used for the purpose of trade, with a pre¬
dictable life of less than 50 years), private motor cars and National Savings
Certificates are normally exempt. Gains on government securities are exempt
from the tax if they have been held for more than 12 months.
Under the Development Land Tax Act 1976 any assessable development value
realised on the disposal of an interest in land is chargeable to tax at the rate of 60
per cent but the first £50,000 of any such development value realised in any
financial year is completely exempt. Other exemptions include the sale or de¬
velopment of owner-occupied residences.
Value added tax (VAT) is a broadly-based tax, chargeable at 15 per cent. It is
collected at each stage in the production and distribution of goods and services
by taxable persons (generally those carrying on a business with a turnover of
more than £18,000 a year). The final tax is borne by the consumer. The taxable
person is charged by suppliers of goods and services with VAT (input tax) and
then charges the customer with VAT on goods and services supplied (output
tax). It is the difference between output and input tax that is paid to Customs
and Excise.
There are two methods by which certain goods and services are relieved from
VAT: one is by charging VAT at a zero rate (a taxable person does not charge tax
to a customer but reclaims any input tax paid to suppliers); the other is by
exemption (a taxable person does not charge a customer any output tax and is
not entitled to deduct or reclaim the input tax). Zero-rating applies to most types
of food (except in the course of catering); books, newspapers and periodicals;
fuel (except for petrol and other fuels for road use) and power; construction of,
and certain alterations to, buildings; exports; certain international services; pu¬
blic transport fares; caravans and houseboats; young children’s clothing and
footwear; drugs and medicines supplied on prescription; and certain supplies
by or to charities. Exemption applies to land (including rents), insurance, postal
services, betting, gaming (other than by gaming machines and lotteries),
finance, education, health, burial and cremation, and supplies by trade unions
and professional bodies to their members.
C usto ms Duties Customs duties are chargeable in accordance with the Common Customs Tariff
of the European Community (no such duties are chargeable on goods which
314
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Excise Duties
Car Tax
Stamp Duty
National Insur¬
ance
Surcharge
PUBLIC
SECTOR
BORROWING
qualify as Community goods). Special customs import and export procedures
are operated under the Common Agricultural Policy and Community levies are
chargeable on a wide range of agricultural products from non-Community
countries.
Oils used for road fuel bear duty at the basic rate. Heavy oil not used for road fuel
and light oil used for furnace fuel bear a lower duty and, except for lubricating
oil, are zero-rated for VAT. Oil used as chemical feedstocks or otherwise than as
a fuel or lubricant in manufacturing is relieved from duty. There are duties on
spirits, beer, wine, made-wine, cider and perry, mainly related to alcoholic
strength. The cigarette duty is based partly on a charge per 1,000 cigarettes and
partly on a percentage of retail price. Duty on other tobacco products is based on
the weight of the finished product. The principal betting duties are the general
betting duty, which is charged at a rate of 8 per cent of the stake money, except
for on-course betting, which is charged at 4 per cent; pool betting duty (which
applies to football pools), charged at a rate of 42 • 5 per cent of the stake money;
and bingo duty, charged at 10 per cent. Revenue is also raised from duties on the
operation of gaming machines and casinos.
The licence duty on a private motor car or light van is £85 a year; for motor¬
cycles and three-wheel vehicles it is £8 • 50, £ 17 or £34 a year according to engine
capacity. The licence duty on goods vehicles is charged on the basis of gross
weight and, if over 12 tonnes, according to the number of axles; the duty is de¬
signed to ensure that such vehicles cover at least their road costs through the
tax paid (licence duty and fuel duty). Taxis and buses are taxed according to
seating capacity.
New cars, motorcycles, scooters, mopeds and some motor caravans, whether
British made or imported, are chargeable with car tax at 10 per cent on the
wholesale value. VAT falls on the price including car tax.
Transfers of property (other than of stocks and shares, which are liable to duty
at 2 per cent) up to a value of £25,000 are exempt from stamp duty. Above this
threshold stamp duty is chargeable at ratesofO • 5 per cent, 1 per cent and 1 -5 per
cent on transfers valued up to £30,000, £35,000 and £40,000, respectively, with
the full rate of 2 per cent applying to values above £40,000. Transfers to charities
are exempt.
The National Insurance surcharge took effect from the start of the 1977-78
financial year. It is in the form of a levy paid by employers, along with their
National Insurance contributions, of 1 per cent of employee’s earnings up to
£250 a week except for those earning less than £34 (churches and charities
are exempt). The proceeds are not paid into the National Insurance Fund but,
together with other tax proceeds, go into the Consolidated Fund.
A continuing reduction in the public sector borrowing requirement (PSBR) as a
percentage of gross domestic product is an important part of the Government’s
medium-term financial strategy; the percentage is projected to fall from 2 -75
per cent in 1983-84 to 2 percent in 1985-86. As part of the policy of controlling
the rate of growth of the money stock, the Government seeks to finance its
borrowing requirement (the excess of expenditure over tax revenue and other
receipts) by sales of long-term debt to the public outside the banking system.
The central government borrowing requirement in 1983-84 was set at £ 11,500
million, compared with £12,600 million in 1982-83, and the PSBR £8,000 mil¬
lion, compared with £9,000 million in 1982-83. Public sector debt sales to the
non-bank private sector totalled £8,400 million in 1982-83, of which £4,600
PUBLIC FINANCE
315
The National
Debt
million was government stock (known as gilt-edged stock as there is no risk of
default) and £3,000 million national savings instruments. Gilt-edged stock is
marketable and is traded on the Stock Exchange. Individuals may also make
transactions through post offices in stocks included on the National Savings
Stock Register. Financial institutions, such as pension funds and insurance
companies, have the largest holdings. The Government issues both conven¬
tional and, since 1981, indexed stock (on which principal and interest are linked
to the retail prices index).
National savings instruments are non-marketable and are designed to attract
personal savings. Their importance relative to gilt-edged stock as a source of
funds has increased in recent years. The other principal debt instruments of
central government are Treasury bills and certificates of tax deposit. Treasury
bills are 91 -day bills sold at a weekly auction to the discount houses, which guar¬
antee to take up the whole of the offer; certificates of tax deposit, which may be
purchased by individuals or corporate bodies, may be tendered in settlement of
a range of taxes.
The bulk of public corporations’ borrowing is met by central government
through the National Loans Fund although their temporary borrowing needs
are met largely from the market, often under Treasury guarantee. That part of
local authority borrowing met by central government is supplied by authori¬
sation of Parliament through the Public Works Loan Board from the National
Loans Fund. (The Board remains an independent body even though it was mer¬
ged for administrative purposes in 1980 with the National Debt Office to form the
National Investment and Loans Office.) The local authorities also borrow
directly from the market, both short-term and long-term, through a range of
instruments. Some public corporations and local authorities also borrow on
occasion, under special statutory power and with Treasury consent, in foreign
currencies.
Net central government borrowing each year represents an addition to the
National Debt. At the end of March 1983 the National Debt amounted to some
£ 127,000 million of which £3,000 million was in currencies other than sterling.
Of the £124,000 million sterling debt, £96,000 million consisted of gilt-edged
stock; of this, 29 per cent had a maturity of up to five years, 38 per cent a matur¬
ity of over fiv e y ears and up to 15 years and 34 per cent a maturity of over 15 years
or undated. The remaining sterling debt was made up mainly of national sav¬
ings (£17,000 million), certificates of tax deposits, Treasury bills, and Ways and
Means advances (very short-term internal government borrowing).
18 Banking
and Financial
Institutions
Britain’s position as a major financial centre reflects the wide range of
specialised financial services provided. The City of London has the greatest con¬
centration of banks in the world, the world’s biggest insurance market and a
Stock Exchange with a larger listing of securities than any other exchange, and
remains the principal international centre for transactions in a large number of
commodities. Its tradition of informal dealing and its position between the time
zones of the United States and the Far East enable it to complete large-scale
transactions with economy and speed. Among the major developments in the
activities of financial institutions in recent years have been the rapid growth in
the representation of overseas banks in London and the establishment of new
futures markets.
The main institutions which form the British banking system are the Bank of
England (the central bank), the clearing banks (offering a wide range of
services), the National Girobank, the Trustee Savings Banks, the overseas
banks, the merchant banks, the discount market and the National Savings
Bank. Specialised financial services outside the banking system are provided
by, among others, finance houses, leasing companies, factoring companies,
finance corporations, pension funds, investment and unit trusts, building
societies, the insurance market, the Stock Exchange, the foreign exchange
market, the London gold market, commodity markets and futures markets.
The Bank The Bank of England was established in 1694 by Act of Parliament and Royal
of England Charter as a corporate body; the entire capital stock was acquired by the
Government under the Bank of England Act 1946. The Bank’s main functions
are to act as note-issuing authority, to advise the Government on financial
matters, to execute monetary policy and to act as banker to the Government. It
also exercises prudential supervision over the banking system and manages
the Exchange Equalisation Account on behalf of the Treasury.
The Bank of England has the sole right in England and Wales of issuing bank
notes. The note issue is fiduciary, that is to say, it is no longer backed by gold but
by government and other securities. The Scottish and Northern Ireland banks
have limited rights to issue notes; these issues, apart from an amount specified
by legislation for each bank, must be fully covered by holdings of Bank of
England notes. Responsibility for the provision of coin for circulation lies with
the Royal Mint, a government department.
The Government’s economic policy, of which the reduction of inflation is a
major aspect, accords considerable importance to control of the money supply.
The Bank, in conjunction with the Treasury, seeks to influence the trend rate of
growth of the money supply. Announced monetary targets were adopted in
1976 and are incorporated in the Government’s medium-term financial
strategy. Figures announced in the 1983 Budget give targets for 1983-84 and
illustrative ranges for 1984-85 and 1985-86. Therangesfor the two later years
will be reconsidered nearer the time and account will be taken of structural and
BANKING AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
317
The Deposit
Banks
institutional changes which may affect the economic significance of the differ¬
ent monetary aggregates.
As banker to the Government, the Bank of England is responsible for arrang¬
ing government borrowing and for managing the National Debt.
The Bank is able to influence money market conditions through its dealings
with the discount houses (see p 319), which developed in the nineteenth
century as bill brokers for industrialists. The discount houses hold mainly
Treasury, local authority and commercial bills financed by short-term loans
from the banks. If there is a shortage of cash in the banking system as a result,
for example, of large tax payments or heavy sales of government securities, the
Bank relieves the shortage either by buying bills from the discount houses or by
lending directly to them. This permits the banks to replenish their cash bal¬
ances at the Bank by recalling some of their short-term loans to the discount
houses.
The methods by which the Bank operates in the money markets, however,
have undergone some change. Until August 1981 the Bank was ready to lend
directly to the discount houses at rates at or near its announced Minimum
Lending Rate, in addition to its open-market dealings with the discount houses
in bills. Under subsequent arrangements, the Bank no longer undertakes to
announce continuously the rate at which it will supply cash to the market, but
conducts its operations in such a way as to keep short-term interest rates within
an unpublished band. More emphasis is now put on open-market operations in
bills than on direct lending to the discount houses.
Under the Banking Act 1979 deposit-taking businesses require authorisation
from the Bank of England unless they are specifically exempted from the
authorisation provisions of the Act. Institutions may be authorised either as
recognised banks or as licensed deposit-takers and are subject to the Bank of
England’s supervision.
On behalf of the Treasury the Bank manages the Exchange Equalisation
Account (EEA), which holds Britain’s official reserves of gold, foreign exchange,
Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) on the International Monetary Fund and
European Currency Units (ECUs). Using the resources of the EEA, the Bank
may intervene in the foreign exchange markets to check undue fluctuations in
the exchange value of sterling.
The major deposit (or clearing) banks are Barclays, Lloyds, Midland and
National Westminster and, in Scotland, the Bank of Scotland, Clydesdale Bank
and the Royal Bank of Scotland. Their primary business is receiving, trans¬
ferring and paying deposits, together with providing overdraft and other loan
facilities to personal and commercial customers. Customers may deposit
money in two main types of account, current accounts and deposit accounts.
Nearly two-thirds of all adults have a current account and over one-third a
deposit account. Although interest is not usually paid on current accounts,
withdrawals may be made on demand and amounts transferred by cheque.
Interest is paid on deposit accounts but seven days’ notice is required for with¬
drawals. Bank profits arise from the difference between the interest earned from
lending and the costs incurred, including the interest paid to depositors. (Bank
lending rates are determined by base rate, which may differ between banks.
The greater the creditworthiness of a borrower the smaller is the premium
charged above base rate.)
The clearing banks provide full banking services throughout Britain;
however, other institutions, especially building societies (see p 322), have
begun to compete strongly in this area. The ‘big four’ banks operate through
some 11,000 branches and sub-branches. National Westminster has the largest
number (3,200) followed by Barclays (3,000), Midland (2,500) and Lloyds
318
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
National
Girobank
(2,300). The banks are increasingly involved in international banking activities
and, since the late 1970s, have lent more for house purchase. They have also
acquired substantial interests in finance houses and leasing agencies and some
have set up their own unit trusts and merchant banks.
The deposit banks’ main liquid assets consist of balances at the Bank of
England, money at call (mainly loans to discount houses), their holdings of
Treasury and some other bills and short-dated British government securities.
The banks also hold a proportion of their assets as portfolio investments (mainly
longer-dated British government securities) or trade investments.
The introduction in 1981 of a loan guarantee scheme (see p 199) has widened
the involvement of banks in financing small businesses. Steps had already been
taken in this direction by, for example, the establishment by Midland Bank of an
independent business banking unit and a venture capital scheme; most other
banks have similar schemes.
The bank giro, a credit transfer scheme, and direct debiting, by which a
creditor, with the prior approval of the debtor, may claim money due direct from
the latter’s bank account, have greatly speeded the money transmission
services. An increasing number of banks have automatic cash dispensing
machines and many are also introducing more automated banking facilities.
Cheque cards entitle holders to cash a cheque up to the value of £50 at any office
of major British and Irish banks and are also generally acceptable as a guaran¬
tee for payments by cheque up to that amount. Credit cards (Access and
Barclaycard) associated with the clearing banks are also a widely used method
of payment; Access operates within the international Mastercard system and
Barclaycard within the VISA system. Two clearing banks (Midland and Clydes¬
dale) issue uniform eurocheques; these are high-security printed cheques
which may be used to obtain cash or make payments at home or abroad, sup¬
ported by the uniform eurocheque card. Uniform eurocheques are made out in
the currency of the country in which they are being used. The other clearing
banks issue eurocheque encashment cards. These are not valid in Britain but
enable travellers overseas to cash domestic cheques, made out in sterling, at
designated banks.
Membership of the London Bankers’ Clearing House, which deals with the
clearing of cheques and drafts, consists of the Bank of England, the London
clearing banks, the Co-operative Bank, the Central Trustee Savings Bank and
the National Girobank (see below). In 1982 cheques and drafts worth nearly
£5,800,000 million passed through the London clearing system. Town clearing
enables transfers of funds between banks within the City of London to be settled
the same day, while the Clearing House Automated Payment System (CHAPS)
makes available same-day settlement elsewhere in Britain. A similar approach
in automated banking is the agreement by the clearing banks to introduce
point-of-sale terminals in retail outlets, which would enable the value of
shoppers’ purchases to be deducted from their personal bank accounts.
The National Girobank, part of the Post Office, provides a low-cost current
account banking and money transfer service. It operates through over 20,000
post offices in Britain. All accounts and transactions are maintained by means
of a computer complex at Bootle, Merseyside. In March 1983 Girobank had 1.3
million account holders, with balances of over £700 million. There were about
300 million transactions in the year ended March 1983. In addition to its services
to individuals, Girobank’s services to business customers include a facility
whereby organisations with dispersed branches, depots and representatives
can rapidly channel receipts into their central account. Over 200 local authori¬
ties and a number of nationalised industries as well as voluntary housing asso¬
ciations use Girobank’s rent collection services. Girobank’s international
BANKING AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
319
Trustee
Savings Banks
Overseas
Banks
Merchant
Banks
The Discount
Market
services also provide cross-border money transfer facilities for the 20 million
account holders in the European Community and other countries.
The range of banking services provided by Girobank includes current and
deposit accounts, personal loans, budget accounts, direct debit facilities,
cheque guarantee cards, bridging loans, overdrafts for corporate customers,
travellers’ cheques and foreign currency transactions, bureaux de change and
Postcheques for drawing cash at post offices in 29 overseas countries.
The Trustee Savings Banks (TSBs), most of which were founded in the nine¬
teenth century, operate under their own trustees but are subject under legisla¬
tion to the supervision of the Trustee Savings Banks Central Board and the
Treasury. Following a planned programme of amalgamations, there were 13
individual banks in June 1983 (compared with 67 in 1975) with about 1,650
branches, 13 million accounts and total deposits of £6,500 million. TSBs provide
a full range of banking services including cheque accounts and credit services.
Interest is paid on seven-day and one-month deposits and a higher rate on
larger sums deposited for periods up to five years. Credit services include perso¬
nal loans, overdrafts and mortgages. The TSBs have their own credit card,
Trustcard, which operates within the VISA system, and TSB Trust Company
provides a wide range of savings, insurance, life assurance and unit trust facil¬
ities. The TSBs carry out wholesale commercial lending as well as lending to
smaller companies in the form of term loans.
At the end of 1982 a major re-structuring of the TSBs was announced,
involving, among other things, the issue of publicly-quoted shares especially to
customers and staff. This is not expected to take place before 1985.
Some 540 overseas banks and financial institutions were represented in Britain
in 1983 through branches, subsidiaries, representative offices and consortia. A
total of470 were directly represented while 70 were represented only through a
stake in a consortium. Of those directly represented, 84 were from the United
States, 43 from Japan and some 150 from Europe. They provide a comprehen¬
sive banking service in many parts of the world and engage in the financing of
trade not only between Britain and other countries but also between third
countries.
Merchant banks have traditionally been primarily concerned with acceptances1
and with the sponsoring of capital issues on behalf of their customers. Today
they have a widely diversified and complex range of activities with an important
role in international finance and the short-term capital markets, the provision
of expert advice and financial services to British industrial companies, especi¬
ally where mergers, takeovers and other forms of corporate reorganisation are
involved, and in the management of investment holdings, including trusts,
pensions and other funds.
The discount market, an institution unique to the City of London, provides a
financial mechanism which promotes an orderly flow of short-term funds by the
discount houses borrowing ‘at call’ or at short notice from the banks and lend¬
ing to the Government by buying Treasury bills (see p 315). The discount
houses have recourse to the Bank of England as ‘lender of last resort’.
Assets of the discount houses consist mainly of Treasury and commercial
bills, government and local authority securities and negotiable certificates of
deposit denominated in both sterling and United States dollars. Discount
1 The term is derived from the method of financing trade by which commercial bills are ‘accepted’
or guaranteed by a merchant bank against documents, after which they may be discounted for
cash by a discount house or other intermediary.
320
National
Savings
National
Savings
Bank
National
Savings
Certificates
National
Savings
Income Bonds
Premium
Savings
Bonds
Save As You
Earn
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
houses accept formal responsibility for covering the Government’s need to
borrow on Treasury bills, which are offered for tender each week.
The Department for National Savings is responsible for the administration of
government savings schemes: National Savings Bank accounts, National Sav¬
ings Certificates, National Savings Income Bonds, Premium Savings Bonds and
Save As You Earn contracts. Government policy has traditionally been directed
towards encouraging investment, primarily of personal savings, in these
schemes, particularly as they represent a major source of funds for financing
the public sector borrowing requirement. At the end of June 1983 National Sav¬
ings totalled £24,000 million. Facilities are provided by the Department for the
purchase of government stocks; a selection of some 50 stocks is held on the
National Savings Stock Register. Since 1980 initiatives to raise a larger share of
personal savings directly for the public sector have been introduced and some
existing facilities made more competitive.
The National Savings Bank provides a system for depositing and withdrawing
savings at 20,000 post offices around the country or by post. There are about 22
million active accounts. Ordinary Accounts earn interest at 3 per cent a year (or
6 per cent if a minimum balance of £500 is maintained throughout the year); the
first £7 0 of annual interest is tax free. Up to £ 100 can be withdrawn on demand at
any Savings Bank post office (£250 for ‘regular customers’) but a few days’ no¬
tice is required for larger amounts. Investment Accounts earn a higher rate of
interest (which is taxable) and one month’s notice is required for withdrawals.
At the end of June 1983 the sum of the two accounts totalled £5,744 million.
National Savings Certificates, in units of £10 (index-linked issue) and £25 (con¬
ventional issue), are encashable at par at any time. Interest, which is free of
income tax (including investment income surcharge) and capital gains tax, is
paid only on encashment. The maximum permitted holding of the current
twenty-sixth issue is £5,000. Under the terms of the second index-linked issue of
National Savings Certificates, the repayment value is related to the movement
of the retail prices index (subject to the certificates being held for one year). If
held for five years a bonus of 4 per cent of the purchase price is added to the
repayment value. Supplements of up to 2 • 4 per cent are applicable to index-lin¬
ked certificates held between November 1982 and October 1984. The maximum
permitted holding is £ 10,000. At the end of June 1983 the total investment in all
forms of National Savings Certificate was £13,800 million.
National Savings Income Bonds, introduced in 1982, are designed to provide
savers with a regular monthly income. Bonds are sold in multiples of £1,000,
with a minimum holding of £2,000 and a maximum of £200,000. Repayment is
at either three or six months’ notice.
Premium Savings Bonds are in units of £ 1 (minimum purchase is £5) and individ¬
ual holdings are limited to £ 10,000. After a qualifying period of three months the
bonds give investors a chance to win tax-free prizes. There is a weekly draw for
prizes of £100,000, £50,000 and £25,000 and a monthly draw offering
thousands of prizes ranging in value from £50 to £250,000. The total value of
Premium Savings Bonds outstanding at the end of June 1983 was £1,600
million.
The Third Issue of the Save As You Earn (SAYE) scheme, introduced in 1975,
allows for regular monthly savings of fixed amounts, from £4 to £50, over five
years. On the fifth anniversary of the start of the contract each payment is reva-
BANKING AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
321
OTHER
FINANCIAL
INSTITUTIONS
Finance
Houses
Leasing
Companies
Factoring
Companies
lued in line with the retail prices index. Alternatively, the payments may
remain invested until the seventh anniversary, when they will be index-linked
again and a bonus equal to two monthly payments added. Uncompleted con¬
tracts repaid between the first and seventh anniversaries earn annual interest
of 6 per cent but no interest is payable if repayment is before the first anni¬
versary.
A new Share Option Issue Series B of SAVE, replacing the Fourth Issue, will be
introduced in November 1983. It will run concurrently with the Third Issue and
will be available to individuals entitled to purchase shares under a Share Option
Scheme approved by the Inland Revenue. Regular payments of between £ lOand
£50 (the maximum), deducted from pay over five years, will qualify for bonuses
equal to 14 and 28 monthly contributions on the fifth and seventh anniversaries
respectively. Interest at a rate of 6 per cent a year will be payable on completed
contracts repaid between the fifth and seventh anniversaries and on repayment
of uncompleted contracts between the first and seventh anniversaries. Any in¬
terest or bonus under a Third Issue or Share Option Issue Series B savings con¬
tract is free from income tax (including investment income surcharge) and capi¬
tal gains tax.
A contract can earn a supplement of 2 • 4 per cent of its value at 30 November
1982 if it is repaid with index-linking after 30 November 1983, and a further
supplement of 2 • 4 per cent of its value at 30 November 1983 (including the first
supplement) if it is repaid after 30 November 1984.
Many special financial facilities, supplementary to the credit facilities of the
banks, are provided through institutions outside the banking system. These
include institutions providing credit in specialised forms, such as finance
houses, leasing and factoring companies; finance corporations; institutions
which manage investments on behalf of the public, such as pension funds, and
investment and unit trusts; intermediaries which are less dependent on the
financial markets of the City of London, such as building societies; the insur¬
ance market; institutions which provide financial services, such as the Stock
Exchange; the foreign exchange market; the London gold market; commodity
markets; and the financial futures market.
Finance houses are major suppliers of hire purchase finance for the personal
sector and of short-term credit and leasing to the corporate sector. Over 80 per
cent of all their business is accounted for by the 42 firms which constitute the
Finance Houses Association (FHA). At the end of 1982 credit outstanding to the
members of the FHA was over £12,000 million.
Leasing companies buy and own plant or equipment required and chosen by
businesses and lease it at an agreed rental. This form of finance has grown
quickly in importance, partly because the leasing companies can take advan¬
tage of investment incentives to the benefit of customers whose tax position
would otherwise make them unavailable. In 1982 the 60 members of the Equip¬
ment Leasing Association acquired assets in Britain valued at some £2,700 mil¬
lion, which represented about 13 per cent of total investment in plant, equip¬
ment and vehicles.
Factoring consists of making cash available to a company in exchange for its
debts. Over the last 20 years it has developed as a major financial service, cover¬
ing exports from and imports to Britain as well as domestic trade. In 1982 the
Association of British Factors handled business of nearly £2,400 million and
some 3,000 companies made use of the Association’s services.
322
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Finance
Corporations
Pension Funds
Investment
and Unit
Trusts
Building
Societies
Finance corporations meet the need for medium- and long-term capital (includ¬
ing venture capital) when such funds are not easily or directly available from
traditional sources such as the Stock Exchange or the banks.
Investors in Industry (previously Finance for Industry) supports investment
programmes over the whole range of industry. During the year ended 31 March
1983 the corporation invested £261 million. Within the last few years it has
become increasingly prominent in financing management ‘buy-outs’, which
involve the purchase of businesses by managing and other staff from their
owners. The shares in Investors in Industry are owned by the Bank of England
(15 per cent) and the individual London and Scottish clearing banks.
Other finance corporations include Equity Capital for Industry, the Agricul¬
tural Mortgage Corporation, the Commonwealth Development Finance Com¬
pany and the Commonwealth Development Corporation (the last two being no
longer confined to the Commonwealth in their activities).
Pension funds are administered by trustees in order to invest members’ pension
contributions, either directly in the market or through intermediaries such as
insurance companies. The market value of assets held by pension funds rose
from £2,000 million in 1957 to about £63,000 million in 1981 when 20 per cent
was in British government securities and 55 per cent in company securities.
The growth of pension funds over the last 25 years has been reflected in a
marked decrease in the proportion of shares held by individual investors.
Investment and unit trusts enable investors to spread their risks and obtain the
benefit of skilled management. Investment trusts are companies which observe
certain requirements of the Stock Exchange and the tax authorities and invest
in securities for the benefit of their shareholders. At the end of 1982 their invest¬
ments totalled over £ 10,000 million, of which nearly one-half was held overseas.
Unit trusts are constituted by trust deed between a management company
and a trustee company which holds the assets. Normally, the managers sell
units to the public and also repurchase them on demand. The sums held must
be invested in securities. The costs of running the trust are defrayed partly by
an initial charge which forms part of the price of a unit and partly by a periodic
service charge which is usually taken out of the trust’s income. Authorisation
by the Department of Trade and Industry is needed before units can be offered to
the public; this is only granted if the trust deed meets the Department’s re¬
quirements. In 1981 the Department granted unit trusts permission to hold up to
20 per cent of their assets in shares traded on the Unlisted Securities Market (see
p 324), in addition to the 5 per cent of assets that they were already allowed to
hold in unlisted securities, whether or not traded on this market. In May 1983
there were 1.9 million unit holdings with a total value of £9,700 million.
Building societies are non-profit-making mutual institutions which borrow
mainly short-term from individual savers, who are generally able to withdraw
their money on demand (although short-notice investments at higher rates of
interest have become increasingly popular) and provide long-term loans at
variable rates of interest on the security of private dwellings purchased for
owner occupation. They also lend to a very limited extent on the security of
business or commercial property. The Building Societies Association, the
movement’s representative body, can advise on levels of interest rates.
Building societies account for most lending for house purchase in Britain and
in recent years they have overtaken the banks as the principal repository for the
personal sector’s liquid assets; over a half of all adults have a building society
account. The societies now offer a wide range of services to investors; various
saving schemes have been established and computerised cash withdrawal
BANKING AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
323
The Insurance
Market
Insurance
Companies
Lloyd’s
Insurance
Brokers
systems are being developed. The Nottingham Building Society, in collabor¬
ation with the Bank of Scotland, offers customers the full range of its services by
means of Prestel (see p 287). Business is concentrated in the hands of a few large
societies, the five largest accounting for 55 per cent of the total assets of the
movement. At the end of 1982 there were 227 registered building societies with
total assets of £73,000 million and in the course of the year over £ 15,000 million
was advanced in new mortgages. Building societies are supervised by the Chief
Registrar of Friendly Societies under the Building Societies Act 1962.
The British insurance industry provides a comprehensive and competitive
service domestically and internationally. It has been estimated that British
insurers handle some 20 per cent of general insurance business placed on the
international market. The London market is the world’s leading centre for in¬
surance where, in addition to most British companies and Lloyd’s, a large
number of overseas companies are also represented. It is the world centre for the
placement of international reinsurance and, partly as a consequence, many
British companies have formed close relationships with overseas companies.
Some British insurance companies confine their activities to domestic business
but most large companies undertaking general business transact a substantial
amount overseas through branches, agencies or affiliated local companies.
About 850 companies are authorised to carry on one or more classes of insur¬
ance business in Britain, of which 175 are from overseas.
Some 340 companies belong to the British Insurance Association and these
account for about 95 per cent of the world-wide business of the British insur¬
ance companies market.
Life assurance is handled by some 260 authorised insurance companies and
is also available through certain friendly societies. Three-quarters of this busi¬
ness is transacted through the members of the Life Offices’ Association or the
nine members of the Associated Scottish Life Offices. Lloyd’s underwriters also
write short-term life business.
Lloyd s, established in the seventeenth century, is an incorporated society of
private insurers in London. Although its activities were originally confined to
the conduct of marine insurance business, a very considerable world-wide
market for the transaction of other classes of insurance business in non-marine,
aviation and motor markets has been built up. Lloyd’s, which does not accept
insurance itself, is regulated by a series of special Acts of Parliament dating
from 1871 to 1982.
Lloyd s is not a company but a market for insurance administered by the
Council of Lloyd’s, where business is carried out for individual underwrit¬
ing members for their own account and risk and in competition with each other
and with insurance companies. Insurance may only be placed through Lloyd’s
brokers (see p 324), who negotiate with Lloyd’s underwriting agents on
behalf of the insured. Only elected underwriting members of Lloyd’s, for whom
insurance is transacted with unlimited liability and who have met the most
stringent financial regulations laid down by the Council, are permitted to be
represented at Lloyd’s; these safeguards give security to a Lloyd’s policy.
There are 21,600 underwriting members of Lloyd’s grouped into about 400
syndicates and represented at Lloyd’s by underwriting agents who accept risks
on behalf of the members of their syndicates.
Insurance brokers, acting on behalf of the insured, are an essential part of the
Lloyd s market and a valuable part of the company market. Many brokers
specialise in reinsurance business, acting as intermediaries in the exchange of
324
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
International
Insurance
Services
The Stock
Exchange
The Foreign
Exchange
Market
contracts between companies, both British and overseas, and often acting as
London representatives of the latter. The Insurance Brokers (Registration) Act
1977 provides for the registration of insurance brokers by a Registration Council
and makes Britain the first country to introduce self-regulation of insurance
brokers.
The British Insurance Brokers’ Association, which sponsored the Act, has
about 3,700 members. They produce some £10,000 million annually in pre¬
miums for Lloyd’s and insurance companies.
About one-half of the general (that is, non-life) business of members of the
British Insurance Association originates from about 100 overseas countries,
through establishments abroad, including overseas branches and agencies,
and through reinsurance placed on the London market.
In accordance with the Treaty of Rome, insurance and reinsurance in the
European Community are regulated by directives addressed to the
governments of member states and intended to harmonise the legislation of the
various member countries, thus providing a ‘common market’, which would
avoid distortion of competition. Directives cover reinsurance, compulsory
motor insurance, freedom of establishment for life and non-life insurers, Com¬
munity co-insurance and insurance intermediaries. These directives have been
implemented in British legislation.
The Stock Exchange has its main trading floor and central administration in
London. There are also trading floors in Glasgow, Liverpool, Manchester, Bir¬
mingham and Dublin.
The number and variety of securities officially listed on the Stock Exchange
are greater than in any other market in the world and its turnover of company
securities is roughly equivalent to that of all the other European exchanges
combined. Some 7,100 securities are quoted on the Stock Exchange; at the end
of June 1983 these had a total market value of £746,000 million. About 5,400
securities of companies were quoted including a number of leading overseas
securities. Company issues represent four-fifths of the securities at market
valuation, the remainder being British, Irish Republic and other overseas
government and corporation stocks as well as eurobonds (see p 325). Institu¬
tional investors, such as pension funds, now own a higher proportion of ordi¬
nary shares than individuals. The Unlisted Securities Market (USM), which
deals generally in the securities of small companies unable or unwilling to ob¬
tain a Stock Exchange listing, was opened in 1980, since when the number of
companies with shares traded has risen from about a dozen to over 150.
A market in traded options, in the shares of nearly 50 prominent British com¬
panies, enables investors not only to buy options to purchase or sell shares in
future at pre-fixed prices but also to trade in the options themselves.
The securities industry is subject to a combination of statutory and non-
statutory regulation by the Council for the Securities Industry, which provides
cohesion between the self-regulatory elements. The law on investor protection
is under review.
The market consists of banks and several firms of foreign exchange brokers
which act as intermediaries between the banks. It provides those engaged in
international trade with foreign currencies for their transactions. The foreign
exchange banks are in close contact with financial centres abroad and are able
to quote buying and selling rates for both spot and future delivery. The forward
market enables traders who, at a given date in the future, are due to receive or
make a specific foreign currency payment, to contract in advance to sell or buy
the foreign currency involved for sterling at a precise fixed exchange rate.
BANKING AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
325
The eurocurrency market provides a network of bank deposits and loans de¬
nominated in a currency other than that of the country in which the bank is
situated. The eurobond market performs a similar service in transferring funds
from lenders to borrowers but by means of bonds issued in currencies other
than that of the issuing country. Transactions in both markets tend to be in
large denominations. The markets developed in the late 1950s following the
restoration of convertibility between the major currencies partly in order to
avoid incurring the costs of exchange control and other regulations.
The London
Gold Market
Commodity
Markets
Financial
Futures
Anyone may deal in gold but, in practice, dealings are largely concentrated in
the hands of the five members of the London gold market, who meet twice daily
to establish a London fixing price for gold. This price provides a reference point
for world-wide dealings in gold. Although much interest centres upon the
fixings, active dealing takes place throughout the day. With the opening in 1982
of the London Gold Futures Market, the only one in the European time zone,
futures dealings in the metal around the world are now possible 24 hours a day.
Britain remains the principal international centre for transactions in a large
number of commodities, although most of the sales negotiated in London relate
to consignments which never pass through the ports of Britain. The need for
close links with sources of finance and with shipping and insurance services
often determined the location of these markets in the City of London. There are
also futures markets in cocoa, coffee, grains (wheat and barley), rubber, soya
bean meal and oil, sugar, wool and non-ferrous metals (aluminium, copper,
lead, nickel, silver, tin and zinc), potatoes and gas oil. The markets are collabo¬
rating in the development of new arrangements to safeguard participants.
The London International Financial Futures Exchange began trading on the
floor of the Royal Exchange in late 1982. Some 260 banks and other financial
institutions are members of the market, which allows parties affected by
movements in interest rates or exchange rates to reduce their vulnerability.
Trading takes place in financial instruments of differing maturities and deno¬
minated in a number of currencies.
19 Overseas Trade
Although small in area and accounting for under 1 • 5 per cent of the world’s
population, Britain is the fifth largest trading nation in the world—and, as a
member of the European Community, part of the world’s largest trading area,
which accounts for about one-third of all trade.
Overseas trade has been of vital importance to the economy for hundreds of
years, and especially since the mid-nineteenth century, when the rapid growth
of industry, commerce and shipping was accompanied by Britain’s develop¬
ment as an international trading centre. Exports are equivalent to about 30 per
cent of gross domestic product at factor cost. Britain is a major supplier of
machinery, vehicles, aerospace products, metal manufactures, electrical
equipment, chemicals and textiles, and a significant oil exporter. It relies upon
imports for over one-third of total consumption of foodstuffs, and for most of the
raw materials needed for its industries. Invisible trade is also of great signifi¬
cance to the economy, accounting for one-third of overseas earnings; Britain’s
net earnings from invisibles are second only to those of the United States.
VISIBLE In 1982 Britain’s exports of goods were valued at about £55,500 million and its
TRADE imports of goods at about £53,400 million (both values are free on board, defined
in Table 30, and are on a balance of payments basis, as distinct from an overseas
trade statistics basis, which for imports includes the cost of insurance and
Table 30: Exports and Imports 1977-82 (balance of payments basis)
1977
1980
1981
1982
Value (£ million)
Exports f.o.b. 31,728 47,415 50,977 55,546
Exports f.o.b. a 31,990 47,357 50,698 55,538
Imports f.o.b. 34,012 46,182 47,969 53,427
Imports c.i.f. a 36,219 49,773 51,169 56,940
Volume index (1975 = 100):
Exports 118-4 127-9 126-6 128-9
Imports 107-8 118-8 118-6 126-0
Unit value index (1975 = 100):
Exports 141-5 192-8 207-4 221-8
Imports 141-4 186-3 203-6 220-7
Terms of trade (1975 = 100) b 100-1 103-5 101-9 100-5
Source: Monthly Review of External Trade Statistics.
a On an overseas trade statistics basis.
b Export unit value index as a percentage of import unit value index.
Notes: f.o.b. = free on board, that is all costs accruing up to the time of placing the goods on board the exporting
vessel having been paid by the seller.
c.i.f. = cost, insurance and freight, that is including shipping, insurance and other expenses incurred in
the delivery of goods as far as their place of importation in Britain. Some of these expenses
represent earnings by companies resident in Britain and are more appropriate to the invisibles
account.
OVERSEAS TRADE
327
Commodity
Composition
freight, and for both exports and imports includes returned goods). Following a
decline in the volume of exports in 1981, there was a recovery in 1982 when the
volume rose by nearly 2 per cent (in value terms by 9 per cent). Imports also rose
in 1982, 6 per cent by volume and 11 per cent by value.
Britain has traditionally been an importer of food and raw materials and an
exporter of manufactured goods. In recent years manufactured goods have
accounted for a growing proportion of imports but a declining proportion of
exports. They are still responsible, however, for the bulk of exports (see Table
31). By far the most important group is machinery and transport equipment,
which in 1982 accounted for 33 per cent of total exports. Machinery alone
accounted for 23 per cent: mechanical machinery 14 per cent and electrical
machinery 9 per cent. Chemicals accounted for 11 per cent. The greater impor¬
tance of North Sea oil exports is reflected in the recent rapid rise in the share of
fuels in total exports, from 4 per cent in 1975 to 20 per cent in 1982. Sectors
which have become relatively less important include passenger motor cars and
textiles, the latter accounting for 2 per cent of exports in 1982, compared with 5
per cent in 1970.
Recent changes in Britain’s import pattern are similar to those which have
affected other major industrialised countries, although to a lesser degree. There
has been a large rise in the share of finished manufactures and semi-finished
Table 31: Commodity Composition of Trade 1982 a
Exports (f.o.b.) Imports (c.i.f.)
£ million per cent £ million per cent
N on-manuf actures:
Food, beverages and tobacco
Basic materials
Fuels
Manufactured goods:
Semi-manufactures, of which
Chemicals
Textiles
Iron and steel
Non-ferrous metals
Metal manufactures
Other
Finished manufactures, of
which
Machinery
Road vehicles
Clothing and footwear
Scientific instruments and
photographic apparatus
Other manufactures
Miscellaneous
16,482
3,947
1,341
11,193
37,316
14,061
6,119
1,191
1,294
1,245
1,395
2,817
23,256
12,957
3,108
956
1,812
4,423
1,740
29-7
71
2-4
20-2
67'
25
11
2
2
2
2
5
41 ■
23
5-
1 ■
3-3
80
3-1
18,582
7,251
3.930
7,401
37,083
14,042
4,181
1.930
1,369
1.496
950
4,116
23,041
10,871
4.497
1,969
1,815
3,889
1,275
32-6
12-7
6-9
130
65-
24
7
3
2
2
1 ■
7-
40-5
19-1
7-9
3-5
2-2
Total
55,538
100 56,940
100
Source: Monthly Review of External Trade Statistics.
a On an overseas trade statistics basis.
Note. Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
328
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Geographical
Distribution of
Trade
INVISIBLE
TRANSACTIONS
goods, particularly the former, which accounted for over 40 per cent of imports
in 1982, as against 11 per cent in 1960. Since 1962 imports of semi¬
manufactures have formed a larger part of the total import bill than basic mater¬
ials, reflecting the tendency for producer countries to undertake processing of
primary products up to the semi-finished and occasionally finished stage. The
decline in the proportion of food imports reflects the increasing extent to which
demand for food has been met by domestic agriculture and the smaller share of
expenditure devoted to food.
About three-quarters of Britain’s exports and imports are with other developed
countries (see diagram below). In the last 30 years trade with the rest of Western
Europe has become increasingly important, representing nearly 60 per cent of
Britain’s trade in 1982, compared with about 30 per cent in 1950.
European Community countries account for six of the top ten export markets
and for six of the ten leading suppliers of goods to Britain (see Table 32), with the
Federal Republic of Germany being the largest single supplier. Exports to North
America rose in 1982 by 17 per cent and the United States is Britain’s largest
single export market, taking 13-4 per cent of British exports (valued at £7,457
million) in 1982. Recent features of Britain’s trade have been a decline in the
proportion of trade with other Commonwealth countries, the emergence of oil¬
exporting countries as a major market for British exports and a rapid increase in
imports from Japan (which have more than doubled since 1978).
Britain has nearly always earned a surplus from its invisible transactions and
there has been a surplus every year since 1948. Transactions fall into three main
groups: services (receipts and payments arising from services, as distinct from
goods, supplied to and received from overseas residents); interest, profits and
Geographical Distribution of Trade 1982
Exports
Total to
developed
countries
74%
European
Community
42%
Rest of Western
Europe
12%
North America
15%
Other developed countries g0/0
Imports
European
Community
44%
Total from
developed
countries
81%
Rest of Western
Europe
15%
North America
14%
Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
OVERSEAS TRADE
329
Table 32: Principal British Markets and Suppliers 1982 a
Main markets
Value
£ million
Share
per cent
Exports
United States
Federal Republic of Germany
Netherlands
France
Irish Republic
Belgium/Luxembourg
Italy
Sweden
Saudi Arabia
Nigeria
Imports
Federal Republic of Germany
United States
Netherlands
France
Belgium/Luxembourg
Italy
Japan
Norway
Irish Republic
Sweden
7,457
5,415
4,653
4,486
2,890
2,298
2,023
1,935
1,362
1,225
7,414
6,638
4,475
4,269
2,862
2,745
2,658
2,023
2,000
1,673
13
9
8
8'
5 •
4 •
3'
3'
2-
2-
130
11-7
Source: Monthly Review of External Trade Statistics
a On an overseas trade statistics basis. Exports are f.o.b., imports c.i.f.
dividends (income arising from outward and inward investment and other capi¬
tal transactions): and transfers between Britain and other countries. In 1982
there was a surplus of £3,309 million on invisible earnings (see Table 33).
Gross earnings from invisible exports amounted to £31,724 million in 1982,
equivalent to 57 per cent of the earnings from visible exports. Earnings from
services rose by 4 per cent in 1982 to £ 17,582 million, although in volume terms
this represented a fall of about 2 per cent. Debits, at £ 13,738 million, were 9 per
cent higher by value but virtually unchanged in volume terms. The surplus on
services fell to £3,844 million in 1982, with deteriorations in the sea transport,
civil aviation, travel and government accounts being only partly offset by an
increase of 6 per cent in net earnings from financial and other services.
The surplus on interest, profits and dividends rose by 25 per cent from £ 1,257
million in 1981 to £1,577 million in 1982, the general government deficit being
greatly outweighed by the surplus of the private sector and public corporations.
Earnings on portfolio investment (investment in overseas securities) rose by
about two-thirds, reflecting the growth in overseas investment following the
abolition of exchange controls in 1979, while net interest on borrowing and lend¬
ing in foreign currencies by British financial institutions increased by well over
40 per cent. Credits from external lending in sterling by British banks rose by
nearly one-third.
The deficit on transfers in 1982 was £2,112 million, largely on government
transactions (mainly contributions to the European Community, contributions
and subscriptions to international organisations, and bilateral aid).
330
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
COMMERCIAL
POLICY
General
Agreement on
Tariffs and
Trade
Table 33: Britain’s Invisible Transactions 1982
£ million
Credits
Debits
Balance
Services: 17,582 13,738 + 3,844
Private sector and public
corporations, of which 17,147 12,499 +4,648
Sea transport 3,565 3,908 - 343
Civil aviation 2,471 2,080 + 391
Travel 3,184 3,650 - 466
Financial servicesa 2,145 — +2,145
Other 5,782 2,861 +2,921
General government 435 1,239 - 804
Interest, profits and dividends: 10,991 9,414 +1,577
Private sector and public
corporations 10,-175 7,798 +2,377
General government 816 1,616 - 800
Transfers: 3,151 5,263 -2,112
Private 994 1,262 - 268
General government 2,157 4,001 -1,844
Total invisible transactions
31,724
28,415
+ 3,309
Source: United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1983 Edition.
The figure is obtained net of overseas payments, and similar earnings in Britain by overseas financial institu¬
tions are negligible. For these reasons the item appears only as a credit entry.
Britain remains committed to the open trading system, and to this end has
taken a leading part in the activities of such organisations as the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), the International Monetary Fund
(IMF), the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) (see
p 86). Since joining the European Community in 1973, Britain has conducted
many of these activities in collaboration with its Community partners. Britain
also participates in the development of the Community’s commercial policy.
The Community’s common customs tariff is, on average, at a similar level to the
tariffs of other major industrial countries.
Protective tariffs have been reduced as a result of negotiations held under the
auspices of the GATT. These also reduced other barriers to trade and discrimi¬
nation in international commerce. In the ‘Tokyo Round’ of the GATT Multi¬
lateral T rade N egotiations (1973-79)a number of agreements dealing with both
tariff and non-tariff barriers to trade were concluded. However, the world
recession since 1979 (which has depressed the levels of production and interna¬
tional trade) has intensified pressures to adopt protectionist measures. At the
ministerial meeting of the GATT held in November 1982 contracting parties
reaffirmed their commitment to maintain their existing obligations and to
strengthen their observance in future. They agreed to make determined efforts
to ensure that their trade policies and measures were consistent with the
GATT’s principles and rules, and to resist protectionist pressures in formulat¬
ing and implementing national trade policies. The contracting parties also
OVERSEAS TRADE
331
Community
Trade
Agreements
CONTROLS ON
TRADE
Import Controls
Export Controls
agreed to refrain from taking or maintaining any measures inconsistent with
the GATT and to promote the liberalisation and expansion of trade.
With the exception of transitional tariff arrangements for certain products from
Greece, all tariffs on trade between Britain and the other European Community
countries have been eliminated. Britain applies the common customs tariff to
all countries neither belonging to, nor having any special arrangement with, the
Community, subject to special arrangements for some industrial materials.
The Community has reciprocal preferential trading agreements with the
European Free Trade Association (EFTA) countries (Austria, Finland, Iceland,
Norway, Portugal, Sweden and Switzerland), Cyprus, Israel, Malta, Spain and
Turkey, and non-reciprocal agreements with Algeria, Morocco, Tunisia, Egypt,
Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, Yugoslavia, and a group of African, Caribbean and
Pacific countries (see below). Tariff preference is also given to developing coun¬
tries (under the Generalised Scheme of Preferences), the Faroe Islands and the
overseas countries and territories of member states.
Former Commonwealth preferential agreements have been phased out and
replaced, in the case of a number of developing Commonwealth countries in
Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific, by the trade provisions of the Convention
of Lome which came into effect in 1975. This was succeeded by a second conven¬
tion, Lome II, in 1981. A number of non-Commonwealth developing countries
within the same geographical area are also signatories.
Britain maintains few restrictions on its international trade. Most goods may be
imported freely and only a narrow range of goods is subject to any sort of export
control.
In accordance with its international obligations under the GATT and to the
European Community, Britain has progressively removed almost all quantita¬
tive restrictions imposed on economic grounds. Only some 7 per cent of
Britain’s imports are subject to any form of non-tariff restraint and about 80 per
cent of imports are admitted into Britain duty free. The few remaining quantita¬
tive restrictions mainly affect textile goods (in view of the rapid contraction of
the domestic textile industry) and are thus covered by the Multi-Fibre Arrange¬
ment (a series of agreements covering international trade in textiles, designed
to balance the interests of both exporting and importing countries). All quanti¬
tative restrictions have been removed from imports of goods of Community ori¬
gin, with the exception of certain internationally recognised restrictions oper¬
ated by the Department of Trade and Industry on a few goods such as firearms,
ammunition and radioactive materials. Other government departments oper¬
ate certain restrictions on non-economic grounds (on goods such as animals
and plants and some of their derivatives, controlled drugs, explosives, certain
‘citizens band’ radios and pornographic material) for reasons of health, safety,
conservation or social policy.
The great majority of British exports are not subject to any government control
or direction. However, there are controls governing exports of military and stra¬
tegic significance which also apply to certain metals, metal products (including
certain British coins), waste and scrap; on cattle, sheep, swine, goats, horses,
asses and mules, for humanitarian purposes; on salmon and trout, to inhibit
out-of-season fishing; on cattle, swine and certain meat exported to another
member state of the European Community, for health certification purposes; on
endangered species of animals and plants and some of their derivatives, in
accordance with international agreements; on photographic material over 60
years old and valued at £200 or more per item and other articles over 50 years
332
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
GOVERNMENT
SERVICES
British Over¬
seas Trade
Board
Export Credit
Insurance
BALANCE OF
PAYMENTS
old, to restrict the export of items of national importance; on controlled drugs;
on British spirits (beverages) in casks of less than 40 litres; and on Common
Agricultural Policy products.
The Government assists exporters by creating conditions favourable to the
export trade and by providing information and advice about opportunities for
trade in other countries and credit insurance facilities. Export promotion is also
assisted by the Scottish Council (Development and Industry), the Development
Corporation for Wales and in Northern Ireland by the Department of Economic
Development.
The British Overseas Trade Board (BOTB) directs Britain’s official export pro¬
motion services, which include the provision of export intelligence assistance to
British exporters in appointing agents and locating potential customers, help at
trade fairs and other promotional events overseas, and support for firms partici¬
pating in trade missions. It includes representatives of commerce and industry,
the Trades Union Congress, the Department of Trade and Industry and the
Foreign and Commonwealth Office and operates under the general authority of
the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, who is the president.
Exporters wanting assistance and advice can consult the offices of the BOTB
throughout Britain and, through these offices, the commercial posts of the
British Diplomatic Service overseas.
The Export Credits Guarantee Department (ECGD) provides credit insurance
for about a third of the country’s export trade and insures exports of both goods
and services. The main risks covered include insolvency or protracted default of
the buyer, governmental action which stops the British exporter receiving
payment, new import restrictions, and war or civil disturbance in the buyer’s
country. Cover may commence from the date of shipment or from the date of
contract (at higher premiums).
This insurance may be supplemented by unconditional guarantees of
repayment given direct to banks financing exporters, whether in sterling or in
foreign currencies. Alternatively, for contracts over £1 million the ECGD will
guarantee loans direct to overseas buyers enabling them to pay on cash terms,
or ‘lines of credit’ similarly covering an agreed buying programme of an over¬
seas country. The banks provide finance against these guarantees. The ECGD
is also prepared to support the issue of performance bonds in the commercial
market in respect of cash or near-cash contracts worth over £250,000.
Investment insurance is provided for new British investment overseas
against expropriation, war damage and restrictions on remittances.
The balance of payments statistics record transactions between residents of
Britain and non-residents. The balance on current account shows whether
Britain has a surplus of income over expenditure.
Traditionally Britain has had a deficit on visible trade and a surplus on invisi¬
ble trade, but in 1980, 1981 and 1982 visible trade was also in surplus (see Table
34). In the previous 20 years there was only one other year, 1971, in which a
visible trade surplus was recorded. In 1982 the current account surplus amoun¬
ted to £5,428 million and the surpluses for 1980-82 are the three highest ever
recorded for Britain’s balance of payments. They indicate the effect on visible
trade of Britain’s net self-sufficiency in oil, with a substantial surplus on oil
trade emerging in the last two years. Total investment and other capital trans¬
actions resulted in a net outflow of £2,851 million from Britain, partially reflec¬
ting the current account surplus.
OVERSEAS TRADE
333
Capital Flows
External Assets
and Liabilities
A description of visible trade and invisible transactions is given on
pp 326-30 and capital transactions are described below.
Table 34: Britain’s Balance of Payments 1972-82
£ million
1972 1977
1980
1981
1982
Visible trade balance
Invisible transactions
balance
-748 -2,284 +1,233 +3,008 +2,119
+ 971 +2,338 +2,002 +3,539 +3,309
Current balance
Investment and other
capital transactions
Allocation of Special
Drawing Rights
Official financing:
Net transactions with
overseas monetary
authorities
Foreign currency borrowing
(net) by the Government
and public sector
Official reserves a
Balancing item
+ 223 ' +54 +3,235 +6,547 +5,428
-673 +4,166 -1,887 -7,594 -2,851
+ 124 — +180 +158 —
+ 449 +1,113 -140 -145
- 163
— +1,114
+ 692 -9,588
-815 +3,141
941 - 1,587 + 26
291 +2,419 +1,421
156 +202 -3,861
Source: United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1983 Edition.
a Drawings on (+ (/additions to (-).
Britain’s exchange controls were abolished during 1979 and residents are free to
acquire foreign currency for any purpose including direct and portfolio invest¬
ment overseas. Controls on the lending of sterling abroad have also been
removed and non-residents may freely acquire sterling for any purpose. Gold
may be freely bought and sold. The abolition of exchange controls means that
Britain meets its full obligations on capital movements under the OECD Code
on Capital Movements and under European Community directives. The
Government welcomes both inward and outward investment. Outward invest¬
ment helps to develop markets for British exports, while providing earnings in
the form of interest payments, profits and dividends. Foreign investment in
Britain often helps to increase the efficiency of industry by introducing new
technological developments.
In 1982 direct investment overseas by British (non-oil) companies was £2,638
million and investment by oil companies and miscellaneous investment was
£1,960 million, while British residents’ portfolio investment overseas totalled
£6,170 million, considerably higher than in 1979. The inflow of direct, portfolio
and other investment into Britain amounted to £3,459 million. An analysis of
investment and other capital transactions is given in Table 35.
At the end of 1982 Britain’s aggregate identified external assets were valued at
£140,850 million1: £122,787 million belonging to the private sector (£90,579
million of investment overseas and £32,208 million of banking and commercial
' The significance of any inventory of Britain’s aggregate external assets and liabilities is limited
because a variety of claims and obligations are included that are very dissimilar in kind, in degree
of liquidity and in method of valuation.
334
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Table 35: Analysis of Investment and Other Capital Transactions
1980-82 a
£ million
1980 1981 1982
Overseas investment in Britain:
British public sector
British private sector
British private investment overseas
Official long-term capital
Import credit b
Export credit b
Foreign currency borrowing or
lending abroad by British banks
Changes in external sterling
liabilities c
External sterling lending by
British banks d
Other external borrowing or
lending
Other transactions
+ 589 +188 +320
+ 4,651 +3,174 + 3,139
-8,146 -10,671 -10,768
-91 -336 -337
-254 +122 -224
-902 -969 -1,165
+ 2,054 +1,462 +4,173
+ 3,820 +2,756 +4,572
-2,500 -2,954 -3,243
-865 -467 +432
-243 +101 +250
Total -1,887 -7,594 -2,851
Source: United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1983 Edition.
a Assets: increase (- )/decrease (+); liabilities: increase (+ )/decrease (-). Excludes official financing.
b Excluding trade credit between related firms; after deducting advance and progress payments to suppliers.
' Exchange reserves and other external banking and money market liabilities in sterling.
d Excluding credit for exports from Britain.
claims) and £18,063 million to the public sector including official reserves (gold,
convertible currencies and IMF Special Drawing Rights) estimated at £12,939
million.
At the end of 1982 direct private investment overseas (investment in
branches, subsidiaries and associated companies), excluding oil, totalled
£39,459 million, portfolio investment £37,900 million and investment by oil
companies £11,500 million. At the end of 1978 (the latest data available: figures
for 1981 are being compiled) over three-quarters of direct investment (including
investment by oil companies) was in other developed countries, with North
America and the European Community each having about one quarter. The
main individual countries were the United States (which has about 21 per cent of
Britain’s overseas direct investment), Australia (13 per cent) and the Federal
Republic of Germany (7 per cent). Just under half of direct investment is in
manufacturing units, 13 per cent in distribution and just over 40 per cent in
other activities.
Britain’s aggregate identified external liabilities were valued at £98,442 mil¬
lion at the end of 1982. Overseas investment in the private sector accounted for
£35,651 million, comprising £19,081 million of direct investment (excluding
that of oil and insurance companies), £6,700 million of portfolio holdings of
British company securities and £9,870 million of investment by overseas oil
companies. At the end of 1978 investment from developed countries accounted
for virtually all of overseas direct investment (excluding insurance) in Britain,
with 60 per cent originating in the United States and 23 per cent in the European
Community. Slightly under 50 per cent was in manufacturing industry.
20
Government
and Scientific
Research
Promotion
of Science and
Technology
Britain has for centuries encouraged research and innovation, and its record of
achievement in relation to size of population is in many respects unsurpassed.
This record has been maintained throughout the twentieth century. For
example, fundamental contributions to modern molecular genetics were made
by the working out of the structure of the molecule of deoxyribonucleic acid
(DNA) by Professor Francis Crick, Professor Maurice Wilkins, and an American
colleague, James Watson, at Cambridge University in 1952. A more recent
achievement was the research carried out by Mr Patrick Steptoe and Dr Robert
Edwards which made possible the birth of the world’s first test-tube baby in
Britain in 1978. Other notable contributions in recent years have been made by
Professor Dennis Gabor on holography (the production of three-dimensional
images using lasers). Dr Brian Josephson on superconductivity (abnormally
high electrical conductivity at low temperatures), Professor Stephen Hawking
on black holes (hypothetical regions of space), Sir Martin Ryle and Professor
Antony He wish on radio-astrophysics, Professor Frederick Sanger on molecu¬
lar biology, Dr Cesar Milstein on monoclonal antibodies and Dr Godfrey
Hounsfield on computer-assisted tomography (for medical diagnosis), among
others. Nobel prizes for science have been won by 66 British citizens, a number
exceeded only by the United States.
The Government keeps under review facilities for training scientists and
ensures that adequate research is devoted to matters of national interest, which
include defence, industrial innovation, environmental protection, use and
conservation of natural resources, the provision of good food, shelter and
energy and of efficient transport and communications.
Total expenditure in Britain on scientific research and development in 1981
was some £5,800 million, or 2 • 3 per cent of the gross domestic product. About
half was provided by industrial enterprises, with a significant contribution also
being made by private endowments, trusts and charities. The other half was
financed by the Government, which carries out roughly a quarter of Britain’s
research and development in its own establishments. Government finance for
research and development also went to industry and the universities.
Responsibility for basic civil science in Britain rests with the Secretary of State
for Education and Science, and responsibility for technology mainly with the
Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, but in all cases the Prime Minister has
overall responsibility. Other government departments are concerned with
research and development related to their functions. Government responsi¬
bility for space activities is undertaken by the Secretary of State for Trade and
336
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Expenditure
The
Department of
Education and
Science
The Advisory
Board for the
Research
Councils
Industry, the Secretary of State for Education and Science (through the Science
and Engineering Research Council, see p 337), and the Secretary of State for
Defence according to the nature of the project. Applied research and develop¬
ment is undertaken in accordance with the ‘customer-contractor principle’
under which government departments, as customers, define their research
requirements. The work is undertaken by contractors who may be, for
example, government laboratories, research councils, research associations,
industry or the universities. Departments with major technological needs
generally have a Chief Scientist’s organisation, which helps to formulate
requirements, select the most suitable contractors and co-operate with them to
obtain the best value for money.
Advice on scientific and technological matters is provided by the Advisory
Board for the Research Councils, the Advisory Council for Applied Research
and Development, and a committee of Chief Scientists and Permanent
Secretaries. These bodies ensure that scientific questions are brought before
ministers as appropriate and that scientific priorities reflect those of the
Government as a whole.
Total government expenditure on research and development in 1983-84 is
estimated (at outturn prices) to be some £3,800 million. The largest depart¬
mental research and development budget is that of the Ministry of Defence for
defence equipment (see also p 94). The main civil departments involved are the
Department of Education and Science, which supports the research councils
and the universities; the Department of Trade and Industry; the Department of
Energy; the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and the Department of
Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland; and the Department of the Environment
and the Department of Transport. More details of the kinds of research carried
out are given in the relevant chapters.
The Department of Education and Science discharges its responsibilities for
basic and applied civil science mainly through the five research councils to
which it allocates funds from its science budget (£517 million in 1983 - 84). The
councils and their allocations are: the Science and Engineering Research
Council (£254 • 5 million), the Medical Research Council (£113-7 million), the
Natural Environment Research Council (£62 • 5 million), the Agricultural and
Food Research Council (£46 million) and the Social Science Research Council
(£22-4 million). Science budget grants are also made to the British Museum
(Natural History) and to the Royal Society. The allocations provide support for
research in the form of grants and contracts to universities, polytechnics and
elsewhere, research units and other establishments of the research councils,
postgraduate support and subscriptions to international scientific organi¬
sations. The Department is also responsible for some aspects of international
scientific relations (see p 344) and helps to co-ordinate government policy
regarding scientific and technical information.
The Department is also the main source of funding for the universities, whose
allocations are determined by the University Grants Committee. Although
individual universities decide upon the allocation of their resources between
teaching and research, the proportion committed to research is generally
believed to be between 25 and 30 per cent.
The Advisory Board for the Research Councils advises the Secretary of State on
civil science, particularly with regard to the research council system, on the
support of postgraduate students, on the proper balance between national and
international scientific activities, and on the allocation of the science budget
among research councils and other bodies. It also promotes close liaison
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
337
between the councils and users of their research. Its membership includes the
chairman or secretary of each of the research councils, the chairman of the
University Grants Committee, the Chief Scientists from departments with a
major interest in the work of the research councils, the Chief Scientific Adviser,
Cabinet Office, and independent members drawn from universities, industry
and the Royal Society.
THE RESEARCH Each of the five research councils is an autonomous body established under
COUNCILS Royal Charter with membership drawn from the universities, professions,
industry and the Government. They conduct research through their own
research establishments and by supporting selected research in universities
and other higher education establishments. As well as being financed from the
science budget, two of the councils receive commissions from departments
under the customer-contractor principle. In 1983 - 84 the Agricultural and Food
Research Council is expected to derive about half of its total income from
commissions and the Natural Environment Research Council about a third.
Science and
Engineering
Research
Council
The Science and Engineering Research Council (SERC) supports basic research
in astronomy, geophysics, the biological sciences, chemistry, mathematics,
physics, and engineering and applied sciences, in furthering its primary
purpose of sustaining standards of postgraduate education and research in the
universities and polytechnics. A large proportion of SERC’s resources is
devoted to the provision of research grants to help academic staff to carry out
fundamental research, either in their own institutions or in the Council’s
research establishments or elsewhere; the encouragement of active collabor¬
ation between higher education establishments and industry, particularly in
areas of national importance; the award of studentships to suitable graduates
for training in methods of research or a specialised branch of science or
engineering of importance to British industry; and the award of fellowships to
promising scientists or engineers to enable them to carry out their own
independent research programmes.
Research SERC maintains four research establishments: the Daresbury Laboratory at
Establishments Warrington (Cheshire), the Royal Greenwich Observatory at Herstmonceux
(East Sussex), the Royal Observatory, Edinburgh, and the Rutherford Appleton
Laboratory at Chilton (Oxfordshire). The establishments are centres of
specialised research, and are also used for the development and operation of
central experimental facilities beyond the resources of an academic institution.
They provide support for scientists whose research needs access to facilities run
by international research organisations, such as the powerful particle accelera¬
tors at the European Organisation for Nuclear Research (CERN) near Geneva,
Switzerland, and the high-flux neutron source at the Institut Laue-Langevin
(ILL) at Grenoble, France.
International SERC provides national contributions to CERN, the civil science programme of
Collaboration the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation, the Anglo-Australian Telescope, and
the European Incoherent Scatter Facility; and part of Britain’s contribution to
the European Space Agency (see p 344). It also contributes to, and shares with
its French and Federal German partners, the control of the ILL nuclear reactor
at Grenoble. In addition, SERC encourages scientists and engineers to initiate
or extend collaborative projects with colleagues overseas, particularly in
Europe, by using its existing fellowships, studentships and grant schemes.
Engineering Developments in engineering research and training geared to the needs of
industry are major concerns of SERC. Some special programmes are being
338
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Astronomy
Nuclear Physics
Natural
Sciences
supported within a general effort to develop research and postgraduate training
in university and polytechnic engineering departments. Among subjects
receiving major support are information technology (including software engi¬
neering, intelligent knowledge-based systems and device fabrication), radio
communications, industrial robotics, the application of numerical control to
manufacturing, biotechnology, marine technology, polymer engineering,
energy and materials, particulate technology, medical engineering, combus¬
tion engines and coal technology. The Teaching Company Scheme, jointly
sponsored by SERC and the Department of Trade and Industry, supports
collaborative ventures between academic engineering departments and
industrial companies to improve their manufacturing methods and perform¬
ance. A network to provide an interactive computing facility to universities has
been built up and is serviced at Chilton.
Astronomy uses both ground-based techniques, such as optical and radio
telescopes, and space-based methods (see p 345). Optical astronomy is carried
out in university departments and, within SERC, at the Royal Greenwich
Observatory and the Royal Observatory, Edinburgh. Instruments include the
Royal Greenwich Observatory’s Isaac Newton Telescope, of diameter 2 • 5
metres, which has been installed on the island of La Palma in the Canary Islands
(the 4 • 2-metre Herschel Telescope, destined for La Palma, is under construc¬
tion); the Anglo-Australian Telescope, of diameter 3 • 9 metres, at Siding Spring,
Australia, in a project with the Australian Government; a 1 • 2-metre Schmidt
telescope on the same site; optical telescopes operated by the South African
Astronomical Observatory, to which SERC contributes; and a 3 • 8-metre
infra-red telescope, the largest telescope in the world designed specifically to
make infra-red observations, at Mauna Kea, Hawaii. Also on Hawaii SERC has
under construction a special 15-metre radio telescope for observing
wavelengths of less than a millimetre. Cambridge and Manchester Universities
are the main centres for research in radio astronomy with substantial support
from SERC.
The Starlink network of computer systems, centred at Chilton and located at
many centres of astronomical research in Britain, provides and co-ordinates
image processing and data reduction facilities for use by British astronomers.
Chilton also houses the operations control centre for the Infrared Astronomical
Satellite (IRAS), a joint project of SERC, the United States National Aeronautics
and Space Administration (NASA) and the Netherlands Space Agency.
Launched in 1983, IRAS has already detected five new comets and areas where
stars are being formed.
SERC establishments concerned with the provision of facilities for university
research in nuclear physics are at Chilton, which supports university teams
engaged in experiments in particle physics at the European Organisation for
Nuclear Research (CERN) and other overseas centres, and the Daresbury
Laboratory, where a 20 million-volt tandem accelerator for research into
nuclear structure began operating in 1982. Projects using these and other
facilities are funded through research grants to universities.
Support is provided for high-quality research in biological and natural sciences,
mathematics and science-based archaeology. Where experimental facilities are
too expensive to be provided for individual universities and polytechnics,
central facilities have been provided. For example, since 1980 the Daresbury
Laboratory has operated a synchrotron storage ring which provides high
intensity electromagnetic radiation used in a wide range of experiments in
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
339
The Technical
Change Centre
Medical
Research
Council
Natural
Environment
Research
Council
materials science, surface physics, crystallography and molecular biology.
Other central facilities include a high-powered laser facility at Chilton, which is
used to study plasmas, and a spallation neutron source being built, also at
Chilton, to provide a pulsed beam of neutrons.
The Technical Change Centre, set up in 1980 and funded jointly by SERC, the
Social Science Research Council and the Leverhulme Trust, conducts and
promotes study and research into the choice, management and acceptability of
technical change with relevance to the national economy.
The Medical Research Council (MRC) is the main government agency for the
support of biomedical research. Its major research establishments are the
National Institute for Medical Research at Mill Hill, London, which carries out
fundamental research relevant to medicine, the Clinical Research Centre at
Northwick Park Hospital, London, and the Laboratory of Molecular Biology at
Cambridge. The Council also has over 50 research units, mostly located in
university departments, medical schools and hospitals in Britain. In addition to
the work it supports in its own establishments, the Council provides further
support for research through grants to workers in universities, polytechnics
and other centres, and through awards granted for those undertaking research
training.
The MRC is assisted by four advisory boards: the Neurobiology and Mental
Health Board; the Cell Biology and Disorders Board; the Physiological Systems
and Disorders Board; and the Tropical Medicine Research Board.
The Natural Environment Research Council (NERC) is responsible for encou¬
raging, planning and executing research in the physical and biological sciences
relating to man’s natural environment and its resources. The work is broadly
divided into groups defined as: the Solid Earth (its physical properties and
mineral resources); Seas and Oceans (their behaviour and living and mineral
resources); Inland Waters (their behaviour and living resources); Terrestrial
Environments (wildlife communities and their resources); Atmosphere (its
structure and interactions); and a number of interdisciplinary studies including
pollution and the physical and biological properties of the Antarctic environ¬
ment. Research programmes which NERC is planning to expand include those
on geological work in connection with deep drilling and mapping, which is
important for future mineral and energy exploration; new means of insect pest
control using viruses harmless to man; the climate; remote sensing by satellite,
for resource and ecological surveys; and modelling the behaviour of British
estuaries. NERC is also involved extensively in contract research and is able to
provide public authorities, industry and commerce with experienced personnel
and material facilities for such work across the spectrum of environmental
science.
The Council’s research institutes are: the British Antarctic Survey, the
Institute of Geological Sciences, the Institute of Hydrology, the Institute of
Marine Biochemistry, the Institute for Marine Environmental Research, the
Institute of Oceanographic Sciences, the Institute of Terrestrial Ecology, the
Institute of Virology and the Sea Mammal Research Unit. The Council also
operates the Research Vessel Services and maintains a central computing
service in support of all its institutes.
Research institutes aided by council grants are; the Freshwater Biological
Association, the Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom, the
Scottish Marine Biological Association, the Unit of Comparative Plant Ecology
and some university units.
340
Agricultural
and Food
Research
Council
Social Science
Research
Council
UNIVERSITY
RESEARCH
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Agricultural and Food Research Council (AFRC) has eight research
institutes under its direct control: the Animal Breeding Research Organisation,
the Institute for Research on Animal Diseases, the Institute of Animal
Physiology, the Food Research Institute, the Letcombe Laboratory, dealing
with the growth of crops in relation to soil conditions and cultivation, the Meat
Research Institute, the Poultry Research Centre, and the Weed Research
Organisation. There are five AFRC units associated with universities and one
computing centre, in Harpenden (Hertfordshire). The AFRC is also responsible
for 15 independent state-aided agricultural research institutes, notably the
Rothamsted Experimental Station, at Harpenden, which is the largest agricul¬
tural research institute in Britain (and was the first in the world to be
established, in 1843), and deals with research on soils, fertilisers, crop
physiology and crop husbandry; and the National Institute of Agricultural
Engineering, at Silsoe (Bedfordshire). There are also seven independent
institutes in Scotland financed by the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries
for Scotland with advice from the AFRC on their scientific programmes, staffing
and equipment.
The AFRC is proceeding with plans for new initiatives in the growth areas of
science related to agriculture and food, especially in human food and nutrition
research. These growth areas may be summarised as: human nutritional
studies, including cell biology and food toxicology; biopolymers in food science;
scientific and engineering aspects of food processing; microbiological
approaches to food preservation, quality and safety; and biotechnological
methods of food production.
The Social Science Research Council’s (SSRC) interest covers the broad areas of
social affairs, education and human development, industry and employment,
economic affairs, environment and planning, and government and law. It
sponsors a number of designated research centres and initiates research into
such topics as industrial policy, energy policy, population studies, central and
local government, young people in society, and inner city areas. Grants are
provided for research projects at universities and other institutions, and awards
made to postgraduate students. The SSRC also has five research units: the
Industrial Relations Research Unit; the Cambridge Group for the History of
Population and Social Structure; the Research Unit on Ethnic Relations; the
Centre for Socio-legal Studies; and the Social and Applied Psychology Unit (run
jointly with the Medical Research Council).
Of the total estimated university expenditure on scientific research in the
academic year 1981-82 (£473 • 5 million), the largest government contribution
(£263 • 8 million) was through the University Grants Committee.
Scientific research in the universities and other institutions of higher
education is also supported through the research councils. This support takes
two forms. First, nearly two-thirds of the postgraduate students in science and
technology receive maintenance awards from the research councils, through
postgraduate studentships. These awards are in some cases for periods of up to
three years of training in research work and in others for shorter periods for
advanced studies. Secondly, grants and contracts are given to the universities
and other institutions by the research councils for specified projects, particu¬
larly in new or developing areas of research. The AFRC, MRC and SSRC
maintain a number of research units within universities. In addition, the
research councils provide central facilities in their own establishments for use
by university research workers. The other main channels of support for
scientific research in the universities are various government departments, the
Royal Society, industry and the independent foundations.
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
341
A number of universities in industrial centres have acquired outstanding
reputations in studies relating to their local industries, and on a national scale
close relationships are fostered between the universities, industries and the
Government in numerous joint projects. Britain has more than 20 science
parks constructed or planned. These are sites usually near universities
containing science-based industries and designed to facilitate commercial
developments in advanced technology through collaboration between uni¬
versity and industrial scientists and technologists.
Charitable foundations sponsoring research in Britain include: the Cancer
Research Campaign, the Chester Beatty Institute for Cancer Research, the Ciba
Foundation, the Imperial Cancer Research Fund, the Institute for Cancer
Research, the Leverhulme Foundation, the Nuffield Foundation, the Wellcome
Trust and the Wolfson Foundation.
PROFESSIONAL There are numerous technical institutions and professional associations, many
INSTITUTIONS of which promote their own disciplines or are interested in the education and
professional well-being of their members. The Council of Science and Tech-
nology Institutes is a federal body with 15 member institutes representing,
among others, biologists, chemists, mathematicians, metallurgists, physicists
and geologists.
CHARITABLE
FOUNDATIONS
THE
FELLOWSHIP
OF
ENGINEERING
THE LEARNED
SOCIETIES
Royal Society
The Fellowship of Engineering, formed from distinguished engineers in the
Royal Society and the leading chartered engineering institutions, advises on all
aspects of engineering to the Government and other relevant bodies. It also
arranges lectures, seminars and conferences on matters of national importance
in engineering. The Fellowship was incorporated by Royal Charter in 1983. Up
to 60 leading engineers from industry, the academic world and the public
service in Britain are elected each year and there were 506 Fellows in 1983.
Although today most research is conducted under other auspices, the learned
societies, of which there are more than 300, have retained their traditional
function of facilitating the spread of knowledge. The most eminent of those
concerned with science in its broadest aspects (as distinct from those societies
with specialised interests and activities) are the Royal Society, Royal Society of
Arts, Royal Institution and British Association.
The Royal Society, or, more fully, the Royal Society of London for Improving
Natural Knowledge, founded in 1660, occupies a unique place in Britain’s
scientific affairs and is equivalent to national academies of sciences in other
countries. It is the oldest such academy in the world to have enjoyed continuous
existence. There are today three main categories of Fellowship: Royal Fellows;
Foreign Members, of whom there are about 85; and the main body of Fellows
numbering about 980. Election to the Fellowship, which is for life, is restricted
to 40 persons a year. The Royal Society is governed by a council of 21 members.
The President of the Society is consulted on scientific appointments to research
councils (other than the Social Science Research Council) and Fellows serve on
most of the governmental advisory councils and committees concerned with
research.
The Royal Society recognises the highest standards of scientific and techno¬
logical achievements through its elections to the Fellowship and the award of its
medals and endowed lectureships. It awards 14 medals (not all annually)
including the Copley Medal (its highest award) and three Royal Medals, while
there are seven endowed lectureships. The Society encourages research
through the award of grants and research appointments. It administers 18
342
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Royal Society
of Arts
Royal
Institution
British
Association
research professorships, of which four are supported from private funds and the
remainderfromitsparliamentary grant. A further 11 senior research fellowships
and 106 other research fellowships are supported in British universities. Grants
for research are made from its private funds and from its parliamentary grant,
and particular funds are available for scientific investigations and expeditions,
for travel by individual scientists, for studies in the history of science and for
scientific publications. The dissemination of scientific knowledge is encou¬
raged by a programme of scientific discussion meetings and through its
publications. It has an extensive library of works relating to the history of
science. The council gives advice to the Government and other bodies on
matters relating to science and technology and their application, and study
groups on particular aspects of science are established at intervals to prepare
reports which are widely distributed to the scientific community. A number of
committees of the council, some of them jointly with other bodies, promote
improvements in education in science subjects and emphasise the importance
of the applied sciences and engineering in industry.
The international relations of the Royal Society are extensive. As the national
academy of science, it represents Britain in all but two of the 19 international
unions comprising the International Council of Scientific Unions. It is a
member of the European Science Foundation and certain other organisations,
and also plays a leading part in international scientific programmes. It has
agreements for exchange visits by scientists and co-operative research with
many academies throughout the world, and maintains informal relations to
promote scientific co-operation with many other countries; some 3,000 visits
abroad for periods ranging from a few days to two years are supported annually.
The largest formal scheme is the European Science Exchange Programme,
which provides for fellowships (usually of one year) and study visits (lasting
about two months) with 15 other countries in Western Europe.
The Royal Society of Arts (properly, the Royal Society for the Encouragement of
Arts, Manufactures and Commerce) is concerned with arts, architecture and
design, science and technology, industry and commerce, the environment and
education. Since its foundation in 1754, one of the Society’s principal objects
has been to promote the progress of all branches of practical knowledge, chiefly
by means of lectures and conferences, and by the publication of a monthly
journal designed to enable leading authorities to report on developments of
public as well as specialist interest.
The Royal Institution was founded in 1799 as a public body for facilitating the
introduction of useful mechanical inventions and improvements, and for
teaching the application of science to everyday life. Later it undertook the
‘promotion of chemical science by experiments and lectures for improving arts
and manufactures’, and ‘the diffusion and extension of useful knowledge’. Its
character, however, was largely determined by the early nineteenth-century
work of Sir Humphry Davy and Michael Faraday, who established a tradition of
research. Today the Royal Institution has extensive laboratories which under¬
take research on subjects including fast chemical kinetics, photosynthesis and
solar energy. Lectures are given on recent developments in science and other
branches of knowledge with particular emphasis on encouraging young people
to take an interest in science.
The British Association for the Advancement of Science was founded in 1831 to
promote general interest in science and its applications. One of its chief
activities is the Annual Meeting, attended by many young students as well as by
eminent scientists. In addition, the Association plans special lectures, exhi-
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
343
Zoological
Gardens
Botanical
Gardens
Scientific
Museums
bitions and discussions (some designed for young audiences), the publication of
pamphlets, the organisation of conferences, and the appointment of study
groups. The Association has 16 branches and five lectureships for young
scientists (dealing with the physical, biological and social sciences) to encou¬
rage scientists to make their activities known to wider audiences. The British
Association has made an important contribution to the development of science
by taking or recommending action to remove obstacles to the discovery and
application of scientific knowledge.
The Zoological Society of London, whose main function is as a scientific
organisation, runs the world-famous London Zoo, opened in 1828, which
occupies 14 hectares (36 acres) of Regent’s Park, London. In 1931 the Society
opened Whipsnade Park Zoo near Dunstable (Bedfordshire) where over 2,000
animals roam a 200-hectare (500-acre) park. The Society is responsible for the
Institute of Zoology, which carries out research in conservation and compara¬
tive medicine. It also organises scientific meetings and symposia for zoologists,
publishes scientific journals and maintains one of the largest zoological
libraries in the world. Other well-known zoos (of which there are some 150 in
Britain) include those at Edinburgh, Bristol, Chester, Dudley, Marwell (near
Winchester), Chessington and Jersey. There are also a number of ‘safari parks’
containing reservations of wild animals through which the public can pass in
closed motor cars.
The Royal Botanic Gardens (founded in 1759) cover 121 hectares (300 acres) at
Kew (west London) and a 187-hectare (462-acre) estate at Wakehurst Place,
Ardingly (West Sussex). They contain the largest collections of living and dried
plants in the world. The Herbarium is primarily concerned with research into
the classification of plants and the preparation of floras and plant lists as well as
the identification of about 50,000 specimens a year from overseas. A Conser¬
vation Unit gathers and provides information on endangered species of plant on
a world-wide basis. The study of plant anatomy, plant biochemistry, cytology
and genetics is undertaken in the Jodrell Laboratory at Kew. The laboratory’s
plant physiology section is based at Wakehurst Place where research is being
carried out into seed germination and storage. A wide range of living plants,
comprising some 110,000 different kinds of plant representing most plant
families, is displayed at Kew.
The Royal Botanic Garden at Edinburgh was founded in 1670. Associated
gardens are the Logan Botanic Garden at Ardwell near Stranraer, the Younger
Botanic Garden at Benmore near Dunoon, and Dawyck Garden at Stobo near
Peebles. The large collection of living plants, both out of doors and in
greenhouses, is used for taxonomic research (into plant classification).
The British Museum (Natural History) is one of the world’s principal centres for
the general study of natural history, particularly for specialised research into
taxonomy. It has five scientific departments: botany, entomology, mineralogy,
palaentology and zoology. It possesses extensive collections of extant and fossil
animals and plants and of minerals, rocks and meteorites. The Science
Museum illustrates the development of pure and applied science in all
countries, but chiefly in Britain. The geology of Britain is probably known in
more exact detail than that of any other country in the world, and the Institute of
Geological Sciences has an outstanding collection of exhibits in its Geological
Museum. These three museums are in South Kensington, London. Other
important collections include the Museum of Science and Industry, in Birming¬
ham, the Museum of the History of Science, at Oxford, and the Royal Scottish
Museum, Edinburgh.
344
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
INTER¬
NATIONAL
SCIENTIFIC
RELATIONS
SPACE
ACTIVITIES
Britain is represented on the European Community’s Scientific and Technical
Research Committee, the object of which is to co-ordinate national policies on
these matters and to implement joint projects of interest to the Community, and
the Committee for Scientific and Technological Policy of the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Other intergovernmental
organisations involved in scientific co-operation with which Britain is con¬
cerned include: European Co-operation in Science and Technology: specialised
agencies of the United Nations such as the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organisation; the International Atomic Energy Agency:
the Nuclear Energy Agency and the International Energy Agency of the OECD;
the European Organisation for Nuclear Research: the European Space Agency:
the European Molecular Biology Laboratory: the International Agency for
Research on Cancer; and the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation Science
Committee. Among non-governmental organisations Britain is represented in
the international unions comprising the International Council of Scientific
Unions (see p 342). The five research councils, the Royal Society and the British
Academy were founder members of the European Science Foundation set up in
1974. Since 1968 Britain has signed over 35 inter-governmental agreements
with other countries on co-operation in science and technology or technical
co-operation. These agreements are usually intended to promote mutually
beneficial exchanges and are administered by various government
departments.
There are science and technology offices in the British Embassies in
Washington, Paris, Bonn, Moscow, Tokyo and Peking, whose staff, among
other things, promote contacts in science and technology between Britain and
the countries to which they are accredited. They serve all central government
departments concerned in overseas scientific affairs, as well as research
councils and the Royal Society, which is the main representative of Britain in
areas of non-governmental collaboration.
Increasing use of the services of the overseas science and technology offices is
being made by industrialists. Reports from the embassies on overseas science
and technology are disseminated to several hundred British companies.
Administrative support for the overseas scientific network is provided by the
Department of Trade and Industry’s Overseas Technical Information Unit.
The British Council (see p 67) fosters co-operation between British scientists
and scientists of overseas countries to promote among overseas specialists a
better understanding and knowledge of Britain and its scientific achievements,
and, in the developing countries, to identify and manage development projects
in the technological, scientific and educational sectors. The Council helps
British scientists to visit other countries, makes its own awards for postgra¬
duate study in Britain by scientists from overseas and supervises programmes
for senior specialists and students who come to Britain through United Nations
agencies or bilateral technical co-operation schemes.
A number of government departments have an interest in space activities,
including the Department of Trade and Industry, the Department of Education
and Science (through the Science and Engineering Research Council) and the
Ministry of Defence. Expenditure on civil space activities in 1982-83 was about
£80 million.
Britain is a member of the European Space Agency (ESA) together with
Belgium, Denmark, France, the Federal Republic of Germany, the Irish
Republic, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland. The Depart¬
ment of Trade and Industry is responsible for leading the British delegation to
the ESA and for British participation in its space applications programmes, and
Spacelab, a manned laboratory to be carried on board the United States Space
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
345
Shuttle. In 1982 Britain joined the ESA’s ‘ARIANE’ launcher programme,
having previously been involved in the development and production of
equipment for the project through the bilateral agreement with France. The
Department also promotes technological development in Britain’s space
industry through a national space programme; the industry has advanced and
wide-ranging capabilities, particularly in telecommunications. The Depart¬
ment of Education and Science, through the Science and Engineering Research
Council, provides Britain’s representatives and financial contribution for the
ESA’s scientific satellite programme. Participation in the ESA’s science
programme provides the main space opportunities for British experimenter
groups and, in competition with other European science groups, Britain has
been selected to participate in all but one of the ESA’s science missions
(including EXOSAT, an X-ray observatory launched in May 1983).
There are bilateral arrangements for space research with other countries,
notably the United States through its National Aeronautics and Space Admin¬
istration (NASA). British experiments have already provided information
which has helped to increase scientific knowledge, especially in astronomy,
astrophysics, and geophysics, including climate research. Britain plans to put
an X-ray telescope on board the Federal Republic of Germany’s X-ray satellite
ROSAT, due to be launched in 1987, and is also collaborating with the Federal
Republic on AMPTE, a geophysics satellite. Other international satellite
missions are being planned.
21 Promotion
of the Arts
Artistic and cultural activity in Britain ranges from the highest standards of
professional performance to the enthusiastic support and participation of
amateurs. London is one of the leading world centres for music, drama, opera
and dance, and festivals held in towns and cities throughout the country attract
much interest. Many British playwrights, composers, sculptors, painters,
writers, actors, singers, choreographers and dancers enjoy international
reputations. Television and radio play an important role in bringing a wide
range of artistic events to a large audience. At an amateur level, activities which
make use of local talent and resources take many forms: choral, orchestral,
operatic, dramatic and other societies for the arts abound, and increasing
numbers of people take an interest in crafts such as pottery, weaving and
woodwork. New arts activities introduced by the ethnic minorities are beginn¬
ing to flourish, and range from Indian dance to Pakistani poetry and Caribbean
steel bands.
Promotion and patronage of the arts are the concern of both official and
unofficial bodies. The Government and local authorities take an active part, and
a substantial and increasing amount of help also comes from private sources,
including trusts and commercial concerns. Policies towards support for the arts
have two main aims. One is to maintain the cultural heritage and to encourage
interest in the traditional arts, and to make them more accessible to greater
numbers of people. The other is to provide financial aid to working artists and
craftsmen, and to encourage more people to take part in creative leisure
pursuits.
The Minister for the Arts, a Minister of State at the Privy Council Office, is
responsible for general arts policy, and administrative work connected with the
arts is undertaken by the Office of Arts and Libraries attached to the office. The
Secretaries of State for Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland are also con¬
cerned with cultural matters. The Government is also responsible for the
upkeep of ancient monuments and historic buildings, and grants are made
towards the maintenance of privately owned historic buildings (see p 167).
Arts education in schools, colleges, polytechnics, evening institutes and
community centres is the responsibility of central government education
departments, in partnership with local education authorities and voluntary
bodies.
Finance Planned government expenditure through the Office of Arts and Libraries
amounts to some £230 million in 1983-84. About one quarter of this is being
spent on the nine national galleries and museums in England; one quarter on
the British Library; and most of the remaining half (£91 million) channelled
through the Arts Council to support the performing and visual arts throughout
Britain. Additional planned expenditure in Scotland, Wales and Northern
Ireland amounts to about £23 million.
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
347
Arts Councils
British Council
Broadcasting
Organisations
Local Support
Proposed spending on the arts by local authorities in 1983-84 is some £408
million.
Valuable support for the arts comes from many voluntary sources, a practice
encouraged by the Government. Industrial and commercial concerns offer a
vital source of sponsorship and patronage to a wide range of arts, including
museum exhibitions, concerts, and opera seasons, often advised by the
Association for Business Sponsorship of the Arts and the Arts Council. The
value of business sponsorship is estimated at some £13.5 million a year.
The main objects of the Arts Council of Great Britain, established by Royal
Charter in 1946, are to develop and improve the knowledge, understanding and
practice of the arts, to increase their accessibility to the public, and to advise
and co-operate with government departments, local authorities and other
organisations. The Council gives financial help and advice to many organi¬
sations, from the major opera, dance and drama companies, orchestras and
festivals, to the smallest touring theatres and experimental groups. It encou¬
rages such interests as contemporary dance, mime, jazz, literature, photo¬
graphy and art films, and helps professional creative writers, choreographers,
composers, artists and photographers through a variety of subsidy schemes. It
also promotes art exhibitions and tours of opera, dance and drama companies
and of contemporary music groups. Funds are provided for specialist training
courses in the arts and for help with the construction or conversion of premises
under its ‘Housing the Arts’ programme.
Organisations in Scotland and Wales receive their subsidies through the
Scottish and Welsh Arts Councils, which are committees of the Arts Council of
Great Britain with a large measure of autonomy. Northern Ireland has an
independent Arts Council with aims and functions similar to those of the Arts
Council of Great Britain.
The British Council promotes knowledge of British culture and literature over¬
seas (see p 67), and maintains libraries in most of the countries in which it is
represented. The Council may initiate or support overseas tours by British
theatre companies, orchestras, choirs, and opera and dance companies, as well
as by individual actors, musicians and artists. It promotes fine arts and other
exhibitions overseas, organises British participation in international exhi¬
bitions, and encourages professional interchange in all cultural fields between
Britain and other countries.
Both the BBC and the independent television companies broadcast a wide
variety of drama (including adaptations of novels and stage plays), perform¬
ances of opera, ballet and other music, and general magazine programmes and
documentaries on the arts. These have won many international awards (see
p 370). Independent television companies also make grants for the promotion of
the arts in their regions.
The BBC has orchestras employing many of the country’s full-time profes¬
sional musicians, and each week it broadcasts nearly 100 hours of serious music
(both live and recorded) on its Radio 3 channel. It regularly commissions new
music, particularly by British composers, and sponsors concerts, competitions
and festivals.
Many local authorities support a wide range of artistic activities. They maintain
more than 1,000 local museums and art galleries, undertake direct promotions,
and grant-aid professional and voluntary organisations including orchestras,
opera and ballet companies, and local theatre companies. They also contribute
to the cost of new or converted buildings for the arts.
348
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Regional Arts
Festivals
Arts Centres
DRAMA
Professional
Theatre
Regional co-operation in arts patronage is encouraged through 15 regional arts
associations in England and Wales, which aim to ensure that the arts are more
widely available and that artists receive support at regional as well as national
level. They offer financial assistance to artists and arts organisations, and
advise on, and in some cases promote, activities. They are financed by the Arts
Council, the British Film Institute, the Crafts Council and local authorities, and
these interests are represented on the governing bodies of these associations.
Considerable interest and enthusiasm is shown for more than 200 professional
arts festivals which take place each year. Those concentrating on music include
the Three Choirs Festival which has taken place annually for more than 250
years in Gloucester, Worcester or Hereford; the Cheltenham Festival, largely
devoted to contemporary British music; and the Aldeburgh and Bath festivals.
Among others catering for a number of art forms are the Edinburgh Interna¬
tional Festival, the Royal National Eisteddfod of Wales, the Llangollen Interna¬
tional Musical Eisteddfod and those in Belfast, Buxton, Chichester, Malvern,
Harrogate, Salisbury, Windsor and York.
About 200 arts centres in Britain provide opportunities for enjoyment of and
participation in the arts. The centres are supported mainly by regional arts
associations and local authorities with some help from the Arts Council and
other organisations. Many theatres and art galleries provide a focal point for the
community by offering facilities for other arts.
Britain is one of the world’s major theatre centres and has a long and rich
dramatic tradition. As well as theatre in London and the regions, touring com¬
panies visit many of the new arts centres and community festivals. Contempo¬
rary British playwrights who have achieved recognition at home and overseas
include John Osborne, Harold Pinter, Peter Shaffer and Tom Stoppard, while
among the best-known directors are Peter Brook, Sir Peter Hall and Trevor
Nunn. Many British actors and actresses enjoy international reputations;
among those honoured for their work are Dame Peggy Ashcroft, Glenda
Jackson, Lord Olivier and Sir John Gielgud. The British musical Cats won
seven United States ‘Tony’ awards in 1983, including those for best musical,
best score and best director (Trevor Nunn).
Britain has some 300 theatres intended for professional use which can seat
more than 200 people. Some are owned by non-profit-making companies, 50 of
which receive Arts Council subsidies. The remainder are operated commer¬
cially or are owned by local authorities. London is the focus with a hundred or so
theatres in the West End and suburbs, 17 of which are permanently occupied by
subsidised companies. These include the National Theatre Company, which
stages classical and modern plays in its three auditoria on the South Bank of the
River Thames, and the Royal Shakespeare Company which, in addition to
presenting seasons of Shakespearean plays at Stratford-upon-Avon, is resident
at the Barbican Theatre in the new Barbican Centre for Arts and Conferences in
the City.
Outside London most large towns have at least one theatre; some, like the
Palace Theatre, Manchester, date from the nineteenth century and have been
handsomely restored; others, like Theatr Clywd, North Wales, and the Theatre
Royal, Plymouth, have been built to the latest designs. Several theatres
attached to universities give performances for the public. Most regional theatre
companies present about ten productions a year on their main stage, and some
also have studio theatres which are used for experimental productions. They
often accommodate tours of the major London productions and performances
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
349
Amateur
Theatre
Dramatic
Training
Theatre for
Young People
MUSIC, OPERA
AND DANCE
Music
Orchestral and
Choral
by touring companies (both the National Theatre and the Royal Shakespeare
Company have toured in Britain and overseas), while successful regional
productions often transfer to the West End stage.
In order to encourage the use of theatre premises by the public throughout the
day, many have gallery space, a craft or book shop, and refreshment facilities.
Several thousand amateur dramatic societies are encouraged by local edu¬
cation authorities, other public bodies, and four special organisations: the
British Theatre Association, the National Drama Conference, the Scottish
Community Drama Association and the Association of Ulster Drama Festivals.
Training for the theatre is provided mainly in drama schools. Among the best
known are the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, the Central School of Speech
and Drama, the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art, and the Guildhall
School of Music and Drama, all of which are in London; the Old Vic School in
Bristol; the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama in Glasgow; and, in
Cardiff, the Welsh College of Music and Drama. Several universities offer
courses in drama.
Theatre for young people is popular and concessionary ticket schemes
encouarage attendance. The Young Vic was opened in London in 1970 as a
theatre for young audiences. Both the National Youth Theatre, founded in
London in 1956, and the Scottish Youth Theatre, established in Edinburgh in
1970, offer early acting opportunities to young people. There are some ten
companies specialising in theatre for children, including the Unicorn Theatre
for Young People, Theatre Centre and the Polka Company. Most resident
companies provide programmes and other types of theatre activity for young
people, and some have ‘theatre in education’ teams which work closely with
schools.
Pop music, folk music, jazz, light music and brass bands all have substantial
followings while the widespread interest in classical music is reflected in the
large audiences at choral and orchestral concerts and at performances of opera,
dance and chamber music.
Seasons of orchestral and choral concerts are promoted every year in many of
the large towns and cities. The principal concert halls in central London are the
Royal Festival Hall, next to which are the Queen Elizabeth Hall and the Purcell
Room accommodating smaller-scale performances; the Royal Albert Hall,
where the world-famous seasons of BBC Promenade Concerts are given each
summer; the Wigmore Hall, a recital centre; and St John’s, Smith Square. The
new Barbican Centre for Arts and Conferences contains a large concert hall.
The leading symphony orchestras are the London Philharmonic, the London
Symphony (resident at the Barbican Centre for Arts and Conferences), the Phil-
harmonia, the Royal Philharmonic, the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic, the
Halle (Manchester), the City of Birmingham Symphony, the Bournemouth
Symphony, and the Ulster and the Scottish National. The BBC’s orchestras
provide broadcast concerts which are often open to the public. There are also
specialised string and chamber orchestras such as the English Chamber
Orchestra, the Academy of St Martin-in-the-Fields, the London Mozart Players,
the City of London Sinfonia, the Academy of Ancient Music, the Bournemouth
Sinfonietta, the Northern Sinfonia (Newcastle upon Tyne), the Scottish Baro¬
que Ensemble and the Scottish Chamber Orchestra. The London Sinfonietta
specialises in performing contemporary music. Early music played on authen¬
tic instruments is attracting increasing interest throughout the country.
350
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Choral Societies
Amateur
Interest
Pop Music
Jazz
Opera and
Dance
British conductors such as Sir Colin Davis and Neville Marriner reach a wide
audience through their recordings as well as by their performances, and the
works of composers such as Sir Michael Tippett, the late Sir William Walton and
the late Lord (Benjamin) Britten enjoy international acclaim. The Master of the
Queen’s Music, Malcolm Williamson, holds an office within the Royal House¬
hold, with responsibility for organising and writing music for state occasions.
Among the principal choral societies are the Bach Choir, the Royal Choral
Society, the Cardiff Polyphonic Choir, the Edinburgh Royal Union and the
Belfast Philharmonic Society. Almost all the leading orchestras have close links
with particular choirs, such as the Philharmonia Chorus and the London Sym¬
phony Chorus.
Amateur music-making is encouraged by county music committees aided by
the Carnegie United Kingdom Trust and united in the Standing Conference for
Amateur Music. The National Federation of Music Societies (the organisation
for chamber music societies, amateur choirs and orchestras) receives Arts
Council funds to help affiliated societies with the cost of engaging professional
musicians. Some 1,200 music societies are members of the Federation, which
advises them on concert planning and promotion. The Welsh Amateur Music
Federation, funded by the Welsh Arts Council, and the Scottish Amateur Music
Association similarly assist amateur music-making.
Among the characteristics of modern pop music are the diversity of styles, the
frequency with which new styles and stars emerge, and the short lifespan of
many groups. Usually electric guitars and drums provide the instrumental
basis, but there has been an increasing use of brass instruments, while some
groups have abandoned traditional instruments for electronic synthesisers.
Popular music is an integral part of ‘youth culture’, and has been so since the
early 1960s when groups such as The Beatles and The Rolling Stones, and later
The Who, Led Zeppelin and Pink Floyd achieved international success. British
groups have continued to appeal to audiences worldwide and often set new
trends in music; some of the more recent groups to have achieved international
renown are Dire Straits, The Police, Ultravox and Sky. Individual performers
include Cliff Richard, David Bowie, Elton John and Rod Stewart.
Jazz has an enthusiastic following in Britain and is played in numerous clubs
and pubs. It is planned to open a national jazz centre in London by early 1984.
Regular seasons of opera and ballet are given at the Royal Opera House, Covent
Garden, London. The Royal Opera and Royal Ballet, which rank among the
world’s finest companies, are supported by a permanent orchestra. Seasons of
opera in English are given by the English National Opera which performs at the
London Coliseum and makes regional tours. Sadler’s Wells Theatre stages
many of the London performances of visiting opera and dance companies and
those of the Sadler’s Wells Royal Ballet which performs in London and the
regions; the New Sadler’s Wells Opera Company gave its opening season in
1983. Scottish Opera has regular winter seasons at its permanent home, the
Theatre Royal in Glasgow, and tours mainly in Scotland and northern England.
Welsh National Opera has seasons in Cardiff and other cities and tours abroad
and, with Kent Opera, provides most of the touring productions in England.
Opera North, based in Leeds, undertakes tours in the north of England.
An opera season, for which international casts are specially assembled, is
held every summer at Glyndebourne in Sussex; this is followed with an autumn
tour by Glyndebourne Touring Opera with different casts. Opera in Northern
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
351
Ireland is promoted by the Northern Ireland Opera Trust and the Studio Opera
Group.
Dance and Mime Dance companies also include: London Festival Ballet, which divides its
Companies performances almost equally between London and the regions; Ballet Rambert
(Britain s oldest ballet company, which re-formed in 1966 as a leading modern
dance company); Scottish Ballet, based in Glasgow; London Contemporary
Dance Theatre (which provides regular seasons of contemporary dance in
London besides touring extensively); and Northern Ballet Theatre, based in
Manchester. Extemporary Dance Company and Moving Picture Mime Show
also provide programmes throughout the year. Several modern dance groups
are supported by regional arts associations. About 35 small dance and mime
groups or performers are assisted by the Arts Council.
Training in Professional training in music is given mainly at colleges of music. The leading
Music, Opera London colleges, which are grant-aided, include the Royal Academy of Music,
and Dance the Royal College of Music, the Guildhall School of Music and Drama and
Trinity College of Music. There are also the Royal Scottish Academy of Music
and Drama in Glasgow, the Royal Northern College of Music in Manchester, the
Welsh College of Music and Drama, Cardiff, and the Birmingham School of
Music. The National Opera Studio provides advanced training courses. The
leading dance schools are the Royal Ballet School, the Rambert Academy and
the London School of Contemporary Dance which, with many private schools,
have helped in raising British dance to its present high standard. Dance is now a
subject for degree studies.
Youth and Music, an organisation affiliated to the international Jeunesses
Musicales, encourages attendance by young people at opera, dance and concert
performances. Scottish Ballet Workshop works in schools throughout
Scotland.
Many children learn to play musical instruments at school, and some take the
examinations of the Associated Board of the Royal Schools of Music. The
National Youth Orchestras of Great Britain, of Scotland and of Wales and other
youth orchestras are noted for their high standards. Over a third of the players
in the European Community Youth Orchestra come from Britain.
British films, actors and the creative and technical services which support them
have achieved notable successes in international film festivals and other
events. The British film Gandhi won eight United States ‘Oscar’ awards in 1983,
including those for best film, bestdirector (Sir Richard Attenborough) and best
actor (Ben Kingsley). Oscars have also been won by British technicians for work
on American-financed films made in Britain, for example, Star Wars. Besides
feature films, including co-productions with other countries, the industry
produces films for television as well as promotional, advertising and training
films.
There are about 1,440 cinema screens in Great Britain, and estimated
attendances in 1982 amounted to 64 million. Cinema attendance figures have
been declining rapidly since the mid-1950s: in 1953 the average weekly cinema
audience was some 25 million, but by 1982 it was about 5 percent of that figure.
Major reasons for this have been competition from television Viewing, the rapid
rise in the use of home video cassette recorders, with feature and other films
available for low cost purchase or hire, and the effect of the economic recession
on the spending power of a predominantly young cinema-going public.
Declining revenues from the box office have led to a reduction in the number
of new British feature films being made. This trend has been partially offset,
however, by the growing involvement of television companies in film produc-
352
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Government
Support
British Film
Institute
Cinema
Licensing
and Film
Censorship
tion. Another development has been the growth of grant-aided regional film
theatres and film societies offering alternative programmes to those of the
commercial cinema chains.
The Government does not invest directly in feature films. A levy on cinema
admissions, the Eady levy, provides a fund (the British Film Fund) to benefit the
makers of eligible films. The National Film Finance Corporation receives
money from this fund for the production of feature films, and also provides loans
for scriptwriting and other pre-production costs. Grants from the levy can be
made to the Children’s Film and Television Foundation, the British Film
Institute Production Board and the National Film and Television School. The
rest of the fund is distributed to makers of eligible films in proportion to a film’s
takings. The Government makes a grant to the Scottish Film Council and, as
part of the funds allocated each year in support of the Welsh language, to the
Welsh Films Board.
The development of film and television as an art is promoted by the British Film
Institute, founded in 1933, and in Scotland by the Scottish Film Council; both
bodies receive government grants. The Institute, whose grant in 1983-84 is
£6 • 5 million, offers direct financial and technical help to new and experienced
film makers who cannot find support elsewhere and helps to fund film and video
workshops in liaison with the Channel Four television company. It administers
the National Film Theatre in London and the National Film Archive, and has a
library from which films and video cassettes may be hired. The Institute’s
Information Division has extensive international collections of books, periodi¬
cals, scripts, stills and posters, offers an information service on all aspects of
film and television, and produces a range of publications, including the British
National Film Catalogue which records films and video cassettes available in
Britain. The Education Department produces study materials and offers an
advisory service to teachers of film and television at all levels of formal
education and increasingly in adult education.
The National Film Archive contains nearly 40,000 films, including newsreels
and other miscellaneous items, and over 10,000 television programmes. The
National Film Theatre has two cinemas showing films of outstanding historical,
artistic or technical interest, and is unique in offering regular programmes
unrestricted by commercial considerations or by the age or nationality of the
films. Each autumn it mounts the London Film Festival at which some 100 of
the finest new films from all over the world are screened.
The British Film Institute has promoted and helps to fund the development of
some 34 regional film theatres and is involved in establishing film and
television centres with a range of activities and facilities in a number of major
cities. It also co-operates with the regional arts associations and grant-aids their
film activities. In Wales, the Welsh Arts Council acts as the Institute s agent. In
Scotland, the Scottish Film Council is responsible for regional film theatres and
administers the Scottish Film Archive; it is also responsible for promoting the
use of film and television in education. Together with the Scottish Arts Council
it makes grants towards film production in Scotland. Grants in Northern
Ireland are made by the Arts Council of Northern Ireland.
Local authorities have powers to license cinemas and censor films. They have a
legal duty to prohibit the admission of children under 16 to unsuitable films, and
may censor films for adults. In considering the suitability of films the
authorities normally rely on the judgement of an independent body, the British
Board of Film Censors, to which most films for public showing are submitted.
The Board was set up on the initiative of the cinema industry, to ensure a proper
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
353
standard was maintained in films offered to the public. It does not use any
written code of censorship, and may require cuts to be made before granting a
certificate to a film; very rarely, it refuses a certificate. Films passed by the
Board are put into one of five categories: U meaning universal — suitable for all;
PG meaning parental guidance, in which some scenes may be unsuitable for
young children; 15 and 18, for persons of not less than 15 and 18 years of age
respectively; and Restricted 18, for restricted distribution only through segre¬
gated premises to which no one under 18 is admitted, for example, licensed
cinema clubs.
Children’s Cinemas which give children’s shows require a special licence from local
Films authorities. Nearly 100 cinemas provide programmes for children on Saturday
mornings. The Children’s Film and Television Foundation, with aid from the
British Film Fund, produces and distributes entertainment films specially
designed for children.
Training in Film An independent National Film and Television School, financed primarily by
Production grants from the Government and the British Film Fund, offers courses for
writers, directors, producers and camera technicians. Training in film produc¬
tion is also given at the London International Film School, the Royal College of
Art, and at some polytechnics and other institutions.
The documentary tradition in short film production in Britain was founded in
1929 when a group of directors began making factual films of a distinctive and
imaginative kind for the Government, and later for commercial organisations.
The war years saw a big expansion in this field and, since then, British
documentary technicians have continued to produce, for both cinema and
television, high quality factual films which have won numerous international
awards. The British Industrial and Scientific Film Association promotes the use
of films in industry, science and commerce. The selection of British entries for
international short and documentary film festivals is undertaken by the British
Council.
Government departments sponsor a wide range of documentary information
programmes on film, video and tape slide for education and training. Program¬
mes are also made for overseas television. The majority are produced through
the Central Office of Information and are commissioned from commercial film
companies. Several major documentary film libraries provide films on hire or
free of charge to a wide variety of educational, industrial and other users.
The Arts Council funds, promotes and distributes films on the arts. The films
(many of which have won international awards) cover all arts subjects and are
intended for educational and television use both in Britain and overseas.
VISUAL ARTS A number of modern British sculptors and painters have a high international
reputation, and have received many international prizes and commissions for
major works in foreign cities. Among the best known are Henry Moore,
Elisabeth Frink, Francis Bacon and David Hockney.
State support for painting and sculpture mainly takes the form of mainte¬
nance and purchase grants for the national museums and galleries, purchase
grants for municipal museums and galleries, and grants towards the cost of art
education. The Government also encourages high standards of industrial
design and craftsmanship through grants to the Design Council.
The Arts Council maintains its own collection of contemporary British art,
and organises or offers grants or guarantees for a variety of exhibitions
throughout the country. It runs the Hayward and Serpentine galleries in
London and supports a number of art and photography galleries in London and
Documentary
Films
354
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Art Market
Museums and
Art Galleries
National
Collections
the regions, such as Arnolfini in Bristol, and the Museum of Modern Art in
Oxford. The Council also provides support for artists and photographers
through purchasing, commissioning fellowships and residences. Grant aid is
also available to support art and photography books and magazines. The
Scottish, Welsh and Northern Ireland Arts Councils have galleries in Edin¬
burgh, Cardiff and Belfast respectively.
London is a major centre for the international art market, and regular sales of
works of art take place in the main auction houses, two of the longest
established being Sotheby’s and Christie’s. Certain items are covered by export
control. These are: works of art and collectors’ items over 50 years old and
worth more than £8,000 (more than £2,000 in the case of British historical
portraits); photographic material over 60 years old and worth more than £200;
documentary material over 50 years old; and British archaeological material
over 50 years old. A licence is required before such items can be exported, but
this is granted automatically in the case of objects imported into Britain within
the last 50 years. In other cases the application for a licence is considered by the
Department of Trade and Industry, and, if the Department’s expert advisers
recommend the withholding of a licence, the matter is referred to the Reviewing
Committee on the Export of Works of Art. If the Committee considers a work to
be of national importance it can advise the Government to withhold the export
licence for a specified time to give a public museum or art gallery an opportunity
to buy at a fair price.
Over 1,000 museums and art galleries are open to the public, including the
major national collections and a wide variety of municipally and independently
owned institutions. Some 52 million people visited the galleries and museums
in 1982.
The national museums and art galleries in London contain some of the world’s
most comprehensive collections of objects of artistic, archaeological, scientific,
historical and general interest. They are the British Museum (including the
Museum of Mankind), the Victoria and Albert Museum, the Science Museum,
the National Gallery, the Tate Gallery, the National Portrait Gallery, the
Imperial War Museum, the National Army Museum, the Royal Air Force
Museum, the National Maritime Museum, the Wallace Collection, the British
Museum (Natural History) and the Geological Museum. Some of these
museums also have branches outside London, examples being the National
Railway Museum (York) and the National Museum of Photography (Bradford)
which are part of the Science Museum, and portrait collections at Montacute
House (Somerset) and Beningborough Hall (Yorkshire), administered by the
National Portrait Gallery in collaboration with the National Trust.
New developments planned include the building of extensions to the Tate
Gallery, to house the large collection of paintings bequeathed by the
nineteenth-century artist, J.M.W. Turner, and a national Theatre Museum, to be
opened in Covent Garden, London.
There are three national museums and art galleries in Edinburgh: the
National Museum of Antiquities of Scotland, the Royal Scottish Museum
(including the Scottish United Services Museum), and the National Galleries of
Scotland (comprising the National Gallery of Scotland, the Scottish National
Portrait Gallery, and the Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art). A new
Museum of Scotland, to record the country’s cultural heritage, is planned. The
National Museum of Wales, in Cardiff, has a branch at St Fagan’s Castle where
the Welsh Folk Museum is housed, an Industrial and Maritime Museum in
Cardiff s dockland, the Museum of the Woollen Industry at Drefach Felindre,
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
355
Other
Collections
Finance
Policy and
Co-ordination
and the North Wales Quarrying Museum at Llanberis. Northern Ireland has two
national museums: the Ulster Museum in Belfast and the Ulster Folk and
Transport Museum, County Down.
Most of the national collections are administered by independent trustees.
The Victoria and Albert and Science Museums are the responsibility of the
Office of Arts and Libraries, but are due to become trustee institutions in April
1984. The Royal Scottish Museum, administered by the Scottish Education
Department will also become independent in 1985 or 1986.
Other important collections in London include the Armouries in the Tower of
London, the Museum of London, Sir John Soane’s Museum and the London
Transport Museum. In Buckingham Palace the Queen’s Gallery has exhibitions
of pictures from the extensive royal collections.
Most cities and towns have museums devoted to art, archaeology and natural
history, usually administered by the local authorities but sometimes by local
learned societies or by individuals or trustees. Both Oxford and Cambridge are
rich in museums, many of them associated with the universities, such as the
Ashmolean Museum in Oxford, founded in 1683, the oldest in the country, and
the Fitzwilliam Museum in Cambridge. Many private art collections in historic
family mansions, including those owned by the National Trust, are open to the
public, while an increasing number of open air museums depict the regional
life of an area or preserve early industrial remains (for example, the Weald and
Downland Museum in Sussex, the North of England Open Air Museum in
Durham, and the Ironbridge Gorge Museum in Shropshire). Among the newest
museums to have been established is the National Horseracing Museum at
N ewmarket. The J orvik V iking Centre, a reconstruction of the Viking settlement
in York, is due to open in 1984 and a new maritime museum is being built
to house the restored wreck of the Mary Rose, the flagship of Henry VIII, which
sank in 1545 and was raised in 1982. The new Burrell gallery in Glasgow houses
a world-famous collection of tapestries, paintings and objets d’art.
All national collections are financed chiefly from government funds. Besides
meeting administrative and maintenance costs, the Government provides
annual purchase grants. An independent National Heritage Memorial Fund
financed by the Government provides assistance to organisations wishing to
acquire land, buildings, works of art and other objects associated with the
national heritage. Since the fund was established in 1980 it has made grants and
loans totalling over £25 million. Pre-eminent works of art accepted by the
Government in place of capital transfer tax are allocated to public galleries.
Museums and art galleries, maintained by local authorities, universities and
private benefactions, receive help in building up their collections through the
annual government grants administered by the Victoria and Albert, Science
and Royal Scottish Museums. Financial and practical assistance is also given
by the Arts Council and by trusts and voluntary bodies, including the Calouste
Gulbenkian Foundation, the National Art-Collections Fund, the Contemporary
Art Society and the Association for Business Sponsorship of the Arts.
The Government is advised on policy matters by the Museums and Galleries
Commission which also promotes co-operation between national and prov¬
incial institutions. Nine area museum councils, grant-aided by the
Government, provide technical services and advice on conservation, display,
documentation and publicity.
The independent Museums Association, to which museums and art galleries
and their staffs belong and which also has many overseas members, is a focus
356
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Exhibitions
Training in Art
and Design
Crafts
LITERATURE
AND
LIBRARIES
for the collection of information and discussion of matters relating to museum
administration, and as a training and examining body for professional
qualifications.
In addition to temporary exhibitions organised by the Arts Council and by the
national and regional museums and galleries, many exhibitions are held in the
galleries of dealers. There are also a number of national art exhibiting societies,
the most famous of which is the Royal Academy of Arts at Burlington House.
The Academy holds an annual Summer Exhibition, in which the works of
hundreds of professional and amateur artists are included, and important
exhibitions of foreign art. The Royal Scottish Academy holds annual exhi¬
bitions in Edinburgh. There are also children’s exhibitions, including the
National Exhibition of Children’s Art.
Most practical education in art and design is provided in colleges of art, further
education colleges and private art schools. Degrees at postgraduate level are
awarded by the Royal College of Art. Art is also taught at an advanced level at
the four Scottish Central (Art) Institutions.
Courses at universities and polytechnics concentrate largely on academic
disciplines such as the history of art. The leading institutions include the
Courtauld and Warburg Institutes of the University of London and the
Department of Classical Art and Archaeology in University College, London.
Art has a place in all school curricula, and the Society for Education through Art
encourages, among other activities, the purchase by schools of original works of
art by organising an annual Pictures for Schools exhibition.
Government grants for the crafts, amounting to some £ 1 • 7 million in 1983-84,
are administered in England and Wales by the Crafts Council. The Council
holds regular exhibitions at its London gallery (which also houses a craft
resource centre, including a colour slide library) and publishes Crafts maga¬
zine, books on craft subjects, and slides. It runs a number of grant and loan
schemes to help people at different stages in the development of their art. The
Council runs activities in education and conservation and manages a British
craft shop at the Victoria and Albert Museum. The British Craft Centre in
London, which receives an annual grant from the Crafts Council, holds some
ten exhibitions a year. Scotland receives a separate government grant which is
similarly administered by the Crafts Consultative Committee of the Scottish
Development Agency. The Welsh Arts Council acts as the agent of the Crafts
Council in supporting the crafts in Wales.
The study of literature is included in the curricula of all schools, and most
colleges and universities. There are free public libraries throughout the
country, private libraries and many private literary societies. Book reviews are
featured in the press and on television and radio and there are numerous
periodicals concerned with literature. Recognition of outstanding literary merit
is provided by a number of awards, including the Booker, W. H. Smith & Son,
and Whitbread prizes. Awards to encourage young writers include those by the
Somerset Maugham Trust Fund and the E. C. Gregory Trust Fund. Many
British writers are internationally recognised; in 1983 the Nobel Prize for
Literature was awarded to the novelist William Golding. Other well-known
living authors are Graham Greene, Anthony Burgess, Margaret Drabble and Iris
Murdoch, while distinguished British poets include Philip Larkin, Ted Hughes
and Seamus Heaney. The title Poet Laureate is conferred on a poet who receives
a stipend as an officer of the Royal Household; the holder of the title is Sir John
Betjeman.
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
357
Authors'
Copyright
Literary and
Philological
Societies
Books
Libraries
A scheme to give authors the right to receive payment from government
funds for the use of their books borrowed from public libraries began in 1982.
The author of any original literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work is auto¬
matically protected by the Copyright Act 1956 and its related international con¬
ventions1 from the unauthorised reproduction of the work both before and after
publication. The author of the work is the first owner of the copyright, and the
normal term of copyright in published original works is the life of the author and
a period of 50 years after his or her death.
Societies to promote literature include the English Association and the Royal
Society of Literature. The British Academy for the Promotion of Historical,
Philosophical and Philological Studies (the British Academy) is the leading
society for humanistic studies and receives a government grant. ,
Other specialist societies include the Early English Text Society, the
Bibliographical Society, the Harleian Society, the Saltire Society, and several
societies devoted to particular authors, the largest of which is the Dickens
Fellowship. A number of societies, for example, the Poetry Society, sponsor
poetry readings and recitals. There are also a number of clubs and societies,
such as the Poetry Book Society, which distribute selected new books to their
members.
In 1982 British publishers issued over 48,000 separate titles: nearly 38,000 new
ones, and over 10,300 reprints and new editions. There has been an increase in
the number of book clubs, where books may be bought by mail order.
Leading organisations representing book production and distribution inter¬
ests are the Publishers’ Association and the Booksellers’ Association. The
British Council publicises British books and periodicals through its libraries in
over 60 countries, its programme of book exhibitions (about 270 exhibitions
were mounted in 1982-83) and its publications including the monthly British
Book News. The Book Development Council also promotes British books
overseas. The National Book League, with a membership including authors,
publishers, booksellers, librarians and readers, encourages interest in books
and arranges exhibitions in Britain and overseas.
The British Library, the national library for the United Kingdom, is organised in
three divisions. The Reference Division, which receives a copy of each new
book, pamphlet or newspaper published in Britain and acquires significant
literature from other countries, includes the Department of Printed Books,
holding about 9 million titles; the Department of Manuscripts; the Department
of Oriental Manuscripts and Printed Books; the Science Reference Library,
which holds collections in modern science, technology, patents, trade marks
and designs; and the India Office Library and Records. The Lending Division at
Boston Spa, West Yorkshire, has nearly 4 • 5 million volumes including some
56,000 current periodicals available on loan to other libraries. It also has access
to many millions of books in other libraries and is the national centre for
inter-library lending within Britain and between Britain and countries over¬
seas. The Bibliographic Services Division processes the material deposited with
the British Library for inclusion in its catalogues and publishes the British
National Bibliography which lists all new books and new editions published in
Britain, and other bibliographic records. It also provides automated informa-
tion services of bibliographic data for libraries and their users throughout
1 A copyright work first published in Britain has automatic copyright in all countries which are
members of the Berne Copyright Convention and the Universal Copyright Convention. The law
on copyright is under review.
358
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
University
Libraries
Special
Libraries
Public
Libraries
Britain. The National Sound Archive became part of the library in 1983. Its
collections include nearly half a million discs and over 35,000 hours of recorded
tape, which are available to the public through a free listening service. The
Research and Development Department is a major source of funding for the
support of research and development in library and information services.
Construction of a new building for the British Library’s London services began
in 1982. Under copyright legislation, the National Libraries of Scotland and of
Wales, the Bodleian Library of Oxford University and the Cambridge University
Library can claim copies of all new British publications.
Some of the national museums and government departments have impor¬
tant libraries. The Public Record Office contains the records of the superior
courts of law and of most government departments, as well as such famous
historical documents as Domesday Book, a census of land, livestock and
population conducted by William of Normandy and completed in the year 1086.
The Scottish Record Office in Edinburgh serves the same purpose. The National
Register of Archives (maintained by the Historical Manuscripts Commission)
contains particulars of local and private records.
Besides the few great private collections, such as that of the London Library,
there are the rich resources of the learned societies and institutions (for
scientific societies and institutions, see p 341). Examples are the libraries of the
Royal Institute of International Affairs, the Royal Commonwealth Society, the
Royal Geographical Society, the British Theatre Association, the Royal
Academy of Music, the National Library for the Blind and the National Book
League.
The university libraries of Oxford and Cambridge are unmatched by those of
the more recent foundations, although the combined library resources of the
colleges and institutions of the University of London total some 5 • 5 million
volumes, the John Rylands University Library in Manchester contains some 3
million volumes, and the university libraries of Edinburgh, Birmingham,
Glasgow and Leeds each have over 1 million volumes. Many universities have
important research collections in special subjects; examples include the Barnes
Medical Library at Birmingham and the British Library of Political and
Economic Science at the London School of Economics.
Many associations, commercial and industrial organisations, as well as
government departments and other national institutions, operate library and
information services. Although most of these are primarily intended for use
within the organisation, many special libraries can be used by arrangement by
people interested in the special area covered, and the specialist publications
held are often available for inter-library lending.
Public library authorities have a duty to provide a free lending and reference
library service in their areas. Britain’s network of libraries, consisting of 5,500
service points, has a total stock of some 137 million books. About one-third of the
total population are members of public libraries. Qualified and specialist staff
are available for consultation in all but the smallest outlets. Some areas are
served by mobile libraries, and domicilary services cater for people unable to
visit a library. Many libraries have collections of records, audio and video
cassettes, and musical scores for loan to the public. A number also lend from
collections of works of art, which may be originals or reproductions. Nearly all
provide children’s departments, while reference and information sections and
art, music, commercial and technical departments meet the growing and more
specific demands in these fields. Most libraries hold documents on local history.
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
359
Library
Association
Under a voluntary system of library co-operation in England and Wales eight
regional library bureaux (consisting mainly of public libraries in each area) aim
to be largely self-sufficient in the interlending of current British books, achieved
in some regions by a system of co-operative subject specialisation. The National
Libraries of Scotland and of Wales carry out functions similar to those of the
regional bureaux and the Lending Division of the British Library.
In Northern Ireland five education and library boards, which are grant-aided
by the Department of Education, are responsible for the library service; an inter-
library lending system operates between public and university libraries.
The principal professional organisation for libraries is the Library Association.
It maintains a Register of Chartered Librarians, publishes books, pamphlets
and official journals, and holds regular conferences.
22 The Press
More daily newspapers, national and regional, are sold per person in Britain
than in most other developed countries. On an average day nearly three out of
four adults over the age of 15 read a national morning newspaper and about one
in two reads an evening newspaper. National papers have a total circulation of
nearly 14 -8 million on weekdays and 17 -7 million on Sundays though the total
readership is considerably greater.
There are over 120 daily (Monday to Saturday) and Sunday newspapers and
about 1,000 weekly newspapers. These figures include certain specialised
papers with circulations limited not by region but by interest; for instance,
business, sporting and religious newspapers, and newspapers in foreign
languages.
The press caters for a variety of political views, interests and levels of edu¬
cation. There is no state control or censorship of the press, but it is subject to the
general laws on publication (see p 366). Newspapers are almost always finan¬
cially independent of any political party and are not obliged to follow any speci¬
fic line. Where they express pronounced views and have obvious political
leanings, these derive from traditional, proprietorial and other non-party influ¬
ences. In order to preserve their character and traditions, a few newspapers and
periodicals are governed by various trustee-type arrangements. Others have
management arrangements to ensure editors’ authority and independence.
Against this background of press freedom, Britain’s position within UNESCO
discussions on a ‘new world information order’ and other communications
questions has been to oppose measures which could have the effect of sanction¬
ing the use of the media as an instrument of government policy and limiting the
free flow of information. At the same time, it has reaffirmed its willingness to
support efforts to improve communications systems in the developing world,
with the International Programme for the Development of Communications
(set up in 1980) acting, as originally conceived, as a clearing house through
which each country’s communication needs can be assessed and funds sought
from all possible aid sources.
Unlike most of its European counterparts the British press receives no subsi¬
dies and relatively few tax and postal concessions. Newspaper and magazine
sales and advertising receipts are zero-rated for value added tax. Registered
newspapers receive a concession on postal rates, and there are concessions on
‘per-word’ rates for international press telegrams and photo-telegrams. Like all
postal customers, publishers can obtain reductions in charges for regular bulk
postings.
Newsprint, some 90 per cent of which is imported, forms roughly a third of
average national newspaper costs, while labour represents about 45 p^r cent.
Revenue from sales accounts for varying proportions of income; these are rela¬
tively small in the case of some high circulation newspapers and periodicals
which derive considerable earnings from their advertising. The financial prob¬
lems which have led to the closure of some newspapers in recent years have
resulted from rising costs of raw materials and labour in a highly competitive
market. At the same time some new titles have been launched.
THE PRESS
361
Ownership
Ownership of the national, London-evening and regional daily newspapers is
concentrated in the hands of a number of large press publishing groups (the
groups controlling the national press are listed in Table 36). There are, in
addition, some 200 independent regional and local newspaper publishers.
Although most enterprises are organised as limited liability companies, indi¬
vidual and partner proprietorship survives. The large national newspaper and
periodical publishers are major corporations with interests ranging over the
whole field of publishing and communications; some have shares in indepen¬
dent television and radio contracting companies while others are involved in
industrial and commercial activities.
The law provides safeguards against the risks inherent in undue concentra¬
tion of the means of communication. For instance, if it appears that newspaper
shareholdings in television programme companies have led or are leading to
results contrary to the public interest, the Independent Broadcasting Authority
may, with the consent of the Home Secretary, notify the companies that their
Table 36: National Newspapers
Title and foundation date Controlled by
Circulation a
average
Jan.-June
1983
NATIONAL DAILIES
‘Populars’
Daily Express (1900)
Daily Mail (1896)
Daily Mirror (1903)
Daily Star (1978)
Morning Star (1966)
The Sun (1964)
‘Qualities’
The Daily Telegraph (1855)
Financial Times (1888)
The Guardian (1821)
The Times (1785)
NATIONAL SUNDAYS
‘Populars’
The Mail on Sunday (1982)
News of the World (1843)
Sunday Express (1918)
Sunday Mirror (1963)
Sunday People (1881)
‘Qualities’
The Observer (1791)
Sunday Telegraph (1961)
Sunday Times (1822)
Fleet Holdings 1,889,995
Associated Newspapers Group 1,806,022
Reed International 3,315,070
Fleet Holdings 1,337,486
The People’s Press Printing Society 29,847
News International 4,170,909
Telegraph Newspaper Trust 1,266,069
Pearson Longman 215,570
The Guardian and Manchester
Evening News 437,222
News International 336,189
Associated Newspapers Group 1,307,060
News International 4,074,424
Fleet Holdings 2,616,825
Reed International 3,512,228
Reed International 3,392,746
George Outram & Co 783,068
Telegraph Newspaper Trust 738,193
News International 1,288,448
Circulation figures are those of the Audit Bureau of Circulations (founded in 1931 and consisting of publishers,
advertisers and advertising bureaux) and are certified average daily or weekly net sales for the period. The circu¬
lation figure of the Morning Star is otherwise audited.
362
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The ‘National’
Press
English
Regional
Newspapers
London Papers
programmes may cease to be transmitted. There is a similar stipulation for
independent local radio: if a local newspaper has a monopoly in the area, it is not
allowed to have a controlling interest in the local radio station. In addition, it is
unlawful to transfer a newspaper or newspaper assets to a proprietor whose
newspapers have an average daily circulation amounting, with that of the
newspaper to be taken over, to 500,000 or more copies without the written
consent of the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry. Except in certain
limited cases, as, for example, in the change of ownership of The Times and The
Sunday Times in 1980, consent may be given only after the Secretary of State
has referred the matter to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission and
received its report.
Ten morning daily papers and eight Sunday papers (see Table 36) circulate
throughout the country, and are known as national newspapers. They are pro¬
duced in London (where Fleet Street is the traditional centre for the press), but
six of the dailies and five of the Sundays also print northern editions in Manches¬
ter (accounting for about a quarter of the total production of the national press).
An edition of the Financial Times is also printed in Frankfurt in the Federal
Republic of Germany.
The leading Scottish papers, The Scotsman and the Glasgow Herald, have a
considerable circulation outside Scotland.
National newspapers are often thought of as either ‘quality’ or ‘popular’
papers on the basis of differences in style, content and format (broadsheet or
tabloid, though this is not a rigid distinction). Four dailies and three Sundays
are usually described as quality newspapers. The three Sunday qualities and
three populars produce colour supplements as part of the paper.
The slow decline in newspaper circulations as a whole (from 36 million in 1973
to 32 • 5 million in 1983) conceals the fact that the circulation of some news¬
papers has remained generally steady, while that of others has increased.
The regional newspapers of England (outside London, over 95 morning or
evening dailies and Sundays and some 950 newspapers appearing once or twice
a week) provide mainly regional and local news. The daily newspapers also give
coverage of national and international affairs. Generally, regional evening
newspapers are non-political, while the morning newspapers adopt a more pos¬
itive political stance and tend to be independent or conservative in outlook.
Of the morning papers the Yorkshire Post (Leeds) and the Northern Echo
(Darlington) have circulations of over 88,600 and 92,000 respectively and two
provincial Sunday papers — the Sunday Sun (Newcastle upon Tyne) and the
Sunday Mercury (Birmingham) — have circulations of over 122,000 and
170,500 respectively. Circulation figures of evening papers start at about
11,000; most are in the 20,900-90,000 range, although the Manchester Even¬
ing News and the Birmingham Evening Mail have circulations of over 290,000
and the Liverpool Echo of over 208,000. Weekly papers are of mainly local appeal
and are also a valuable medium for local advertising. Most have circulations in
the 5,000-30,000 range.
There are also many free distribution newspapers (mostly weekly and
financed largely by advertising), some published by orthodox newspaper
publishers. Following a rapid growth in recent years there are now thought to be
over 400 free newspapers with a circulation of 28 million.
The one London evening newspaper, The Standard, has sales of some 507,000.
The local weeklies (about 107) include papers for every district in Greater
London. They circulate in as many as six to eight local editions of individual
THE PRESS
363
Wales
Scotland
Northern
Ireland
New
Technology
papers, affiliated in some cases to larger groups. As elsewhere, there is a range of
free distribution newspapers.
A number of evening newspapers, using the latest production technology, are
published in the outer metropolitan area.
Wales has one daily morning newspaper, the Western Mail, published in
Cardiff; its circulation of just under 80,000 is mainly in south Wales. In north
Wales the Daily Post, published in Liverpool, gives wide coverage to events in
the area. Evening papers published in Wales are the South Wales Echo, Cardiff;
the South Wales Argus, Newport; the South Wales Evening Post, Swansea; and
the Evening Leader, Wrexham. Their circulation range is between 27,600 and
103,000. North Wales is also served by the Liverpool Echo, while the Shropshire
Star covers parts of north and mid-Wales, and there is coverage to a smaller
extent by the Manchester Evening News.
The weekly press (some 60) includes English-language papers, some of which
carry articles in Welsh, bilingual papers, and Welsh-language papers. In 1982
the Government made a grant of £2 • 3 million for the support of the Welsh lan¬
guage: of this, £15,750 was set aside to help Welsh community newspapers.
Scotland has six morning, six evening and three Sunday newspapers. The
morning papers, with circulations of between about 93,000 and over 743,000,
are The Scotsman published in Edinburgh; the Glasgow Herald-, the Daily
Record (sister paper to the Daily Mirror); the Dundee Courier and Advertiser;
the Aberdeen Press and Journal; and the Scottish Daily Express (printed in
Manchester). The evening papers have circulations in the range of 13,000 to
175,000 and are the Evening News of Edinburgh, Glasgow’s Evening Times,
Dundee’s Evening Telegraph and Post, Aberdeen’s Evening Express, the
Paisley Daily Express and the Greenock Telegraph. The Sunday papers are the
Sunday Mail, the Sunday Post and the Scottish Sunday Express (printed in
Manchester).
Weekly and local newspapers number about 130, with the Hamilton Adver¬
tiser and the Falkirk Herald having the largest circulations.
Northern Ireland has two morning newspapers, one evening and one Sunday
paper, all published in Belfast with circulations ranging from 40,000 to 150,000.
They are the News-Letter (Unionist) and the Irish News (Nationalist), the
evening Belfast Telegraph and the Sunday News. There are 32 weekly
newspapers.
The heavy labour costs of newspapers continue to encourage publishers to look
for ways of increasing productivity, often by using the new composing tech¬
nology which dispenses with traditional ‘hot metal’ typesetting, and uses
photographic methods to reproduce an image. It can combine photo¬
composition with computer storage and handling of data, and substitutes elec¬
tronic for manual methods. It presents possibilities for reorganisation which
can have effects throughout a newspaper office and may raise difficult problems
of manning levels, health and safety; the introduction of the ‘on-line’ system, for
example, under which text can be fed at electronic speeds to the computer store
(and recalled for checking on visual display units) and can be passed between
the store and the photosetters, can affect all the traditional departments of a
newspaper up to the printing stage. One system provides portable terminals for
reporters to use when working away from the office. The provincial press has
generally led the way in adopting the new techniques.
364
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Periodical The 5,000 periodical publications are classified as ‘general’, ‘specialised’,
Press ‘trade’, ‘technical’ and ‘professional’. There are also about 500 ‘house maga¬
zines’ produced by industrial undertakings, business houses or public services
for the benefit of their employees and/or clients. The ‘alternative’ press prob¬
ably includes several hundred further titles, most of them devoted to radical
politics, community matters, religion, the occult, science or ecology.
General and specialised periodicals include magazines of general interest;
women’s magazines; publications for children; pop music journals; religious
periodicals; fiction magazines; magazines dealing with sport, gardening,
hobbies and humour; computer magazines; journals specialising in a wide
range of subjects; and the publications of learned societies, trade unions, regi¬
ments, universities and other organisations.
The weekly periodicals with the highest sales are: Radio Times and TV Times
Magazine 'which have circulations of about 3 • 3 million, and Woman’s Weekly,
Woman’s Own, Woman, Weekly News (which sells mainly in Scotland) and My
Weekly, with circulations in the 800,000 to 1 ■ 5 million range. The leadingjour-
nals of opinion are The Economist, a politically independent publication cover¬
ing a wider range of topics than its title implies; the New Statesman, which
reviews politics, literature and the arts from an independent socialist point of
view; the Spectator, which covers much the same subjects from an indepen¬
dent conservative standpoint; Tribune, which represents the views of the left-
wing of the Labour Party; New Society, covering the sociological aspects of
current affairs; and New Scientist, which reports on science and technology in
terms which the non-specialist can understand. Articles and features relating
largely to the British Broadcasting Corporation’s (BBC) television and radio pro¬
grammes appear in The Listener. Punch, traditionally the leading humorous
periodical, and Private Eye, a satirical fortnightly, also cover public affairs.
Financial Weekly and Investors Chronicle are periodicals for people with busi¬
ness and investment interests.
Literary and political journals and those specialising in international and
Commonwealth affairs, published monthly or quarterly, generally appeal to the
more serious reader.
Trade, technical, business, scientific and professional journals are an impor¬
tant aspect of British publishing, many having a considerable circulation over¬
seas. Their publication ranges in frequency from twice weekly to quarterly.
Periodicals published in England circulate throughout Britain. In Wales there
are also several monthly and quarterly journals published in both Welsh and
English; in Scotland there are three monthly illustrated periodicals, a weekly
paper devoted to farming interests, a number of literary journals and numerous
popular magazines; and Northern Ireland has weekly, monthly and quarterly
publications covering farming, the linen industry, building, motoring, politics
and social work.
News Agencies The three principal news agencies in Britain are: Reuters Ltd, an international
news organisation registered in London, The Press Association Ltd and The
Exchange Telegraph Company Ltd.
Reuters Ltd is owned jointly by four associations representative of: the
national newspapers of the United Kingdom; the regional newspapers of the
United Kingdom and the newspapers of the Irish Republic; the newspapers of
Australia; and the newspapers of New Zealand. Each association is party to a
trust deed which safeguards the independence and integrity of the news
service. Reuters employs some 3,300 full-time staff in 70 countries. Of these,
570 are journalists, of whom 430 work outside the United Kingdom. The Com¬
pany’s world-wide communications network makes use of satellites, cables and
high frequency radio. It is connected to computerised message handling
THE PRESS
365
Training for
Journalism
systems and data banks located around the world. Services include general
news for the media delivered by teleprinter and specialised economic news
services for business, which are made available to subscribers by teleprinter
and video display and retrieval terminals. Reuters serves subscribers in 158
countries including news agencies, newspapers, radio and television stations,
governments, financial institutions, stock and commodity brokerage houses
and industry.
The Press Association Ltd, the British national news agency, is co-operatively
owned by the principal newspapers of the United Kingdom outside London, and
of the Irish Republic. It provides a complete service of home news, including
general and parliamentary news, legal reports, and all branches of financial,
commercial and sports news; and includes in its services to regional papers the
world news of Reuters and the Associated Press. News is teleprinted from
London, certain items being available in teletypesetting form. Its photographic
department serves London and regional newspapers with a daily service of pic¬
tures from home and overseas; these are wired to the regional press. Its Special
Reporting Service supplies reports of local or special interest. Press Association
Features provides exclusive rights to syndicated articles and visual features.
The Exchange Telegraph Company Ltd (Extel), an independent news agency,
supplies financial and sporting news services and transmits specialist racing
services by telephone and video terminals from offices throughout Britain.
The British press and broadcasting organisations are also served by Associ¬
ated Press Ltd and by United Press International, which are British subsidiaries
of United States news agencies.
A number of other British, Commonwealth and foreign agencies and news
services have offices in London, and there are minor agencies in other cities,
mostly specialising in various aspects of newspaper and periodical
requirements. Syndication of features is not as common in Britain as in some
countries, but a few agencies specialise in this type of work.
1 he National Council for the Training of Journalists (NCTJ), which represents
the principal press organisations, sets and conducts examinations, and
organises short training courses for journalists.
The two methods of entry into newspaper journalism are selection for a
one-year NCTJ pre-entry course at a college of further education or direct
recruitment by a regional or local newspaper. Both categories of entrant take
part in an apprenticeship scheme consisting of‘on-the-job’ training, and block-
release courses for those who have not attended a pre-entry course. There is also
a centre providing courses of a similar pattern for press photographers. Other
training facilities include postgraduate courses in journalism at University
College, Cardiff, and at the City University (London), and courses provided by
the Newspaper Society Training Service for regional newspapers in such
subjects as circulation, advertising, industrial relations and management. The
NCTJ co-operates closely with other bodies responsible for training in printing,
publishing and professional photography.
Under the Harry Brittain Memorial Fellowship Scheme, awarded by the
Commonwealth Press Union, several young Commonwealth journalists each
year spend three months working and studying in Britain. The Thomson
Foundation holds training courses for journalists from all parts of the world and
provides consultants and tutors for courses in journalism held overseas.
Training for work with periodicals has traditionally been done ‘on the job’ but
formal courses of instruction are becoming more widely available. The London
College of Printing offers a one-year pre-entry course in periodical journalism as
well as block- and day-release courses for those who have already started work
as trainees. In addition, several of the larger publishing houses provide in-
366
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Press
Institutions
The Press
Council
Advertising
Practice
The Press and
the Law
company training which includes periods in the classroom to supplement work
experience. For publishers who do not offer training independently, a training
group has been established.
The most important employers’ organisations are the Newspaper Publishers
Association, whose members publish national newspapers in London and Man¬
chester; the Newspaper Society, which represents the regional, local and
London suburban press; the Scottish Daily Newspaper Society, which repre¬
sents the interests of daily and Sunday newspapers in Scotland; the Scottish
Newspaper Proprietors Association, which represents the owners of weekly
newspapers in Scotland; Associated Northern Ireland Newspapers, whose
members are the proprietors of weekly newspapers in Northern Ireland; and the
Periodical Publishers Association, whose membership embraces the majority
of independent publishers of business and professional periodicals and con¬
sumer magazines.
Organisations representing journalists are the National Union of Journalists,
with more than 32,000 members and the Institute of Journalists with about
2,700 members. All practising journalists (including those engaged in radio,
television, public relations, freelance journalism and book publishing editorial
work) are eligible for membership of either, but not both. Two main printing
unions are concerned with the press.
The Guild of British Newspaper Editors with about 500 members aims to
maintain the professional status and independence of editors, defend the
freedom of the press, and improve the education and training of journalists. The
British Association of Industrial Editors is the professional organisation to
which most editors of house journals belong.
The Press Council comprises equal numbers of press and non-press members,
with an independent chairman. Its aims are: to preserve the established
freedom of the press; to maintain the character of the press in accordance with
the highest professional and commercial standards; to keep under review any
developments likely to restrict the supply of information of public interest and
importance; to deal with complaints about the conduct of the press or the
conduct of persons and organisations towards the press (the Council’s
complaints committees comprise equal numbers of press and non-press
members); to report on developments in the press which may tend towards
greater concentration or monopoly; to make representation on appropriate
occasions to the Government, the United Nations and press organisations
abroad; to publish its adjudications and periodic reports recording its work; and
to review from time to time developments in the press and the factors affecting
them. The Council’s annual reports include press statistics and articles on the
structure of leading press groups.
Advertising practice in the press is regulated and controlled by the Advertising
Standards Authority, an independent body which aims to promote and enforce
the highest standards of advertising in the interests of the public and the
industry, in particular through the British Code of Advertising Practice. The
aims of this code are to ensure that advertisements are legal, decent, honest and
truthful; that they are prepared with a sense of responsibility to the consumer;
that they conform to the principles of fair competition as generally accepted in
business; and that no advertisement brings advertising into disrepute or
reduces confidence in advertising as a service to industry and the public.
The press has generally the same freedom as the individual to comment on
matters of public interest.
THE PRESS
367
Apart from legal requirements to register newspapers and periodicals and to
reproduce ‘the printer’s imprint’, there are no specific press laws but certain
statutes include sections which apply to the press.1 These relate to such matters
as the extent of newspaper ownership in television and radio companies; the
transfer of newspaper assets; restrictions on the reporting of certain types of
court proceedings; the right of press representatives to be admitted to meetings
of local authorities; restrictions on the publication of (a) advertisement and
investment circulars, which are governed by Acts dealing with the publication
of false or misleading descriptions of goods and services and with fraud, and (b)
advertisements of remedies for certain diseases, which are covered by public
health legislation; agreements between British Telecom and newspaper pro¬
prietors on telegraphic communications, which must comply with telegraphs
legislation; restrictions on certain types of prize competition; and copyrights,
which come under copyright laws.
In certain circumstances, where the defence authorities and press repre¬
sentatives in the Defence, Press and Broadcasting Committee2 agree that publi¬
cation of information on particular topics would be detrimental to the national
interest, defence notices (‘D’ notices) are circulated to the news media reques¬
ting that such information should not be published. Compliance with these
requests is expected, but they have no legal force; the final responsibility for the
decision whether or not to publish lies solely with the editor or publisher
concerned.
Of particular relevance to the press are such laws as those on contempt of
court, official secrets, libel and defamation. A newspaper may not publish
comments on the conduct of judicial proceedings which are likely to prejudice
their reputation for fairness before or during the actual proceedings, nor may it
publish before or during a trial anything which might tend to influence the
result. The obtaining and publication of information from state and official
sources of a confidential or security nature is affected by the official secrets
legislation. Newspapers are also liable to proceedings for seditious libel and
incitement to disaffection. The majority of legal proceedings against the press
are libel actions brought by private individuals. In such cases, the editor,
proprietor, publishers, printer and distributor of the newspaper, as well as the
author, may all be held responsible.
A code of conduct on trade union closed shops has been issued under the Employment Act 1980
(see p 301). In relation to the press the code considers the position of editors and journalists and
the essential freedom to collect and publish information and to publish comment and criticism
A committee, under the chairmanship of the Permanent Under-Secretary of State for Defence (a
senior civil servant), composed jointly of officials from government departments concerned with
national security and representatives of the press and broadcasting organisations.
23 Television
and Radio
Broadcasting is based on the tradition that it is a public service accountable to
the people through Parliament. Two public bodies—the British Broadcasting
Corporation (BBC) and the Independent Broadcasting Authority (IBA)—provide
television and radio services throughout the country. In Wales the Welsh
Fourth Channel Authority (WFCA) is responsible for programmes on one
channel. The authorities work to broad requirements and objectives placed on
them by Parliament, but are otherwise independent in the day-to-day conduct
of business.
This independence carries with it certain obligations over programmes and
programme content. Programmes must display, as far as possible, a proper
balance and wide range of subject matter, impartiality in matters of controversy
and accuracy in news coverage, and must not offend against good taste. Codes
of guidance on violence in television programmes, particularly during hours
when large numbers of children are likely to be viewing, are operated by both
authorities. A code of advertising standards and practice is also operated by the
IBA. (The BBC does not broadcast advertisements.) A complaints commission
deals with allegations of unfair treatment or infringement of privacy in pro¬
grammes. Proposals are under discussion to categorise publicly available
videocassette tapes in order to indicate their suitability for different audiences.
The Home Secretary regulates broadcasting generally, is answerable to
Parliament on broad policy questions, and may issue directions on a number of
technical and other matters.
Television viewing is by far the most popular leisure pastime in Britain,
average viewing time per person being about 20 hours a week. Virtually every¬
one has access to television. Over 20 per cent of households have two or more
receivers. The growth in ownership of videocassette recorders and equipment
(including home computers) for playing television games has for many people
increased the choice of entertainment available in the home. Practically every
home also has a radio set, and car radios and portable sets have made radio a
major day-time diversion.
Households with television must buy an annual licence costing £15 for black
and white or £46 for colour. Of over 18 -5 million licences current in April 1983
about 14 • 7 million were for colour.
The British The constitution and finances of the BBC are governed by the Royal Charter and
Broadcasting by a Licence and Agreement. The Corporation of 12 governors (each appointed
Corporation by the Queen on the advice of the Government and including separate gover¬
nors for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland) is responsible for all aspects of
broadcasting. Committees advise them on a wide range of matters including
the social effects of television, religious broadcasting, music, agriculture,
schools broadcasting, further education, programmes for ethnic minorities,
science and engineering, and charitable appeals. The governors appoint the
Director General who is chairman of the BBC’s board of management.
The National Broadcasting Councils for Scotland, Wales and Northern
Ireland control the policy and content of television and radio programmes
intended primarily for reception in their respective areas. Local radio councils,
TELEVISION AND RADIO
369
The
Independent
Broadcasting
Authority
The Programme
Companies
representative of the local community, advise on the development and opera¬
tion of the BBC’s local radio stations.
The domestic services of the BBC are financed principally from the sale of
television licences. This is supplemented by profits from trading activities,
including television programme exports, the sale of records and publications
connected with BBC programmes, the hire and sale of educational films, film
library sales, and exhibitions based on programmes. Nearly three-quarters of
expenditure on domestic services relates to television. The BBC meets the cost
of local radio stations but some local education authorities help to make edu¬
cational programmes. The BBC’s External Services are financed by a grant
determined each year by the Government.
The IBA’s constitution and finances are governed by statute. Its members
(three of whom have responsibility for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland)
are appointed by the Home Secretary. The IBA does not produce radio or televi¬
sion programmes; these are provided by independent programme companies
and by the Channel Four Television Company (a wholly owned subsidiary of the
IBA) for Channel 4. Its main functions are to appoint the companies, supervise
programme arrangements, control advertising and build, own and operate
transmitting stations. The chief executive officer of the IBA, the Director
General, is supported by a headquarters and regional office staff covering all
technical and administrative services.
The IBA is advised by a General Advisory Council, by Scottish, Northern
Ireland and Welsh committees, and by committees on educational
broadcasting, religious broadcasting, charitable appeals and advertising. A
specialist panel advises on advertisements of a medical nature. Local com¬
mittees advise on local radio services.
The IBA’s finance comes from annual rental payments made by the television
and radio programme companies. The television and some independent local
radio programme companies also pay to the IBA, for transfer to the
Government, a levy related to their profits.
Fifteen television programme companies hold contracts to provide television
programmes in the 14 independent television regions (two companies share the
contract for London, one providing programmes during the week and the other
at the weekend). A contract to provide a national early morning television
service, transmitted on the ITV network, is held by an additional company. The
companies operate on a commercial basis, deriving most of their revenue from
the sale of advertising time. The financial resources, advertising revenue and
programme production of the companies vary considerably, depending largely
on the size of population in the areas in which they operate. Although news¬
papers can acquire an interest in programme companies, there are safeguards
to protect the public interest.
In consultation with the IBA, each company plans the content of the program¬
mes to be broadcast in its area. These are produced by the company itself and by
other programme companies or purchased from elsewhere. The five largest
companies serving London, North-West England, East and West Midlands, and
Yorkshire provide more programmes for broadcast elsewhere on the national
network than do the smaller ones. A common news service is provided by
Independent Television News Ltd, a non-profit-making company in which all
the programme companies are shareholders. Negotiations for the supply,
exchange and purchase of programmes and their co-ordinated transmission
through the independent television network take place largely on the Network
Planning Committee which consists of representatives of all the programme
companies and of the IBA.
370
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Television
Similar principles apply in the case of independent local radio. The pro¬
gramme companies are under contract to the IBA, operate under its control and
are financed by advertising revenue. News coverage is supplied as a common
service by Independent Radio News.
Four television channels are in operation. Two each are owned by the BBC and
IBA: BBC 1 and ITV (Independent Television) broadcast on both 405 lines very
high frequency (vhf) and 625 lines ultra high frequency (uhf); and BBC 2 and
Channel 4 broadcast on 625 lines uhf only. About 99 per cent (over 90 per cent
for Channel 4) of the population live within range of the uhf transmission. The
405-line (vhf) transmissions are to be phased out by late 1984.
Apart from a break during the second world war the BBC has been providing
regular television broadcasts since 1936. All BBC 2 programmes and the vast
majority of those on BBC 1 are broadcast on the national network. Some 70 per
cent of the BBC’s network programmes for 1982-83 were produced in London
and 30 per cent elsewhere in Britain.
Through co-ordinated planning on its two services the BBC caters simultane¬
ously for people of differing interests. While both services cover the whole range
of television output, BBC 1 presents more programmes of general interest, such
as light entertainment, sport, current affairs, children’s programmes and
outside broadcasts, while BBC 2 places greater emphasis on minority interests,
but also provides documentaries, travel programmes, serious drama, music,
programmes on pastimes and international films. An early morning television
service providing about 2-j hours of news and information started on BBC 1 in
January 1983. The service runs from Monday to Friday but may later be
extended into the weekend.
The first regular independent television programmes began in London in
1955. On average each of the 14 ITV areas transmitted over 100 hours of televi¬
sion programmes a week in 1982-83, nearly two-fifths of which comprised
informative programmes—including news, documentaries, current affairs,
education and religion. Almost three-quarters of the programmes are produced
by the programme companies. A national early morning television service on
ITV, which opened in February 1983, provides 3 hours of news, information and
current affairs daily.
Channel 4, which began broadcasting in November 1982, provides a national
television service throughout Britain, except in Wales which has a correspond¬
ing service (Sianel 4 Cymru—S4C—see below). The IBA must ensure that pro¬
grammes on Channel 4 are complementary to those of ITV, catering for tastes
and interests not normally provided for by the original independent service. It
must provide a suitable proportion (about 15 per cent) of educational program¬
mes, encourage innovation and experiment, and include a substantial propor¬
tion of programmes from independent producers. The service, both nationally
and in Wales, is financed by subscriptions from the programme companies in
return for advertising time in Channel 4 programmes broadcast in their own
regions. In Wales programmes on the fourth channel are run and controlled by
the Welsh Fourth Channel Authority appointed by the Home Secretary. The
Authority is required to ensure that a substantial proportion (some 22 hours a
week) of the programmes are in Welsh and that programmes broadcast
between 18-30 and 22 • 00 hours are mainly in Welsh. At other times the Welsh
fourth channel shows national Channel 4 programmes.
Britain is one of the world’s foremost exporters of television productions,
many of which have won international awards. In 1982 these included two of the
top four prizes at the International Emmy Awards in the United States and a
first prize in both the drama and music categories at the Prix Italia Television
Festival in Venice. In 1983 awards included two of the top awards at the Mon-
TELEVISION AND RADIO
371
Radio
Cable
Services
External
Services
treux International Television Festival and the gold award in the sports cate¬
gory at the New York International Film and Television Festival.
BBC Radio has four national channels. Radio 1 provides a programme of pop
music, while Radio 2 provides light entertainment and music as well as being
the principal channel for the coverage of sport. Radio 3 provides mainly
classical music as well as drama, poetry and short stories, talks and documenta¬
ries, and Test Match cricket (on medium wave only). Radio 4 is the main speech
programme, providing the principal news and information service and a wide
range of drama, music and talks.
Local radio is provided by 28 BBC stations in England and two in the Channel
Islands and by 42 independent stations distributed throughout Britain.
Another 26 areas are to be covered by ILR (Independent Local Radio) and eight
more for the BBC have been proposed. About 90 per cent of the population is
served by BBC or independent radio stations. Broadcasts provide a comprehen¬
sive service of local news and information, music and other entertainment,
education, consumer advice and coverage of local events, and offer listeners a
chance to air their views, often by using the phone-in technique.
The BBC’s discussion paper on the future of its radio services, BBC Radio for
the Nineties, published in 1983, is the subject of public debate.
Hitherto, about 14 per cent of households with television sets have received their
television services by cable. The vast majority of cable systems have been used
solely to relay broadcast television and radio services in order to improve recep¬
tion quality, to avoid ‘screening’ by buildings or the local topography, or
because external aerials are not allowed on some residential buildings.
However, one local community cable television and four local community
cable sound-only stations in operation enable people both to see and hear pro¬
grammes about local topics and issues and to take part in making the program¬
mes. Seven cable operators have been providing subscription television
(‘Pay-TV’) services in 13 areas for an experimental period since 1981. All oper¬
ators of cable systems are licensed by the Home Secretary and British Telecom.
Commercial relay operators are represented by the Cable Television Associa¬
tion of Great Britain.
The Government has announced its intention to allow a much more general
expansion of cable television. Its proposals are set out in a White Paper1
published in April 1983. The broad conclusions are that cable investment
should be privately financed; that regulation should be as light as possible to
allow the development of a wide range of services and facilities, and flexible
enough to adapt to changing technology; and that there should be certain safe¬
guards for existing broadcasting services. Proposals are made for the estab¬
lishment of a new national Cable Authority to award franchises, supervise
programme services and promote cable development. The necessary legisla¬
tion has been introduced in Parliament, and in the meantime work is starting on
up to 12 cable systems which will serve as pilot projects.
The BBC External Services broadcast by radio to most countries overseas,
using English and many other languages. The main objectives are to give
unbiased news, reflect British opinion and project British life, culture and devel¬
opments in science and industry. News bulletins, current affairs programmes,
political commentaries and topical magazine programmes form the main part
of the output. A full sports service, music, drama and general entertainment are
also included.
1 The Development ofCable Systems and Services. Cmnd 8866, HMSO £6 00
ISBN 0 10 188660 8.
372
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The languages in which the External Services broadcast and the length of
time each is on the air are prescribed by the Government. Apart from this the
BBC has full responsibility and is completely independent in determining the
content of news and other programmes. A plan to improve audibility has been
announced, with some of the costs being met from current operations. As a
result of cuts in government expenditure the number of language services has
been reduced to 37 with a weekly broadcast total of nearly 730 hours.
The BBC World Service broadcasts for 24 hours a day in English and is
supplemented at peak listening times by programmes of special interest to
Africa.
BBC news bulletins and other programmes are re-broadcast by the radio
services of many countries. Re-broadcasting involves direct relays from BBC
transmissions and the use of recorded programmes supplied through the BBC
tape and disc transcription service. There are some 3,000 re-broadcasts weekly
of World Service programmes in pbout 150 countries. The Transcription
Service, which the Government hopes will become self-supporting, offers pro¬
grammes to about 100 countries.
The BBC’s English by Radio and Television Service is the most extensive lan¬
guage teaching undertaking in the world. English lessons are broadcast weekly
by radio with explanations in 30 other languages, and recorded lessons are
supplied to 300 stations in 90 countries. English by Television programmes are
shown in more than 60 countries.
Another part of the External Services, the Monitoring Service, listens to and
reports on foreign broadcasts, supplying a daily flow of significant news and
comment from overseas to the BBC, the press, and the Government.
Radio for overseas is also produced by the radio services of the Central Office
of Information (COI). A wide range of recorded material is sent to radio stations
in over 90 countries. COI television services provide material such as docu¬
mentary and magazine programmes for distribution to overseas stations.
Advertising The BBC does not give publicity to any firm or organised interest except when it
is necessary to provide effective and informative programmes. It must not
broadcast any commercial advertisement or any sponsored programme.
Advertisements are broadcast on independent television but there is no spon¬
soring of programmes by advertisers. Advertisements must be clearly distin¬
guishable and separate from programmes, and the amount of time given to
them must not be so great as to detract from the value of the programmes as a
medium of information, education or entertainment. Advertising is
normally limited to seven minutes in any one hour of broadcasting time and
averaged over the day’s programmes must not exceed six minutes per hour.
The independent local radio stations are normally limited to a maximum of nine
minutes of advertising each hour. The IBA has a code governing standards and
practice in advertising on television and radio and giving guidance about the
types and methods of advertisement which are prohibited; this includes adver¬
tising with a political or religious object or on behalf of cigarettes or betting.
Advertisements may not be inserted in certain types of programme, such as
broadcasts to schools.
Government publicity material to support non-political campaigns may be
broadcast on independent radio and television. This is prepared through the
COI and broadcast and paid for on a normal commercial basis. Short public
service items, mainly about health, safety and welfare, are also produced by the
COI for free transmission by the BBC and independent television and radio. The
Government has no general privileged access to radio or television.
TELEVISION AND RADIO
373
Parliamentary
and Political
Broadcasting
Technical
Developments
Parliamentary reporting includes a daily factual and impartial account of pro¬
ceedings in Parliament. Proceedings, including those of committees, are broad¬
cast on radio, some live and others in recorded form in radio and television news
and current affairs programmes.
Ministerial and party political broadcasts are transmitted periodically on
radio and television under rules agreed between the major political parties, the
BBC and the IBA and there are special arrangements for the period following the
announcement of a general election.
Research into technical problems is carried out by scientific and engineering
staffs of the BBC, the IBA, the Home Office, other government departments and
the radio industry. One of the most important recent developments has been
the introduction of smaller, lighter cameras and video recorders for use on loca¬
tion. Electronic news-gathering equipment, whereby pictures can be trans¬
mitted directly to a studio or recorded on videotape on location, reduces
significantly the time before an item can be broadcast. Other developments
include the use of new types of videotape recorders, the increasing use of
computers to generate graphical shapes such as captions and credits, and the
improvement of the quality of videotape pictures.
Recent developments by the BBC include the ACE digital television stand¬
ards converter, probably the most advanced in the world, which is used to
convert pictures between the European and American standards. Another BBC
development is the NICAM system used to carry high-quality sound pro¬
gramme signals across the country. Both of these systems have been licensed to
commercial manufacturers. The BBC has also developed a data labelling
system for sound programmes which will make programme and station
selection much easier. Research includes investigations into stereo sound for
television, digital transmission signals over fibre-optic cables, improved
picture displays, and many aspects of satellite broadcasting. IBA engineers
were the first in the world to introduce a fully digital field rate standards conver¬
ter to improve the interchange of programmes between areas using the 525-line
system and those using the 625-line system. Current IBA research projects
include the further development of the first digital videotape recorder with
economical use of tape, and a study of the future use of space satellites for broad¬
casting which has included the development of a new MAC transmission
system for use on future direct broadcast satellites. MAC has been accepted by
the Government as a United Kingdom satellite transmission standard.
Direct broadcasting by satellite is due to be started by the BBC in September
1986 on two of the five channels allocated to Britain by international agreement.
One channel will be primarily a feature film service available on a subscription.
The second channel will be of a more general nature. The Government proposes
to give the IBA power to issue one or more contracts for direct satellite broad¬
casting on two of the remaining channels. The allocation of the fifth channel has
not yet been decided. Plans have also been announced for the formation of a
privately financed satellite system, to be designed and manufactured in Britain.
The BBC and IBA have co-operated in the development of a teletext system,
known by the BBC as CEEFAX and the IBA as ORACLE. The use of teletext
allows the television signal to carry additional information which can be
selected and displayed as ‘pages’ of text and graphics on receivers equipped
with the necessary decoders. The system is also used to provide programme
sub-titles, which are of great benefit to the deaf and hard of hearing. Over 95 per
cent of teletext sets throughout the world are based on the British system, and
working services operating to the British standard are in use or on trial in 13
countries, including Australia, the F ederal Republic of Germany and the United
States. British Telecom’s public viewdata service, Prestel, offers a wide range of
374
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
International
Relations
information which is transmitted via the telephone and viewed on the screen of
a television receiver (see p 287).
The BBC and the IBA are active members of the European Broadcasting Union
which manages Eurovision, and is responsible for the technical and administra¬
tive arrangements for co-ordinating the exchange of programmes over the
Eurovision network and intercontinental satellite links, as well as maintaining
a technical monitoring station where frequency measurements and other
observations on broadcasting stations are carried out. The Union also provides
a forum linking the major public services and national broadcasters of Western
Europe and other parts of the world and co-ordinates co-operation in radio and
television.
The BBC is a partner in Visnews, which supplies world newsfilm to 274 televi¬
sion stations in 86 countries and is the most widely used newsfilm agency in the
world. United Press International, Paramount Pictures and Independent Tele¬
vision News jointly provide an international newsfilm service to more than 100
overseas television organisations via the Eurovision network and by satellite.
The BBC is an associate member of the Asian Pacific Broadcasting Union, and
belongs to the Commonwealth Broadcasting Association whose members
extend to each other such facilities as the use of studios, recording channels,
and programme contributions. The BBC also provides technical aid, particu¬
larly in training the staff of other broadcasting organisations throughout the
world; members of the BBC’s staff are seconded for service overseas.
The Government finances a number of overseas students on the broadcasting
training courses at the British Council (see p 67), the BBC and the Thomson
Television College which is based in Glasgow.
The BBC and the IBA participate in the work of the International Telecommu¬
nications Union, the United Nations agency responsible for regulating and con¬
trolling all international telecommunications services (including radio and
television), for allocating and registering all radio frequencies and for promot¬
ing and co-ordinating the international study of technical problems in broad¬
casting. The BBC is also represented on the United Kingdom Committee of the
International Special Committee on Radio Interference. The BBC maintains 29
offices overseas.
24 Sport and
Recreation
The British invented and developed many of the sports and games which are
now played all over the world, and there is widespread interest in most kinds of
sport throughout the country. Large crowds attend occasions such as the
association football Cup Final at Wembley Stadium, the international rugby
matches at Twickenham, Murrayfield and Cardiff Arms Park, the Wimbledon
lawn tennis championships, the classic horse races. Grand Prix motor racing
and the cricket Test matches. Extensive coverage of sport on television has
helped to generate interest in a wide variety of sports including rugby league,
darts, snooker, ice-skating, skiing and athletics.
Levels of participation in sport have been rising due mainly to the increases in
leisure time and facilities, greater mobility and rising living standards. A
growing awareness of the importance to good health of regular exercise has
been reflected in recent years by an upsurge of interest in jogging and marathon
running. Numbers taking part regularly in outdoor sport grew from 25 to 30 per
cent of the adult population between 1973 and 1980, while participation in
indoor sport more than doubled in the same period from 9 to 23 per cent. Men
greatly outnumber women in active sport.
ORGANISATION A Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State in the Department of the Environ-
AND ment co-ordinates government policy on sport and active recreation. The
PROMOTION Secretaries of State for Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland have similar
responsibilities in their areas.
The Government provides financial and other assistance through a number
of official bodies. Some of these, such as the Sports Councils and the Country¬
side Commissions, have specific responsibilities for sport and recreation, and
help other public and private bodies to provide facilities. Others, for example,
the Forestry Commission, the British Waterways Board, the Nature Conser¬
vancy Council and the regional water authorities, provide recreational
amenities in addition to their main functions.
The official policy for the development of sport in England in the period
1982-91, drawn up by the Sports Council in 1982, is to encourage further
increases in participation, especially among young people and those nearing
retirement; to provide adequate facilities for the whole community, especially
in the inner cities and in deprived rural areas; and to continue the encou¬
ragement of high standards of performance. The social role that sport can play
has become more important at a time of high unemployment and rapid change
in work and leisure patterns.
Sports Councils Government assistance for the development of sport in Great Britain is chan¬
nelled through three independent bodies—the Sports Council (for England and
for general matters affecting Britain as a whole), the Sports Council for Wales
and the Scottish Sports Council. (In Northern Ireland the Department of Edu¬
cation makes direct grants to local authorities and voluntary sports bodies. The
Sports Council, which is financed by the Department, is an advisory body
without grant-making powers.) The Councils allocate government funds,
amounting to some £33 million in 1983-84, subject only to general ministerial
376
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
PROVISION OF
FACILITIES
Private
Sponsorship
directives. They award grants for sports development, coaching and admin¬
istration to the governing bodies of sport and other national organisations, and
administer the national sports centres. Grants and loans are made to voluntary
organisations and local authorities to assist the provision of sports facilities. In
some circumstances grants are also given to commercial organisations. The
Councils assist British representatives at international sports meetings and
encourage links with international and overseas organisations. They also have
information centres providing data on a wide range of sports topics. The Sports
Council consults with the Central Council of Physical Recreation, comprising
members of the national governing and representative bodies of sport and
physical recreation in England. The equivalent bodies in Scotland, Wales and
Northern Ireland are the Scottish Standing Conference on Sport, the Welsh
Sports Association and the Northern Ireland Council of Physical Recreation.
There are nine regional councils for sport and recreation in England, on each
of which sporting, countryside and local authority interests are represented.
Local authorities are the main providers of land and large-scale facilities for
community recreation; their total expenditure on sport and recreation amoun¬
ted to some £800 million in 1982-83. Provision of facilities was substantially
increased in the 1970s to meet the increasing demand and to encourage further
expansion of participation. The facilities provided include parks, lakes, playing
fields, sports halls, tennis courts, golf courses, swimming baths and sports
centres catering for a wide range of activities.
Increased emphasis is being laid on the need to improve facilities for sport in
areas of urban stress, and schemes worth some £18 million were supported in
1982-83 as part of the Government’s Urban Programme. A further £3 million
was granted over the two years 1981 -83 towards sports and recreational facil¬
ities on reclaimed sites under the Derelict Land Scheme. In recognition of the
special problems of Merseyside the Government granted £1-25 million to match
an equal sum raised by the private and voluntary sectors for sporting projects in
the area; a further grant of £1 million is being made available in 1983-84.
Publicly maintained schools must provide for the physical education of their
pupils. All (except those solely for infants) are expected to have a playing field or
the use of one, and most secondary schools have a gymnasium. Some have
other amenities such as swimming pools, sports halls and halls designed for
dance and movement. The Government is considering ways of encouraging
greater community use of these activities outside school hours. Sport and recre¬
ation facilities are also provided at institutions of higher and further education
(some of which have departments of physical education), and there are ‘centres
of sporting excellence’, often at universities and other colleges, which enable
selected young athletes to develop their talents while providing, where
appropriate, for their educational needs.
Opportunities for outdoor recreation in national parks, nature reserves, forest
parks and country parks are provided by public bodies (see p 169).
In addition to the recreational facilities provided by public authorities, many
facilities are made available by local voluntary clubs. Some cater for indoor
recreation, but more common are those providing sports grounds, particularly
for games such as cricket, association and rugby football, hockey, tennis and
golf. Clubs linked to business firms often cater for a wide range of activities, and
in many cases make their facilities available to members of the public. Commer¬
cial facilities include tenpin bowling centres, ice- and roller-skating rinks,
squash courts, golf courses and driving ranges, curling rinks and riding stables.
Increasing numbers of sports receive financial sponsorship from commercial
organisations. Sponsorship may take the form of financing specific events, or it
SPORT AND RECREATION
377
Sports Centres
SPORTS
ORGANIS¬
ATIONS
The British
Olympic
Association
may be granted to individual sports organisations. A Sports Aid Foundation
raises and distributes funds from industry, commerce and private sponsors in
order to assist the training of talented individual sportsmen and sportswomen.
The Foundation makes grants on the recommendation of the governing bodies
of sport. The Scottish and Welsh Sports Aid Foundations and the Ulster Sports
and Recreation Trust fulfil similar functions. The Sports Council and the Scot¬
tish Sports Council also run sponsorship advisory services. The estimated
value of commercial sponsorship of sport in Britain was some £100 million in
1982.
National sports centres, some of which were initially financed by funds from
voluntary sources, are run by the Sports Councils, and provide a range of
competition and training facilities. As well as offering residential courses for
national teams, coaches and enthusiasts from all over Britain, the centres are
used extensively by local sports clubs and the local community.
There are six national centres in England and Wales, operated by the Sports
Council. Combined facilities for a range of sports are provided at three centres:
Crystal Palace in south-east London, Bisham Abbey in Buckinghamshire and
Lilleshall in Shropshire. Crystal Palace provides major competition venues for
athletics and swimming and a variety of indoor sports, and Lilleshall is also the
training headquarters of the Football Association. The other three are specialist
centres: the National Sailing Centre, Cowes, Isle of Wight; the National Water
Sports Centre at Holme Pierrepont, Nottinghamshire, which caters for rowing,
canoeing and water-skiing; and the Plas-y-Brenin National Centre for Mountain
Activities in north Wales. Crystal Palace and Holme Pierrepont also receive
financial support from the Greater London Council and the Nottinghamshire
County Council. The Sports Council for Wales runs the National Sports Centre
for Wales in Cardiff and the National Outdoor Pursuits Centre at Plas Menai in
north Wales which was opened in 1982.
The Scottish Sports Council operates three national sports training centres:
Glenmore Lodge near Aviemore for outdoor pursuits, Inverclyde at Largs for
general sports, and a national water sports training centre on Great Cumbrae
Isle in the Firth of Clyde. The Sports Council for Northern Ireland operates one
national facility, the Northern Ireland Mountain Centre at Tollymore in County
Down.
Nearly a thousand indoor sports centres serve local rather than national
needs; they range from purpose-built centres to school sports facilities available
for public use outside school hours. Several cater for specialised interests, such
as the National Equestrian Centre, run by the British Equestrian Federation,
and the Ludwig Guttmann Sports Centre for the Disabled, Stoke Mandeville.
Individual sports are run by independent governing bodies whose functions
usually include drawing up rules, holding events, regulating membership,
selecting and training national teams and promoting international links. There
are also organisations representing people who take part in more informal
physical recreation, such as walking; others, such as the National Trusts (see
p 168), are involved in leisure interests as part of their wider concerns.
The British Olympic Association, founded in 1905, organises the participation
of British teams in the Olympic Games. The Association’s committee consists of
representatives of the 26 sports in the programme of the Olympic Games
(summer and winter). It determines the size of the British team, raises funds,
makes all the arrangements and provides a headquarters staff for the manage¬
ment of the team.
378
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The National
Playing Fields
Association
Sport for the
Disabled
POPULAR
SPORTS AND
RECREATIONS
Association
Football
The National Playing Fields Association, a national charity, encourages the pro¬
vision of playing fields, playgrounds and recreational facilities, specialising in
the play and recreational needs of children and young people, including the
young handicapped. There are affiliated associations in Scotland and Northern
Ireland and in the counties of England and Wales.
The British Sports Association for the Disabled, founded in 1961, encourages
greater sporting and recreational opportunities for disabled people. The
Association, which receives an annual Sports Council grant, provides advice on
physical recreation, arranges sports meetings, and encourages the provision of
facilities throughout the country. It co-ordinates the activities of its 31 member
associations representing all categories of handicap—physical, mental and
sensory. The United Kingdom Sport Association for People with Mental Handi¬
cap was established in 1981.
The first sports stadium in the world designed for the disabled was opened at
Stoke Mandeville, Buckinghamshire, in 1969, and is owned and maintained by
the British Paraplegic Sports Society. Annual national games organised by
several of the associations for the disabled take place at Stoke Mandeville,
Crystal Palace in London and at other locations, while British teams participate
at international events. As part of the International Year of Disabled People in
1981 several initiatives were launched by the sports councils and other bodies to
increase the participation of disabled people in sport.
Some of the major sports and recreations in Britain are described below. The
increased provision of sports centres has led to much greater opportunities for
participation in indoor sports such as basketball, volleyball, fencing, judo, the
martial arts (karate, aikido and kendo), gymnastics, table tennis and shooting.
Almost all outdoor sports have continued to gain in popularity, including the
‘high risk’ activities such as rock climbing and sub-aqua diving. The number of
people enjoying the recreational amenities of the countryside, rivers and
coastline is similarly growing. Two new sports introduced from overseas which
have gained rapidly in popularity are boardsailing and hang-gliding; the flying
of microlight aircraft is one of the newest sports to achieve a keen following.
Sportsmen may be professionals (paid players) or amateurs. Some sports,
such as rugby union, hockey and rowing are amateur but in others the distinc¬
tion between amateur and professional status is less strictly defined, or does not
exist.
The largest spectator sport and one of the most popular participation sports,
association football was first developed and codified in England during the nine¬
teenth century, and is controlled by separate football associations in England,
Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland. In England over 350 clubs are affiliated
to the English Football Association (FA) and some 40,000 clubs to regional or
district associations. The full-time professional clubs in England and Wales
belong to the Football League (92 clubs) and in Scotland to the Scottish Football
League (38 clubs); the clubs play in four divisions in England and Wales and
three in Scotland. During the season, which lasts from August until May, atten¬
dances at Canon League (that is, English leagues) matches total about 19
million. The Football Association, formed in 1863, and the Football League,
formed in 1888, were both the first of their kind in the world.
The annual competitions for the FA Challenge Cup, the Milk Cup (formerly
the League Cup), the Scottish FA Cup, the Scottish League Cup, the Irish Cup
and the Welsh FA Cup are organised on a knock-out basis, and the finals are
played at Wembley Stadium, London, at Hampden Park, Glasgow, at Windsor
Park, Belfast, and on a two-leg home and away basis in Wales. National teams
SPORT AND RECREATION
379
Athletics
The Highland
Games
Badminton
take part in European competitions, the World Cup competition and other inter¬
national matches. England, Scotland and Northern Ireland played in the final
stages of the World Cup competition held in Spain in 1982. English clubs were
European club champions (Liverpool three times, Nottingham Forest twice and
Aston Villa once) for six consecutive years between 1977 and 1982, Aberdeen
won the European Cup-Winners Cup in 1983, and Ipswich Town won the Union
of European Football Associations cup competition in 1981.
The Sports Council, using specially allocated funds, has made grants to a
number of clubs to enable them to modernise or expand football and other
sporting facilities which will attract young people. Hooliganism at football
matches is a subject of public concern, and guidelines have been issued to clubs
by the Government and the football authorities aimed at controlling and reduc¬
ing the problem.
Amateur athletics (including track, road and cross-country running, relay
racing, jumping, vaulting, hurdling, steeplechasing, throwing and race
walking) are governed in England by the Amateur Athletic Association which,
formed in 1880, was the first national governing body for athletics and by the
Women s Amateur Athletic Association. Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland
have their own associations. International athletics and the selection of British
teams are the concern of the British Amateur Athletic Board, which is com¬
posed of representatives of the national associations. For the Olympic Games
one team represents the United Kingdom but England, Wales, Scotland,
Northern Ireland, Jersey, Guernsey and the Isle of Man compete separately in
the Commonwealth Games and also organise their own international meetings.
The Board also administers coaching schemes.
Many British athletes, especially middle-distance runners, have enjoyed dis¬
tinguished reputations; in 1954, for example, Dr Roger Bannister became the
first man to run a mile in under four minutes. More recently four athletes won
gold medals in the 1980 Olympic Games, and in 1983 six world records were held
by Britons: the 800 and 1,000 metres and the mile by Sebastian Coe; the 1,500
metres and two miles by Steve Ovett and the 5,000 metres by David Moorcroft.
Daley Thompson (decathlon) and Steve Cram (1,500 metres) were both gold
medallists at the 1983 world athletics championships in Helsinki.
The Scottish Highland Games, at which sports (including tossing the caber,
putting the weight and throwing the hammer) and dancing and piping compe¬
titions take place, attract large numbers of spectators from all over the world.
Among better-known Highland Games are the annual Braemar Gathering,
which is traditionally attended by the Royal Family, the Argyllshire and Cowal
Gatherings and the meeting at Aboyne.
The origins of badminton are not clear, but the Badminton Association of
England, which together with the Scottish, Welsh and Irish Badminton Unions
today organises the sport in Britain, was formed in 1893 and the first
tournament was promoted five years later. By 1914 the game had spread to many
other Commonwealth countries and is now played throughout the world.
Badminton expanded rapidly in the 1970s and is played in a variety of locations
ranging from sports centres to village halls; between four and five million people
are estimated to play the game in Britain. British women players have done
particularly well in the sport: Nora Perry and Jane Webster of England were
world champions in 1982, and Nora Perry and Thomas Kihlstrom of Sweden
were mixed doubles champions at the 1983 world championships. The English
team (men and women) are also reigning European and Commonwealth Games
champions.
380
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Basketball
Billiards and
Snooker
Boxing
Bowls
Basketball is played in Britain both indoors and outdoors. There are over 1,000
senior clubs and the game is played in most secondary schools; in all over one
million people participate and its popularity is increasing rapidly. The English
Basket Ball Association is the governing body of the sport in England, and there
are similar associations in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland; all are affili¬
ated to the Federation Internationale de Basketball Amateur. The leading
English clubs play in a national league and the main events of the year are the
club championship finals held at Wembley Arena in London and the cup final
staged at the Royal Albert Hall.
The character of the present game of billiards was established in Britain at the
end of the seventeenth century. Snooker, a more varied game invented by the
British in India in 1875, has greatly increased in popularity and become a major
spectator sport as a result of widespread television coverage of the professional
tournaments. It is estimated that between five and six million people now play
the game. British players have an outstanding record in snooker and the major
professional championships have been largely dominated by them. The main
tournament is the annual Embassy World Professional Championship, held in
Sheffield; British winners of this event include Ray Reardon (six times), John
Spencer (three times), and more recently Terry Griffiths (1979), Alex Higgins
(1972 and 1982) and Steve Davis (1981 and 1983). England won the State
Express World Team Championships in 1981 and 1983 and Wales in 1980.
The controlling body of both games is the Billiards and Snooker Control
Council, which holds the copyright of the rules. The Professional Players
Association organises professional championships.
Boxing as a British sport is one of the oldest, probably originating in Saxon
times. Its modern form, also adopted in many overseas countries, dates from
1865 when the Marquess of Queensberry drew up a set of rules eliminating
much of the brutality that had characterised prize-fighting and making skill the
basis of the sport. Boxing is both amateur and professional, and in both strict
medical regulations are observed.
The Amateur Boxing Association controls all amateur boxing in England
including schoolboy, club and association boxing, and boxing in the armed
services. There are separate associations in Scotland and Wales. Northern
Ireland forms part of the Irish Boxing Association. The associations organise
various amateur boxing competitions, and teams from England, Wales, Scot¬
land and Northern Ireland take part in international competitions such as the
European and world championships and the Olympic and Commonwealth
Games.
Professional boxing is controlled by the British Boxing Board of Control,
founded in 1929. The Board appoints inspectors, medical officers and repre¬
sentatives to ensure that regulations are observed and to guard against over¬
matching and exploitation. At various times British boxers have held European
and world championship titles. Some of the best known include Henry Cooper,
Alan Minter, Charlie Magri and Jim Watt.
Bowls has been played in Britain since the thirteenth century. In the south of
England the game is called lawn bowls and is played on a flat green; in the
northern areas of England and the Isle of Man a variation called crown green
bowls is played, so called because the centre of the green is higher than its
boundaries. Lawn and crown green bowls are mainly summer games; in winter
indoor bowls, played on synthetic greens, is growing in popularity. At one time
regarded as a pastime for the elderly, bowls is increasingly played by adults of
SPORT AND RECREATION
381
Chess
Cricket
all ages. Over 2,640 lawn bowling clubs are affiliated to the English Bowling
Association, which, together with the Bowling Associations of Scotland, Wales
and Ireland and the English Women’s Bowling Association, play to the rules of
the International Bowling Board. Other associations, including the English
Bowling Federation, are not under the Board’s control. The British Crown
Green Bowling Association is the governing body of crown green bowls, and has
nearly 2,000 affiliated clubs.
Chess has increased greatly in popularity over the past ten years and England
now ranks among the top five chess playing nations (Scotland and Wales are
separately represented). There are local chess clubs and leagues throughout the
country and the game is widely played in schools and colleges. Important dom¬
estic competitions include the annual Grieveson Grant British Championships,
held at a different resort each year, the Leigh Grand Prix, a circuit of weekend
tournaments, and the Times British Schools Chess Tournament, a knock-out
competition open to all schools. A recent development has been the biennial
world class Grandmaster tournament, the Phillips and Drew Kings, held at
County Hall in London and co-sponsored by the Greater London Council. The
governing bodies of the game are the British Chess Federation, the Scottish
Chess Association (which is the oldest such body in the world, celebrating its
centenary in 1984) and the Welsh and Ulster Chess Unions. The first British
player to achieve the status of Grandmaster for over-the-board chess was Tony
Miles in 1976, and seven Britons now hold that title.
Cricket is among the most popular of summer sports and is sometimes called
the English national game. It is known to have been played as early as the 1550s.
Among the many clubs founded in the eighteenth century is the Marylebone
Cricket Club (MCC), which reframed the la ws of the game. The Club is based at
Lord’s cricket ground, the administrative centre of the game. Cricket in Britain
is now governed by the Cricket Council which consists of representatives of the
MCC, the Test and County Cricket Board (representing first-class cricket) and
the National Cricket Association (representing club and junior cricket).
Cricket is played in schools, colleges and universities, and in most towns and
villages amateur teams play weekly games from late April to the end of Septem¬
ber . In England there is a network of league cricket contested by teams of Satur¬
day afternoon players; in the Midlands and the north of England these teams
include a full-time professional. The game is also played to a lesser extent in
Scotland and Wales.
Some of the best supported games in professional cricket are the annual
series of five-day sponsored Test matches played between England and a
touring team from Australia, New Zealand, India, Pakistan or the West Indies. A
team representing England usually tours one or more of these countries in the
British winter. One-day international games also attract large crowds. A World
Cup is played every four years, with some of the smaller cricketing nations as
well as the major countries competing. A sponsored First Class County Cham¬
pionship of three-day games is played by 17 professional county teams who also
take part in three one-day sponsored competitions—two knock-out compe¬
titions and the Sunday League.
Cricket is also played by women and girls, the governing body being the
Women’s Cricket Association, founded in 1926. Women’s cricket clubs have
regular week-end fixtures, and junior sides play both eleven and six-a-side
competitions. Test match series are played against Australia, India, New
Zealand and the West Indies and other international matches take place. The
women’s World Cup, in which England competes, is held every four years.
382
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Darts
Field Sports
Golf
Darts is an indoor game with its origins in medieval archery in which three
metal darts are thrown at a round, segmented board numbered one to 20.
Played mainly in pubs as a casual recreation to accompany drinking, it has
gained in popularity as a result of widespread television coverage of the profes¬
sional game. As many as nine million people at a time watch televised darts
contests and it is estimated that over three million people play the game
regularly. Darts is organised in Britain by the British Darts Organisation, which
forms part of the World Darts Federation; its rules have become the code for the
world sport. The Organisation arranges events in Britain which bring entrants
from as many as 80 countries. Every two years a World Cup tournament is held;
England won it in 1981.
The main individual title in the game is the Embassy World Professional
Championship. British players have dominated the event and in 1983 the title
was won by Keith Deller of England. The world’s leading player is currently Eric
Bristow of England.
The British Field Sports Society looks after the interests of all field sports
(including hunting, fishing, stalking, shooting, falconry and hare coursing).
The Society is a member of the British Shooting Sports Council which is the
representative body for the recreational use of firearms.
Fox hunting on horseback with a pack of hounds is the most popular British
hunting sport, but there is also stag hunting, hunting the hare and the fast-
developing sport of hunting mink and coypu. The fox hunting season lasts from
early November to April and there are over 400 packs of hounds of all kinds in
Britain. The sport is not without its critics, but a large number of people take a
keen interest in it.
Game shooting as an organised sport probably originated in the early part of
the nineteenth century. Game consists of grouse, black-grouse, partridge,
pheasant and ptarmigan, species which are protected by law during a close
season when they are allowed to breed on numerous estates supervised by
game-keepers. It is necessary to have a licence to kill game, and a certificate
must be obtained from the local police by anyone who possesses a shot-gun. The
Game Conservancy, formed by landowners, farmers and others interested in
game conservation, collects information and studies factors controlling game
population.
The most popular country sport is fishing, and there are about 3.5 million
anglers in Britain. Many fish for salmon and trout, particularly in the rivers and
lochs of Scotland and in Wales, but in England and Wales the most widely prac¬
tised form of fishing is for coarse fish such as pike, perch, carp, roach, dace,
tench, chub and bream. Angling clubs in England affiliate to the National Feder¬
ation of Anglers (there are similar bodies in Scotland, Wales and Northern
Ireland) and many clubs organise angling competitions. National cham¬
pionships are organised by the Federation which also enters a team in the World
Angling Championship. Freshwater fishing usually has to be paid for; most
coarse fishing is let to angling clubs by private owners, while trout and salmon
fishermen either rent a stretch of river, join a club, or pay for the right to fish by
the day, week or month. Coastal and deep-sea fishing are free to all (apart from
salmon and sea trout fishing which is by licence only).
Golf originated in Scotland where it has for centuries borne the title of the Royal
and Ancient Game. The Royal and Ancient Golf Club, the governing body of the
sport for most of the world, is situated at St Andrews on the east coast. Golf is
played throughout Britain and there are golf courses in the vicinity of most
towns, some of them owned by local authorities. The main event of the golfing
year and one of the world’s leading tournaments, is the Open Golf Cham-
SPORT AND RECREATION
383
pionship; other important events include the Walker Cup match for amateurs
and the Ryder Cup match for professionals, which are played between Britain
and the United States and Europe and the United States respectively. Among
the leading professional players in European tournaments are Nick Faldo,
Sandy Lyle, Mark James, Brian Barnes, Bernard Gallagher, Peter Dosterhuis
and Sam Torrance.
Hockey Variants of hockey have been played in Britain for at least five centuries, and
some, like hurling in Ireland and shinty in Scotland, are still played. The
modern game dates from the mid-nineteenth century, and the Hockey Associa¬
tion (of England) was founded in 1886. The Hockey Rules Board controls the
rules of the game. There are some 1,000 men’s hockey clubs throughout Britain
with about 46,000 adult players; an increasing number of clubs have boys’
sections and many boys’ schools also play the game. Cup competitions and
leagues are played at national, division or district, and club levels both indoors
(six-a-side) and outdoors, and there are regular international matches.
The controlling body of women’s hockey in England is the All-England
Women’s Hockey Association (founded in 1895) to which are affiliated some
1,000 clubs with some 72,000 members, and about 2,400 schools; there are
similar associations in Scotland, Wales and Ireland. County, club and school
championships for both outdoor and indoor hockey are played annually in
England. The first international women’s hockey match took place in 1896;
nowadays a match is played annually at Wembley Stadium (in addition to those
played in other parts of the country).
Men’s and women’s hockey are Olympic sports, and arrangements for the
British teams are made by the Great Britain Hockey Board.
Lawn Tennis The modern game of lawn tennis was first played in England in 1872 and the
first championships at Wimbledon in 1877. The controlling body in Great
Britain, the Lawn Tennis Association, was founded in 1888; in Northern Ireland
the Ulster Council of the Irish Lawn Tennis Association controls the game. The
main event of the season is the annual Wimbledon fortnight, widely regarded as
the most important tennis event in the world; this draws large crowds, with the
ground at the All-England Club accommodating over 30,000 spectators. There
are also county championships and national competitions for boys’ and girls’
schools. International events include the Davis Cup and Kings Cup for men and
the Federation Cup for women. Women from Britain and the United States
compete for the Wightman Cup.
Motor Sports Among the most popular spectator sports are motor racing and motor rallying.
The governing body, the RAC (Royal Automobile Club) Motor Sports Associ¬
ation, issues competition licences for a variety of motoring competitions and
organises the RAC Rally, an event in the contest for the World Rally Cham¬
pionship. It also organises the British Grand Prix, held annually at either the
Silverstone or Brands Hatch racing circuits, which counts towards the Formula
One World Motor Racing Championship.
Motorcycle racing is governed by the Auto-Cycle Union, and the most impor¬
tant events of the year are the Isle of Man Tourist Trophy races and the British
Grand Prix. Speedway racing is governed by the Speedway Control Board.
Britain has had six world champion motor racing drivers, the most recent
being Jackie Stewart (1969, 1971 and 1973) and James Hunt (1976); and three
individual world champion motorcycle riders at 500 cc: Mike Hailwood
(1962-65), Phil Read (1973-74) and Barry Sheene (1976-77).
384
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Mountaineering The popularity of mountaineering and rock-climbing has increased greatly in
and Rock recent years. Clubs in the British Mountaineering Council and the Moun-
Climbing taineering Council for Scotland, the representative bodies of the sport, number
nearly 330, ranging from national clubs such as the Alpine Club (founded in
1857, the oldest mountaineering club in the world) and the Scottish Moun¬
taineering Club, to small regional clubs with 20 to 30 members. The National
Centre for Mountain Activities is at Plas-y-Brenin in north Wales, and a number
of local education authorities and national bodies such as the Outward Bound
Trust have established mountaineering training centres. The most popular
areas in Britain for climbing include the Peak District of Derbyshire, and the
mountains of the Lake District, Snowdonia in north Wales and the Western
Highlands of Scotland.
British mountaineers have taken a leading part in exploring mountain ranges
and climbing many of the great mountains of the world, achieving, for example,
the first ascent of the Matterhorn in 1865, of Everest in 1953, of Kangchenjunga
in 1955, of Everest by its south-west face in 1975, and of the south face of
Gosainthan (in the Himalayas) in 1982.
Racing Horse racing takes two forms — flat racing (from late March to early November)
and steeplechasng and hurdle racing (from late July to early June). The Derby,
run at Epsom, is the outstanding event in the flat racing calendar. Other classic
races are: the Two Thousand Guineas and the One Thousand Guineas, both run
at Newmarket: the Oaks, run at Epsom; and the St Leger, run at Doncaster. The
most important steeplechase and hurdle race meeting is the National Hunt Fes¬
tival Meeting at Cheltenham in March. The Grand National, run at Aintree near
Liverpool, is the world’s best known steeplechase and dates from 1837.
The Jockey Club administers all horse racing in Britain. Its rules are the basis
of turf procedure and it also licences racecourses. Racing takes place on most
days (excluding Sundays) throughout the year and about 12,500 horses are in
training. British thoroughbreds continue to be a source of the world’s best
bloodstock.
The racing of greyhounds after a mechanical hare (one of Britain’s most
popular spectator sports) takes place at 105 tracks licensed by local authorities.
Meetings are usually held two or three times a week at each track, up to a
maximum of 130 days a year. The rules for the sport are drawn up by the
National Greyhound Racing Club, which is the sport’s judiciary body. The Ste¬
wards of the Club are also responsible for overall administration and organi¬
sation. The representative body for the sport is the British Greyhound Racing
Board.
Riding Horse riding takes a number of forms ranging from general riding to show
jumping. The art of riding is promoted by the British Horse Society, which is
concerned with the welfare of horses, road safety, bridleways and training. It
also runs the National Equestrian Centre at Stoneleigh in Warwickshire where
activities take place throughout the year. With some 33,000 members the
Society is the parent body of the Pony Club and the Riding Club movements.
These hold rallies, meetings and competitions culminating in their annual
national championships at the British Equestrian Centre. Horse trials are held
during the spring and autumn under the auspices of the Society. Among the
three-day events held each year are those at Badminton (Avon) in April;
Windsor (Berkshire) in May; Braham (Yorkshire) in June; Burghley House (Lin¬
colnshire) in September; and Wylye (Wiltshire) in October. They include
dressage, cross country riding and showjumping.
Showjumping is promoted by the British Show Jumping Association, which
has over 15,000 members and 1,450 shows affiliated to it. The major show
SPORT AND RECREATION
385
Rowing
Rugby Football
Sailing
jumping events each year include the Royal International Horse Show and
the Horse of the Year Show in London, and the Birmingham International
Show Jumping Championships.
The authority responsible for equestrian activities (other than racing) at
international level is the British Equestrian Federation which co-ordinates the
work of the British Horse Society and the British Show Jumping Association.
British equestrian teams have an outstanding record in international compe¬
titions. A British team won the three-day event world championship held at
Luhmuhlen, West Germany, in September 1982; Lucinda Green won the indi¬
vidual gold medal. Well-known show jumpers include David Broome, Malcolm
Pyrah, Harvey Smith and Nick Skelton.
Oarsmanship is taught in many schools, colleges and rowing clubs (including
women’s clubs) throughout Britain. The governing body of the sport in England
is the Amateur Rowing Association; there are similar bodies in Scotland, Wales
and Northern Ireland. There are about 480 rowing clubs, with a total member¬
ship of some 29,000, and each year some 246 regattas and head races are held in
England and Wales under Association rules. The National Water Sports Centre
at Holme Pierrepont, near Nottingham has a rowing course of Olympic
2,000-metre standard.
The University Boat Race between eight-oared crews from Oxford and Cam¬
bridge originated in 1829 and has been rowed on the Thames almost every
spring since 1836. The Head of the River Race in March (also on the Thames) is
the largest assembly of racing craft in the world with more than 430 eights
rowing in procession. At the Henley Regatta in Oxfordshire, founded in 1839,
crews from all over the world compete each July in various kinds of races over a
straight course of 1 mile 550 yards (about 2-1 kilometres).
Rugby Football takes its name from Rugby School, Warwickshire, where it was
first played in 1823. The game is played according to two different codes: Rugby
Union (a 15-a-side game) is played by amateurs while Rugby League (a 13-a-side
game) is played by professionals as well as amateurs. Rugby Union is played
throughout Britain under the auspices of the Rugby Football Union (in
England), the Welsh Rugby Union, the Scottish Rugby Union and the Irish
Rugby Football Union. Important domestic competitions include the County
Championship in England, the national club knockout competitions in
England and Wales and the Scottish League Cup Championship. International
matches between England, Scotland and Wales, Ireland and France are played
each year and there are overseas tours by the national sides and by the British
Lions, a team representing Great Britain and Ireland.
Rugby League is played mainly in the north of England. The governing body
of the professional game is the Rugby Football League which sends touring
teams to Australia and New Zealand; annual matches are also played against
France. The Challenge Cup Final, the major club match of the season, is played
at Wembley Stadium in London. The amateur game is governed by the British
Amateur Rugby League Association; annual matches are played between
England and France.
Sailing has always been popular in Britain. The Royal Yachting Association has
over 1,500 affiliated clubs and 47,000 personal members; some 640 practical
and shore-based teaching centres in the country, including the National Sailing
Centre at Cowes in the Isle of Wight, offer Royal Yachting Association courses in
all branches of the sport. One of the world’s principal regattas takes place each
year at Cowes, and major events are held at other British sailing centres. British
yachtsmen and women have undertaken many notable voyages. Sir Francis
386
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Squash Rackets
Sub-Aqua
Swimming
GAMBLING
Chichester was the winner of the first single-handed transatlantic race in 1960
and made a solo circumnavigation of the world in 1966-67. The first non-stop
solo circumnavigation was achieved by Robin Knox-Johnston in 1968. In 1976
Clare Francis held the record for the fastest single-handed crossing of the
Atlantic, as did Naomi James in 1980. Rodney Pattison won gold medals in the
‘ Flying Dutchman’ class at the Olympic regattas of 1968 and 1972 with his crews
Ian McDonald-Smith and Christopher Davies.
Squash rackets originated at Harrow school in the 1850s. The Squash Rackets
Association, formed in 1929 to promote and organise the game, was a founder-
member of the International Squash Rackets Federation. There are separate
governing bodies for Scotland, Wales, and Ireland. The governing body of
women’s squash in Britain is the Women’s Squash Association, founded in
1934. Squash enjoyed a period of very rapid growth during the 1970s and
remains a fast growing sport. There are over 8,000 squash courts in England,
and the estimated number of players in Britain, both professional and amateur,
is about 2-8 million. The main tournament is the British Open Championships;
the World Open Championships were held in Birmingham in 1982. The out¬
standing British player of the game has been Jonah Barrington, for several
years the world’s leading player and British Open Champion six times between
1966 and 1972.
Underwater activities are varied and include exploratory diving (for example,
wreck and reef diving), snorkel diving, and underwater photography. The
British Sub-Aqua Club is the governing body for all underwater activities and
promotes underwater exploration, science and sport. The Club is the largest of
its kind in the world with over 30,000 members and more than 1,000 clubs in
Britain and overseas. The Scottish Sub-Aqua Club governs the sport in Scotland.
Swimming is enjoyed by millions of people in Britain, many of whom learn to
swim at public baths, schools or swimming clubs. Instruction and coaching are
provided by qualified teachers who hold certificates awarded by the Amateur
Swimming Association, to which over 1,700 clubs are affiliated. The Associa¬
tion also draws up and enforces regulations for amateur swimming, diving, syn¬
chronised swimming and water polo championships and competitions in
England. Separate associations control the sport in Scotland and Wales.
Northern Ireland forms part of the Irish Amateur Swimming Association. A
number of British swimmers have had great success and David Wilkie and
Duncan Goodhew won gold medals at the 1976 and 1980 Olympics respectively.
Various forms of betting and commercial gaming are permitted under strict
regulations and the total money staked in Great Britain in 1982 (excluding
gaming machines) was about £5,718 million. It is estimated that some 94 per
cent of adults gamble at some time or another, 39 per cent regularly.
Gaming includes the playing of casino and card games, gaming machines
and licensed bingo, thought to be played by about 5 to 6 million people on a
fairly regular basis. Betting takes place mainly on horse or greyhound racing,
and on football matches (usually through football pools). Racing bets may be
made at racecourses and greyhound tracks, or through some 12,000 licensed
off-course betting offices which take nearly 90 per cent of the money staked. A
form of pool betting (totalisator betting) is organised on, and off, course by the
Horserace Totalisator Board (HTB). Bookmakers and the HTB contribute a levy
to the Horserace Betting Levy Board which promotes the improvement of horse
racing and breeding and the advancement of veterinary science.
In addition, legislation allows local authorities and certain other bodies to
hold lotteries.
Appendix 1
Currency
The unit of currency is the pound sterling divided into 100 new pence (p). There are eight coins: £ 1;
50p; 20p; lOp; 5p; 2p; Ip; and |p.
Bank of England notes are issued for sums of £1, £5, £10, £20 and £50.
Metric Conversions for British Weights and Measures
Length
Area
Capacity
Weight
(Avoirdupois)
12 inches
3 feet
1,760 yards
1 inch
= 1 foot
= 1 yard
= 1 mile
144 square inches
9 square feet
4,840 square yards
640 acres
2 pints
4 quarts
8 gallons
8 bushels
1 pint
= 1 quart
= 1 gallon
= 1 bushel
= 1 quarter
16 oz.
141b.
1121b.
20 cwt. (2,240 lb.)
2,000 lb.
= 2-54 centimetres
= 30-48 centimetres
= 0-914 metre
= 1 • 609 kilometres
1 square inch
= 1 square foot
= 1 squareyard
= 1 acre =
= 1 square mile =
= 0 ■ 568 litre
= ■ 1-136 litres
= 4 • 546 litres
= 36-37 litres
= 2 ■ 909 hectolitres
1 ounce (oz.)
= 1 pound (11b.)
= 1 stone (st.)
= 1 hundredweight (cwt.)
= 1 long ton
= 1 short ton
6 • 452 square centimetres
929 • 03 square centimetres
0 ■ 836 square metre
0 • 405 hectare
2 • 59 square kilometres
= 28-35 grammes
= 0 • 454 kilogramme
= 6-35 kilogrammes
= 50-8 kilogrammes
= 1-016 tonnes
= 0•907 tonne
Double
Conversion
Tables for
Measures and
Weights
(Use the figures in the central column with those to the left or right, depending on which con¬
version is required. For example, 1 centimetre = 0-394 inch, and 1 inch = 2 -540 centimetres.)
Centi¬
metres
Inches
Metres Yards
Kilo¬
metres
Miles
Hec¬
tares
Acres
2 ■ 540 1 0 • 394
5 • 080 2 0-787
7-620 3 1-181
10-160 4 1-575
12-700 5 1-969
15-240 6 2-362
17-780 7 2-756
20-320 8 3-150
22-860 9 3 • 543
25 • 400 10 3 • 937
0-914 1 1-094
1- 829 2 2-187
2- 743 3 3-281
3- 658 4 4-374
4- 572 5 5-468
5- 486 6 6-562
6- 401 7 7-655
7- 315 8 8-749
8•230 9 9•843
9-144 10 10-936
1-609
3- 219
4- 828
6-437
8- 047
9- 656
11- 265
12- 875
14•484
16-093
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0-621
■243
■864
485
107
728
350
971
592
214
0■405 1 2-471
0•809 2 4•942
1-214 3 7-413
1- 619 4 9-884
2- 023 5 12-355
2-428 6 14-826
2- 833 7 17-298
3- 237 8 19-768
3•642 9 22•239
4- 047 10 24-711
388
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Kilo- Av.
grammes Pounds
Litres
Pints
Litres
Gallons
Metric Hun-
Quintals dred-
per weight
Hectare per Acre
0 • 454 1 2 • 205
0 • 907 2 4 • 409
1-361 3 6-614
1- 814 4 8-818
2- 268 5 11-023
2- 722 6 13-228
3- 175 7 15-432
3-629 8 17-637
4 • 082 9 19 • 842
4 • 536 10 22 • 046
0-568 1 1•760
1-136 2 3-520
1- 705 3 5 ■ 279
2- 273 4 7-039
2- 841 5 8-799
3- 409 6 10-559
3- 978 7 12-319
4- 546 8 14-078
5- 114 9 15-838
5-682 10 17-598
4-546
9-092
13-638
18-184
22•730
27-276
31-822
36•368
40-914
45•460
0-220
0-440
0-660
0-880
1-100
1-320
1-540
1-760
1- 980
2- 200
1- 255 1 0•797
2- 511 2 1-593
3- 766 3 2-390
5- 021 4 3-186
6- 277 5 3-983
7- 532 6 4•780
8- 787 7 5-576
10- 043 8 6-373
11- 298 9 7-169
12- 554 10 7-966
Thermometrical Table
0° Centigrade = 32° Fahrenheit.
100° Centigrade = 212° Fahrenheit.
To convert “Fahrenheit into “Centigrade: subtract 32, then multiply by Vs; “Centigrade into
“Fahrenheit: multiply by 9/s; then add 32.
Bank and Public Holidays in Britain,
Monday 2 January
Tuesday 3 January
Saturday 17 March
Monday 19 March
Friday 20 April
Monday 23 April
Monday 7 May
Monday 28 May
Thursday 12 July
Monday 6 August
Monday 27 August
Tuesday 25 December
Wednesday 26 December
1984
Extra day because New Year’s Day falls on a
Sunday
Bank Holiday on the second working day of the
year (Scotland only)
St Patrick’s Day (Northern Ireland only)
Extra day because St Patrick’s Day falls on a
Saturday (Northern Ireland only)
Good Friday
Easter Monday (England, Wales and Northern
Ireland only)
Early May Bank Holiday
Spring Bank Holiday
Orangeman’s Day (Northern Ireland only)
Bank Holiday (Scotland only)
Summer Bank Holiday (England, Wales and
Northern Ireland only)
Christmas Day
Boxing Day
Chapter 1
Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
Chapter 6
Chapter 7
Chapter 8
Chapter 10
Chapter 11
Chapter 12
Chapter 13
Chapter 14
Chapter 15
Chapter 16
Chapter 17
Appendix 2
Guide to Sources
The principal official periodical sources used in the preparation of this edition are given below:
Land and People
Social Trends, Population Trends, Regional Trends, Employment Gazette, General Household
Survey, Family Expenditure Survey. BTA’s Digest of Tourism Statistics
Overseas Relations
British Aid Statistics
Defence
Statement on the Defence Estimates
Justice and the Law
Criminal Statistics, England and Wales, Criminal Statistics, Scotland
Social Welfare
Social Security Statistics, Health and Personal Social Services Statistics for England, (and
similar statistics for Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland)
Education
Education Statistics for the United Kingdom
The Environment
General Household Survey, National Dwelling and Household Survey, Housing and
Construction Statistics, Northern Ireland Housing Statistics, Digest of Environmental
Pollution and Water Statistics
National Economy
National Income and Expenditure (the ‘Blue Book')
Framework of Industry
National Income and Expenditure (the ‘Blue Book'), British business
Manufacturing and Service Industries
Report on the Census of Production, Monthly Digest of Statistics, Business Monitor MQ10:
Overseas Trade Analysed in Terms of Industries, Employment Gazette, British business
Energy and Natural Resources
Digest of United Kingdom Energy Statistics, Development of the Oil and Gas Resources of the
United Kingdom (the ‘Brown Book'), United Kingdom Mineral Statistics
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
Annual Review of Agriculture
Transport and Communications
Transport Statistics, Great Britain
Employment
Employment Gazette, New Earnings Survey
Public Finance
Financial Statement and Budget Report, The Government’s Expenditure Plans
390
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Chapter 19
Chapter 20
Overseas Trade and Payments
Monthly Review of External Trade Statistics, United Kingdom Balance of Payments (the ‘Pink
Book'), British business
Promotion of Science and Technology
Economic Trends, British business
Full purchasing details of these and other British Government publications can be obtained from
the annual list Government Publications issued by Her Majesty’s Stationery Office (HMSO),
which has agents overseas. The list includes all Bills and Acts of Parliament and the official
parliamentary report Hansard, White Papers, annual reports, reports of official committees and
most publications of government departments including the Central Statistical Office, which
publishes a Guide to Official Statistics. HMSO also sells in Britain many titles published by
international organisations such as the United Nations and the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development.
A Catalogue of British Official Publications not published by HMSO, published by
Chadwyck-Healey, lists the more specialised departmental publications. Details of this and other
commercial publications are available from bookshops or, overseas, from the British Council.
Index
Items are indexed under England, Northern Ireland, Scotland or Wales only where they are
matters peculiar to these countries; otherwise they are indexed under the relevant subject
headings.
Bold type in a sequence of figures indicates main references.
A 
Abortion 123-4
Accidents 65, 270
fire casualties 65
road 270
Administrative tribunals 114
Advertising 169, 231, 366, 372
broadcasting 372
industry 231
outdoor, control of 169
press, practice 366
Advisory Board for the Research
Councils 336-7
Advisory bodies 49-50
Advisory, Conciliation and
Arbitration Service 303-4
Agriculture 50, 53, 54,
211, 256-65, 340
advisory services 262
Agricultural and Food Research
Council 340
agricultural workers
health and safety 262
tenancy legislation 262
and Fisheries, Department of,
for Scotland 53
animals 257-8, 262, 263
diseases, control of 263
welfare 262
Common Agricultural Policy 261
crofts 262
crops 258-9
cereals 258-9
fodder crops 259
sugar 259
Department of (Northern Ireland) 54
diseases and pests, control of 263
education and training 264
exports 260
Agriculture—contd.
farms 256-7
Fisheries and Food, Ministry of 50
government policy 261-2
grants and subsidies 261-2
health and safety 262
horticulture 259-60
land use 256
livestock 257-8
cattle 257, 258
pigs 258
poultry 258
sheep 257-8
machinery 211
marketing 260
co-operatives 260
pesticides 263
plant diseases and pests,
control of 263
price guarantees 261
production 257-60
research 264-5, 340
smallholdings 262
tenancy legislation 262
tractors 211
veterinary medicinal products 263
Aid to developing countries 82-5
bilateral aid 83-5
financial aid 83-4
technical co-operation 84-5
multilateral aid 85
official and other flows 82-3
Aircraft 93, 216-18, 281-5
aerospace industry 216 -18
civil 281-5
military 93
Alcoholic drinks 220-1
Alcoholism 123
Ambulance services 124
Architecture 167-8
392
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Armed forces 91-3
Arms control and
disarmament 78-80
Army 92-3
combat forces 92-3
see also Defence
Arts 50, 346-59
and Libraries, Office of 50
art market 354
British Council 347
broadcasting and 347
centres 348
Councils 347
crafts 356
dance 349, 351
drama 348-9
festivals 348
films 351-3
finance 346-7
literature and libraries 356-9
local authority support 347
museums and art galleries 354-6
music 349-50, 351
opera 349, 350-1
promotion of 346-59
regional associations 348
Royal Society of 342
visual 353-5
training in 356
Atomic energy
see Nuclear energy
Auction houses 232
B 
Balance of payments 332-4
capital flows 333
external assets and liabilities 333-4
Bank of England 316-17
Banking 316-19
see also Financial institutions
Beverages industry 220-1
Birth rates 19
Blood transfusion 124
Books 224, 357
Botanical gardens 343
Britain 1-4, 18-28
economic and social pattern 23-8
historical outline 1 -4
physical features 18
population 19-23
social framework 18-28
see also England, Northern Ireland,
Scotland and Wales
British Airways 282-3
British Association for the
Advancement of Science 342-3
British Broadcasting Corporation
368-9, 370, 371-2
see also Broadcasting
British Council 67, 347
British Film Institute 352
British Olympic Association 377
British Overseas Trade Board 332
British Standards Institution 193
British Technology Group 196-7
see also Science and technology
British Telecom 285-8
see also Telecommunications
Broadcasting 347, 368-74
advertising 372
arts, broadcasting of 347
British Broadcasting
Corporation 368-9
external services 371-2
radio 371
television 370
cable services 371
Independent Broadcasting
Authority 369-70
programme companies 369-70
television 370
international relations 374
parliamentary 373
political 373
technical developments 373-4
Brush industry 223
Budget 309-10
Building
see Construction industry
Bus and coach services 272-3
Business services 231-2
c 
Cabinet 47-8
meetings 47-8
Office 48
Cable TV 371
Capital 313, 333
flows 333
taxes on 313
see also Taxation and duty
Cars
see Motor vehicles
Catering trades 230-1
Channel Islands 3-4
historical outline 3-4
INDEX
393
Charities 341
research sponsored by 341
Chemicals industry 208-10
agricultural chemicals 209
industrial chemicals 209
paint 209
pharmaceuticals 209-10
soap and toilet preparations 210
Children 109-10, 123,
129-30, 132,297,353
child benefit 132
child care 129-30
adoption 130
voluntary organisations 130
employment 297
films for 353
health services for 123
in trouble 109-10
Churches 176-9
Anglican Communion 177
co-operation among 179
England, Church of 176-7
Free Churches 177-8
non-Christian religious
communities 179
Roman Catholic Church 178-9
Scotland, Church of 177
Civil aviation 281-5
air traffic 282
airports 284-5
development 285
ownership and control 284-5
Authority 282
British Airways 282-3
operations 282-3
government responsibilities 282
independent airlines 283-4
navigation services 284
safety 284
traffic control 284
Civil defence 94
Civil engineering 226
Civil Service 55-8
conditions of service 57
Diplomatic Service 56
Northern Ireland 55
political and private activities 57
promotion 57
recruitment and training 56-7
security 58
structure 56
Clothing industry 222-3
Coal 200, 244-6
capital investment 244
consumption 244-6
Coal—contd.
European Coal and Steel
Community 200
industry 244-6
National Coal Board 244
production and productivity 244
research 246
Commission for Racial
Equality 27-8
Commodity markets 325
Commons, House of
see Parliament
Commonwealth 73-6
consultation 74
dependencies 76
Fund for Technical Co-operation 75
organisations 74-5, 75-6
Secretariat 74-5
technical co-operation 75-6
Commonwealth Foundation 75-6
Communications see Post Office and
Telecommunications
Companies 199,
202-3, 231-2, 321
advertising 231
company law 202-3
computer services 231
factoring 321
management consultancy 231-2
market research 232
small firms 199
Competition policy 114, 200-1
anti-competitive practices 201
European Community policy 201
monopolies and mergers 200
public sector 201
Restrictive Practices Court 114
restrictive trade practices 201
Comptroller and Auditor
General 308-9
Computers 213, 231
manufacture 213
services 231
Confederation of British
Industry 302
Conference centres 232
Conservation 166-71, 343
advertising, outdoor, control of 169
architecture 167-8
areas 167
coastal 168
Countryside Commissions 169
derelict land, reclamation 171
green belts 168
historic buildings, 167
394
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Conservation—contd.
national parks and areas of outstand¬
ing natural beauty 169-70
nature conservation 170-1
open country 170
public footpaths 170
tree preservation 168
zoological gardens 343
Construction industry
207, 212, 225-6
building materials 207
civil engineering projects 226
housing construction 225
machinery 212
output 225
overseas construction 226
research and advisory services 226
structure 225
Consumer protection 201-2
advice and information 202
Copyright, authors’ 357
Coroners’ courts 105
Countryside Commissions 169
Courts 54, 101-5, 111-114
civil 111-14
coroners’ 105
criminal 101-5
Restrictive Practices Court 114
Scottish Courts Administration 54
Crafts 356
Crime 96-111
criminal courts 101-5
appeals 103
Criminal Injuries Compensation
Scheme 98
criminal justice 96- 111
criminals, treatment of 106-11
criminological research 97
statistics 97
Crown Office 54
Crown, The
see Monarchy and Royal Family
Cultural and social life
9-10, 11-12, 13-14, 17
Customs and Excise 50, 314
Board of 50
duties 314
Death grant 133
Defence 50, 88-95
armed forces 91-3
Army 92-3
civil 94
combat forces 92-3
deployment 89-90
Ministry of 50
NATO strategy 89
Northern Ireland 90
overseas commitments 89-90
personnel 91
procurement 94-5
production 95
research and development 94-5
reserve and auxiliary forces 91
review 88
Royal Air Force 93
Royal Navy 92
sales 95
strategic nuclear forces 92
see also North Atlantic Treaty
Organisation
Dependencies and associated
states 76
Deposit banks 317-18
Design 192-3, 356
industrial 192-3
training in 356
Development
see Economy and Regional
development
Diplomatic Service 56
Disabled people 128,
132-3,293-4,378
benefits and pensions 132-3
employment services for 293-4
social services for 128
sport for 378
Discount market 319-20
Divorce 20
Drama 348-9
amateur theatre 349
professional theatre 348-9
training 349
young people, theatre for 349
Drugs 123
D 
Dance 349, 351
dance and mime companies 351
training 351
Data processing equipment 213
E 
East-West relations 77-8
Economy 7-9, 11, 13, 16-17,
23-8,53,54, 180-6
background 181-3
INDEX
395
Economy—contd.
employment 182
inflation and competitiveness 181
oil, offshore 182-3
output 182
post-war developments 181
sterling 183
trade 182
economic and social pattern 23-8
Economic Development, Department of
(Northern Ireland) 54
government policy 183
management of 183
national income and
expenditure 184-5
resources, use of 184
Scottish Economic Planning
Department 53
see also Balance of payments,
Industry, Public finance and
Trade,overseas
Education 54, 108, 140-55, 192,264,
267, 295, 336, 349, 353, 354, 356
administration 141
adult and continuing 150-1
agricultural 264
aids in 145
and Science, Department of 50, 336
art and design 356
building programme 146
careers education and guidance 146
curriculum 144
dance 354
Department of (Northern Ireland) 54
drama 349
English (as foreign language)
teaching 153
examinations, secondary school 145-6
film production 353
finance 141, 147
forestry 267
management 192
music 354
Open University 149
overseas links 151-3
English (as foreign language)
teaching 153
exchanges 152
overseas students in Britain 152-3
policies 140-1
polytechnics 149
post-school 146-51
finance 147
institutions 147, 148-9
teaching methods 151
Education—contd.
prison, education in 108
religious 144
research on 151
schoolchildren, health and welfare 146
schools 142-6
Scottish Education Department 54
special educational needs 143-4
standards of 144-5
students 147-8
teacher training 150
teachers 144, 150, 151
technical and vocational 295
universities 148-9
youth service 153-5
see also Students, Training and
Universities
Elderly 128, 131-2
retirement pension 131-2
social services for 128
Elections 35-6, 59-60
local government 59-60
parliamentary 35-6
Electrical engineering 213-14
Electricity supply industry 246-51
consumption 247
generation 247-9
nuclear energy 249-50, 251
research 250-1
structure 247
Electronic engineering 214 -15
Employers’ organisations 302
Confederation of British Industry 302
Employment 50, 132, 133,
182, 290-306
additional benefits 298-9
amenities 298
employers’ health services 298
children 297
conditions of 295-9
Department of, 50
discrimination 297
earnings 297-8
government responsibilities 293-5
health in 304-6
holidays 298
human relations in industry 299
immigrants 296
industrial relations 302-3
law 295-7,301-2
safety in 304-6
services 293-4
careers service 294
disabled people, services for 293-4
geographical mobility schemes 294
396
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Employment—contd.
Professional and Executive
Recruitment 294
sickness benefit 132
trade unions 299-302
training services 294-5
trends 182, 290
unemployment 133, 290-2
women 297
work, hours of 298
see also individual industries,
Industrial relations, Trade unions
and Unemployment
Energy 50, 234-55
coal 244-6
conservation 236-7
measures 236-7
consumption 235, 239-40,
243, 244-5, 247
Department of 50
electricity 246-51
gas, offshore 237, 241-4
natural resources, and 234-55
oil, offshore 237-41
policy 235
renewable sources 251-2
see also Coal, Electricity supply
industry, Gas, Nuclear energy
and Petroleum
Engineering 192, 210-12,
213-15,218, 337-9, 341
Council 192
electrical 213-14
electronic 214-15
The Fellowship of 341
instrument 215
marine 218
mechanical 210-12
Science and Engineering Research
Council 337-9
see also individual industries
England 1-2,4-10
cultural and social life 9-10
economy 7-9
government 4-7
historical outline 1-2
Enterprise zones 160
Environment 24,
50, 55, 156-75, 339
advertising, outdoor 169
air, control of pollution of 174
architecture 167-8
coast 168-9
Countryside Commissions 169
Department of 50
Environment—contd.
Department of (Northern Ireland) 55
green belts 168
housing 160-6
land 171, 172
Natural Environment Research
Council 339
nature protection 170-1
noise 174
open country 170
planning 156-60
pollution control 171-5
public footpaths 170
radioactivity 175
sea, control of pollution in 173
trees and woodland 168
water quality 173
Equal opportunities 26
Ethnic minorities 26-8
see also Race relations
European Community 68-73, 126,
137, 199-200, 201, 261, 266, 330, 331
Britain’s accession, 68
Common Agricultural Policy 261
competition policy 201
European Coal and Steel
Community 200
European Investment Bank 199
European Regional Development
Fund 199
external relations 71-2, 330, 331
finance 72
fisheries policy 266
health arrangements 126
institutions 68-71
internal policies 72-3, 126, 137,
199-200, 201,261,266
regional policy and aid 199-200
social security 137
trade policy 330, 331
Exchange 200, 324-5
foreign exchange market 324-5
Risk Guarantee Scheme 200
Excise duties
see Taxation and duty
Exhibition and conference
centres 232
Expenditure 184-5, 307-9, 313-14
consumers’ 184-5
public 185, 307-9
taxes on 313-14
see also Public expenditure
Exports 51,331-2
controls 331-2
credit insurance 332
INDEX
397
Exports—contd.
Export Credits Guarantee
Department 51, 332
see also individual industries
and Trade, overseas
F 
Factoring companies 321
Families 123, 129, 135
family income supplement 135
health services for 123
social services for 129
Family planning 123
Farming
see Agriculture
Fellowship of Engineering 341
Films 232-3, 351-3
British Film Institute 352
censorship 352-3
children’s 353
cinema licensing 352
documentary 353
government support 352
industry 232-3
training in production of 353
Finance and Personnel, Depart¬
ment of (Northern Ireland) 55
Financial institutions 316-25
Bank of England 316-17
building societies 322-3
commodity markets 325
deposit banks 317-18
discount market 319-20
factoring companies 321
finance corporations 322
finance houses 321
financial futures 325
foreign exchange market 324-5
insurance market 323-4
investment and unit trusts 322
leasing companies 321
London gold market 325
merchant banks 319
National Girobank 318-19
National Savings Bank 320
overseas banks 319
pension funds 322
Stock Exchange 324
Trustee Savings Banks 319
Fire services 64-5
fire casualties 65
fire losses 65
fire prevention 65
research 65
Fire services—contd.
special services 65
Fisheries 265-6
European Community policy 266
fleets 265
freshwater 266
government aid 265-6
landings 265
limits 266
research 266
Food 127, 219-20, 220, 257, 260, 340
Agricultural and Food
Research Council 340
bacon curing 219
bakery products 220
confectionery 220
dairy products 219-20
exports 260
fish products 219
fruit 220
home production of 257
industries 219-20
marketing 260
meat products 219
safety of 127
vegetables 220
Footwear industry 223
Foreign and Common¬
wealth Office 51
Forestry 266-7
Commission 267
education 267
Northern Ireland 267
policy 267
private 267
research 267
Freight services 271-2,
276, 276-7, 277-8, 279-80
Fuel
see Coal, Electricity supply
industry, Energy, Gas, Nuclear
energy and Petroleum
Furniture industry 223
G 
Gambling 386
Gas 241-4
offshore 241-4
consumption 242
equipment industry 218
production 241-3
research 243-4
structure 241
transmission and storage 243
398
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Glass industry 208
Government 4-7,
10-11, 12, 14-16, 29-65
advisory bodies 49-50
Cabinet 47-8
meetings 47-8
Office 48
composition 45-7
departmental ministers 46
junior ministers 46
Lord Chancellor and
Law Officers 46
Ministers of State 46
non-departmental ministers 46
Prime Minister 46
departments of 48-55
functions 50-5
Northern Ireland Assembly 44
see also Civil Service, Local
government, Ministers, Monarchy,
Parliament, Public expenditure and
Public finance
Great Britain see Britain, England,
Scotland and Wales
Green belts 168
H 
Handicapped people
see Disabled people
Health 51, 54, 55, 108,
119-27, 146, 298
and Social Security, Department of 51
and Social Services, Department of
(Northern Ireland) 55
arrangements with
other countries 126
centres 121
district nurses 121
education 124-5
employers’ health services 298
environmental 127
family practitioner services 121
group practices 121
infectious diseases, control of 127
midwives 121
National Health Service 119-27
administration 120-1
finance 120-1
health service commissioners 120
hospitals and specialist
services 121-4
primary health care 121
specialist services 122-4
Health—contd.
primary, care 121
prisoners, health services for 108
private medical treatment 126
professions 125-6
research 125
safety of medicines 125
schoolchildren, health services for 146
Scottish Home and Health
Department 54
smoking and 124-5
visitors 121
Health and Safety Commission 305
Health and Safety Executive 305
Historic buildings 167
Home and Health Department,
Scottish 54
Home Office 51
Horticulture 259-60
Hospices 122-3
Hospitals 121-4
and specialist services 121-4
rehabilitation 122
Hotels and catering 230-1
House of Commons 35, 309
see also Parliament
House of Lords 34-5
see also Parliament
Housing 23-4, 160-6, 225-6, 322-3
administration 162-3
associations 165
building societies 163, 322-3
characteristics 162
construction 225-6
home ownership 163
mortgage loans 163
improvements 165-6
privately rented 164-5
public sector 163-4
slum clearance 166
Human rights 80-1
I 
Immigration 22-3, 296
control 22-3
employment of immigrants 296
Imports 331
controls 331
see also Trade, overseas
Income 184-5, 297-8, 304
Manpower Economics, Office of 304
national, and expenditure 184-5
personal, and expenditure 184
sources of 184, 297-8
INDEX
399
Independent Broadcasting
Authority 369-70
programme companies 369-70
Industrial relations 301-2, 302-4
Advisory, Conciliation and
Arbitration Service 303-4
collective bargaining 303
joint consultation 303
legislation 301-2
Manpower Economics, Office of 304
statutory negotiating machinery 304
Industry 52, 53, 54, 108, 182, 184,
187-203, 204-33, 299, 322
British Technology Group 196-7
construction 207, 212, 225-6
development agencies 198
Economic Development, Department of
(Northern Ireland) 54
European Community and 199-200
Government’s relationship
with 193-9, 200
human relations in 299
industrial associations 189
industrial design 192-3
industrial financing 190, 196-7
industrial output 182,
184, 189-90, 205, 225
industrial plant and steelwork 211
industrial property,
protection of 203
investment in 190, 195, 206, 322
incentives 195
management education 192
manufacturing 204-24
mechanical handling equipment 212
organisation 187-93
prison industries 108
productivity 190
public enterprise 194-5
regional development 197-8
research and development 192, 195-6
rural industries 198
Scottish Economic Planning
Department 53
services 226-33
small firms 199
standards 193
technological advance
190-2, 196-7, 363
Trade and. Department of 52
see also individual industries,
Employment, European
Community and Research
and development
Inflation 181
Information, Central Office of 51
Inland Revenue 51
Board of 51
see also Taxation and duty
Instrument engineering 215
Insurance market 323-4
brokers 323-4
companies 323
international insurance services 324
Lloyd’s 323
Investment 190, 193,
195, 206, 322, 333-4
European Investment Bank 199
in industry 190, 195, 206
overseas 333-4
unit trusts 322
Invisible trade 329-30
see also Trade, overseas
Ireland: historical outline 2-3
Iron and steel 200, 206-7
European Coal and Steel
Community 200
products 206-7
Isle of Man 3-4
historical outline 3-4
J 
Jewry 179
Judges 116
Justice 96-118
and the law 96-118
civil 111-14
criminal 96-111
L 
Land 1-28, 171, 172, 256, 313
and people 1-28
development land tax 313
pollution control 172
reclamation 171
registers 171
use 171, 256
Law 39-41,46, 51, 96-118, 202-3,
295-7,301-2,366-7
administration of the 114-18
Centres 117
civil courts 111-13
appeals 112
civil justice 111-14
civil proceedings 113-14
legal aid 117
company 202-3
coroners’ courts 105
400
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Law—contd.
criminal courts 101-5
Criminal Injuries Compensation
Scheme 98
criminal justice 96-111
criminal trials 104-5
jury 105
legal aid 117
employment 295-7, 301-2
government responsibilities,
in administration of 114 -16
judges 116
legal aid, advice and assistance 116-17
legal profession 116
legislative proceedings,
parliamentary 39-41
delegated legislation 41
Officers 46
Officers’ Department 51
press, legal requirements 366-7
prosecution 101-2
reform 118
terrorism, measures to combat 98
Leasing companies 321
Leather industry 223
Legal profession 116
Leisure trends 28
Libraries 50, 357-9
Arts and, Office of 50
Library Association 359
public 358-9
special 358
university 358
Life, expectation of 19-20
Literature 356-7
literary and philological societies 357
Living standards 24-5
Lloyd’s insurance market 323
Local government 58-64, 163-4, 347
arts, support for 347
authorities, types of 58-9
complaints system 64
elections 59-60
finance
control of 64
government grants 62-3
loans 63
rates 63
functions and services 60-1
housing 163-4
internal organisation 61
officers and employees 61-2
London 324, 325, 362-3
Financial Futures Exchange,
International 325
London—contd.
gold market 325
newspapers 362-3
Stock Exchange 324
Lord Advocate’s Department 54
Lord Chancellor’s Department 51
Lords, House of
see Parliament
Lorries 271-2
M 
Machine tools 211
Machinery 210-12, 213-15
Management and Personnel
Office 51
Management consultancy 231-2
Manpower Economics, Office of 304
Manufacturing 202-24
industries 204-24
investment 206
output 205
process machinery 212
Market research 232
Marriage 20
Mechanical engineering 210-12
Medicine 125,339
medical research 125, 339
Medical Research Council 339
safety of medicines 125
Mental health services 108, 128
Merchant banks 319
Metal manufacture 206-7, 212-13
iron and steel 206-7
metal products 212 -13
non-ferrous metals 207
Migration 21-2
Milk 219-20
production 219-20
Minerals 206-8, 252
mineral products 206-8
non-fuel
exploration 252
production 252
Mines and quarries 212, 246
mining machinery 212
research 246
see also Coal
Ministers 46-8
ministerial responsibility 48
ministerial salaries 47
of State 46
of the Crown 46-7
Prime Minister 46
INDEX
401
Monarchy 29-32
accession 30
acts of government 30-2
ceremonial 32
coronation 30
royal income and expenditure 32
royal visits 32
succession 29-30
Monopolies and mergers 200
see also Competition policy
Motor vehicles 215-16, 230, 314
car tax 314
industry 215-16
retail distribution 230
Motorcycles 216
industry 216
Museums and galleries 343, 354-6
co-operation 355-6
exhibitions 356
finance 355
national and other collections 354-5
policy 355-6
scientific museums 343
Music 349-51
amateur 350
choral 349
societies 350
jazz 350
orchestral 349-50
pop 350
training in 351
N 
National Coal Board 244-6
National Debt 315
National Girobank 318-19
National Health Service 119-27
see also Health
National income 184-5
National Insurance
131-3, 133-5,314
benefits and allowances 131-3, 133-5
contributions 131
supplementary benefit 135
Surcharge 314
National parks 169-70
National Physical Laboratory 193
National Playing Fields
Association 378
National Savings 320-1
Bank 320
Certificates 320
Income bonds 320
National Savings—contd.
Premium Savings Bonds 320
Save As You Earn 320-1
Nationalised industries 194, 201
see also individual industries
Nationality 22
NATO
see North Atlantic Treaty
Organisation
Natural Environment Research
Council 339
Natural resources 234-55
Navy
see Royal Navy
New towns 157-9
News agencies 364-5
Newspapers 360-7
see also Press
Non-departmental public bodies 49
North Atlantic Treaty
Organisation 88, 89-90
Britain’s contribution 89-90
strategy 89
North-South dialogue 86-7
Northern Ireland 14-17,
44, 54-5, 90, 98, 102, 104, 110, 113,
116, 197-8, 255, 267, 300, 306, 363
Assembly 44
civil courts 113
Civil Service 55
criminal courts 102, 104
cultural and social life 17
defence 90
economy 16-17
employment, health and safety in 306
forestry 267
government
background to civil
disturbances 14-15
direct rule and political
initiatives 15-16
government departments 54-5
Agriculture 54
Economic Development 54
Education 54
Environment 55
Finance and Personnel 55
Health and Social Services 55
industrial development
measures 197-8
law, government responsibility
in administration of 116
press 363
terrorism, measures to combat 98
trade unions 300
402
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Northern Ireland—contd.
water resources 255
young offenders, treatment of 110
Nuclear deterrent 92
Nuclear energy 249-50, 251
British Nuclear Fuels Ltd 250
nuclear power programme 250
research 251
o 
Offenders, treatment of 106-11
children 109-10
non-custodial treatment 106-7
probation 107
prisons 107-9
sentencing 106
young adult offenders 111
Office machinery industry 213
Oil
see Petroleum
Old people
see Elderly
Open University 149
Opera 349, 350-1
training 351
Ordnance Survey 51
Overseas Development
Administration 51
Overseas relations 66-87, 347
administration 66-7
British Council 67, 347
Commonwealth 73-6
development co-operation 82-7
North-South dialogue 86-7
European Community 68-73
international economic organisations,
membership of 81 - 2
international peace
and security 77-80
United Nations 80-1
P  
Paper and board industries 223-4
Parliament 33-44, 51, 309, 373
broadcasting of proceedings 373
functions 33
House of Commons 35
House of Lords 34-5
legislative proceedings 39-41
delegated legislation 41
meeting of 33-4
parliamentary committees 41 - 2
Parliament—contd.
joint committees 42
of the whole House 41
party committees 42
select committees 41-2, 309
standing committees 41
parliamentary control 42-4
Parliamentary Commissioner
for Administration 43-4
Parliamentary Counsel Office 51
parliamentary electoral system 35-6
parliamentary privilege 44
parliamentary procedure 38-9
party system 36-8
Patents 203
Paymaster General’s Office 51
Pension funds 322
Pensions 131-2, 136
retirement 131-2
war 136
widows’ 132
Periodicals 364
Petroleum 182-3, 218, 237-41, 312
consumption 239-40
land-based oilfields 239
offshore 182-3, 218, 237-41
effect on economy 182-3
equipment and services
industry 218, 237
oilfields 237
pipelines 240
refineries 239
research 240-1
revenue tax 312
structure of industry 239
trade 240
Planning 156-60, 171
development plans 156-7
enterprise zones 160
inner cities 159-60
Urban Programme 159-60
land registers 171
major schemes 157
new towns 157-9
public participation 157
Plastics industry 224
Police 98-101
authorities and chief constables 99
central authorities 99
common services 100
forces 98-9
powers of arrest 100-1
status and duties 99-100
Political parties 36-8, 373
broadcasts 373
INDEX
403
Political parties—contd.
party system 36-8
Pollution control 171-5
administration 172
air 174
land 172
marine 173
noise 174-5
radioactivity 175
recycling and reclamation 172-3
water 173
Polytechnics 149
Population 19-23, 26-8, 52
age distribution 20
birthrates 19
Censuses and Surveys, Office of 52
distribution 20-1
divorce rates 20
ethnic minorities 26-8
immigration control 22-3
marriage rates 20
migration 21-2
mortality, causes of 19-20
nationality 22
sex ratio 20
Ports 277-9
development 278-9
traffic 277-8
Post Office 288-9, 318-19
National Girobank 318-19
specialist services 289
Pottery industry 208
Power stations 247-50
Press 360-7
advertising practice 366
Council 366
institutions 366
journalism, training for 365-6
legal requirements 366-7
London 362-3
national 362
new technology 363
news agencies 364-5
newspapers 362-3
Northern Ireland 363
ownership 361-2
periodical 364
regional 362-3
Scotland 363
Wales 363
Prestel 287-8
Prime Minister 46
Printing and publishing
224, 357, 363
newspapers, new technology 363
Prisons and prisoners 107-9
discharge and after-care 109
education 108
industries 108
medical service 108
parole 108
privileges and discipline 108-9
psychological service 108
remission of sentence 107
welfare 109
Privy Council 45
committees 45
Probation 107
Procurator General 52
Public expenditure 185, 307-9
contingency reserve 309
control and examination of 308-9
cash limits 308
Comptroller and Auditor
General 308-9
Select Committees of House
of Commons 309
estimates 308
surveys 308
Public finance 307-15
Budget 309-10
public expenditure 185, 307-9
public sector borrowing 314-15
revenue, sources of 310-15
see also Balance of payments,
Public expenditure and
Taxation and duty
Public sector borrowing 314 -15
National Debt 315
Publishing 357
authors’ copyright 357
books 357
Q~
‘Quangos’ 49
R 
Race relations 27-8, 297
Commission for Racial Equality 27-8
employment, discrimination in 297
Race Relations Act 27
Radio 368-9, 370, 371 -4
BBC External Services 371-2
see also Broadcasting
Railways 216, 273-6
British Rail’s subsidiary activities 276
freight 276
404
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Railways—conld.
operations 273-4
passenger services 274-6
private 276
urban 273
vehicles industry 216
Rates 63
Recreation 375-86
see Sport
Refineries
see Petroleum
Regional development
197-9, 199-200
administrative arrangements 197
assisted areas and related
measures 197
development agencies 198
European Community policy
and aid 199-200
incentives 197
Northern Ireland 197-8
Renewable sources of energy 251-2
Research and development
65,94-5,97, 125, 151, 192, 195-6,
226, 240-1, 243-4, 246, 250-1, 255,
264-5, 266, 267, 335-41, 344-5, 373
agricultural 264-5, 340
Agricultural and Food Research
Council 340
broadcasting 373
charitable foundations 341
coal industry 246
construction 226
criminology 97
defence 94-5
educational 151
electricity supply industry 250-1
nuclear research 251
expenditure 336
fire prevention 65
fisheries 266
forestry 267
gas supply and use 243-4
government responsibilities 335-6
industrial 192, 195-6
medical 125, 339
Medical Research Council 339
Natural Environment Research
Council 339
petroleum technology 240-1
professional institutions 341
Research Councils 337 -40
Advisory Board for the 336-7
Science and Engineering Research
Council 337-9
Research and development—contd.
astronomy 338
engineering 337-8
international collaboration 337
natural sciences 338-9
nuclear physics 338
research establishments 337
Technical Change Centre 339
Social Science Research Council 340
space 344-5
university 340-1
water industry 255
Restrictive Practices Court 114
Retail trades 228-31
hotels and catering 230-1
retailing 230
trends 229-30
diversification 230
promotions 230
shopping centres 229-30
supermarkets, superstores
and hypermarkets 229
technology, use of 230
vehicle and petrol retailing 230
Roads 268-73
government responsibilities 269-70
haulage 271-2
licensing 272
structure of industry 271-2
passenger services on 272-3
safety 270-1
Royal Air Force 93
forces 93
see also Defence
Royal Family 32
see also Monarchy
ceremonial 32
income and expenditure 32
visits 32
Royal Institution 342
Royal Navy 92
forces 92
see also Defence
Royal Society 341-2
Royal Society of Arts 342
Rubber industry 224
s 
Safety 65, 175,262,270-1,
281,284,304-6
agricultural workers 262
civil aviation 284
employment, safety in 304-6
INDEX
405
Safety—contd.
Northern Ireland 306
fire prevention 65
Health and Safety Commission 305
Health and Safety Executive 305
radioactivity 175
roads 270-1
sea, safety at 281
Schools 142-6
building programme 146
careers education and guidance 146
curriculum 144
educational aids 145
educational standard 144-5
examinations, secondary school 145-6
health and welfare in 146
independent 143
management of 142
nursery 142
primary 142-3
religious education in 144
secondary 143
special educational needs 143-4
teachers 144
see also Education
Science and technology 50, 190-2,
196-7, 217-18, 230, 335-45, 363
Advisory Board for the Research
Councils 336-7
astronomy 338
botanical gardens 343
British Association 342-3
British Technology Group 196-7
finance for advanced
technology 196-7
technology transfer 196
Education and. Department of 50, 336
international co-operation 344
learned societies 341-3
natural sciences 338-9
newspaper production,
new technology 363
nuclear physics 338
promotion of 335-45
retail trades, use of technology in 230
Royal Institution 342
Royal Society 341-2
Science and Engineering Research
Council 337-9
scientific museums 343
Social Science Research Council 340
space technology 217-18, 344- 5
technology and industry
190-2, 196-7,363
zoological gardens 343
Science and technology—contd.
see also Research and development
and Universities
Scotland 2, 12-14, 53-4,
102, 103-4, 105, 110, 112-13,
115-16, 177, 198, 255, 300, 363
Church of 177
civil courts 112-13
criminal courts 102, 103-4, 105
cultural and social life 13-14
economy 13
government 12
government departments 53-4
Agriculture and Fisheries 53
Central Services 54
Crown Office 54
Development 53
Economic Planning 53
Education 54
Home and Health 54
Lord Advocate’s 54
Scottish Courts Administration 54
historical outline 2
law, government responsibility
in administration of 115 -16
press 363
Scottish Development Agency 198
trade unions 300
water resources 255
young offenders, treatment of 110
Sea 173, 279-81
marine pollution, control of 173
safety at 281
transport 279-81
Service industries 226-33
business services 231-2
distribution 227-31
retail trades 228-31
wholesale trades 227-8
film and TV 232-3
tourism 233
Shipbuilding and marine
engineering 218
offshore equipment 218
Shipping 277-9, 279-81
cargo services 279-80
government responsibilities 280-1
merchant fleet 279
ownership 279
passenger services 280
ports 277-9
safety 281
Small firms 199
Smoking 124-5
and health 124-5
406
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Social life 9-10, 11-12, 13-14, 17
Social Science Research
Council 340
Social security 51, 130-7,314
benefits 131-6, 137
contributions 131
European Community regulations 137
family income supplement 135
Health and. Department of 51
National Insurance 131-3, 133-5,314
supplementary benefit 135
taxation 137
war pensions and related services 136
see also Children, Disabled people,
Employment, Health, National
Insurance, Pensions and Women
Social services 55, 127-30
Health and, Department of
(Northern Ireland) 55
personal 127-30
children 129-30
disabled 128
elderly 128
families 128
mentally ill and mentally
handicapped 128
social workers 130
Social welfare 119-39
see Health, Social security
and Social services
Space activities 217-18, 344-5
space systems, manufacture 217-18
Sport 375-86
facilities, provision of 376-7
private sponsorship 376-7
organisation and promotion 375-6
organisations 377-8
British Olympic Association 377-8
National Playing Fields
Association 378
sport for the disabled 378
popular sports 378-87
associationfootball 378-9
athletics 379
badminton 379
basketball 380
billiards and snooker 380
bowls 380-1
boxing 380
chess 381
cricket 381
darts 382
field sports 382
golf382-3
Highland Games 379
Sport—contd.
hockey 383
lawn tennis 383
motor sports 383
mountaineering and
rock climbing 384
racing 384
riding 384-5
rowing 385
rugby football 385
sailing 385-6
squash rackets 386
sub-aqua 386
swimming 386
Sports Centres 377
Sports Councils 375-6
Sports equipment industry 224
Standards 193
British Standards Institution 193
measurement 193
National Physical Laboratory 193
specification 193
Stationery Office, Her Majesty’s 52
Steel
see Iron and steel
Sterling 183, 200
Exchange Risk Guarantee Scheme 200
Stock Exchange 324
Students 147-8, 152-3
overseas, in Britain 152-3
Supplementary benefit 135
T 
Tariffs and Trade, General
Agreement on 330-1
Taxation and duty 137, 310-15
capital gains tax 313
capital transfer tax 312
car tax 314
corporation tax 312
customs and excise duties 313-14
development land tax 313
income tax 310-12
National Insurance Surcharge 314
petroleum revenue tax 312
social security benefits and 137
stamp duty 314
value added tax 313
Teachers 144, 150, 151
teaching methods 151
training 150
Technology
see Science and technology
INDEX
407
Telecommunications 285-8
British Telecom 285-8
data communications 288
Prestel 287-8
telegrams 288
telephone services 286-7
exchanges 286-7
overseas services 287
transmission 287
telex 288
Television 232-3, 368-71, 372-4
cable 371
industry 232-3
see also Broadcasting
Terrorism 98
Textiles 210, 211, 221-2
carpets 222
cotton 222
hosiery and knitwear 222
industries 221-23
jute 222
linen 222
machinery 211
man-made fibres 210
wool 222
Theatre 348-9
see also Drama
Timber industry 223
Tobacco industry 221
Tourism 198, 233
government support 198
industry 233
Toys and games industries 224
Trade, overseas 52,
182, 240, 326-34
and Industry, Department of 52
balance of payments 332-4
British Overseas Trade Board 332
commodity composition 327-8
controls on 331 - 2
European Community policy 330, 331
General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade 330-1
geographical distribution 328
government services 332
invisible 329-30
oil 240
policy 330-1
trends 182
visible 327-8
see also Balance of payments,
European Community, Exports,
Imports and Visible trade
Trade unions 299-302
legal framework 301-2
Trade unions—contd.
Northern Ireland 300
Scotland 300
Trades Union Congress 300
see also Industrial legislation
Training 57, 150, 264, 294-5,
349, 351, 353. 356, 365-6
agricultural 264
Civil Service 57
dance 351
dramatic 349
film production 353
journalism 365-6
musical 351
operatic 351
Opportunities Scheme 295
services to employers 295
teachers 150
technical and vocational
education 295
visual arts and design 356
Transplant surgery 124
Transport 52, 268-85
air 281-5
bus and coach 272-3
services 272-3
Department of 52
inland 268-79
passenger services 272-3, 274-5, 280
policy 280-1, 282
ports 277-9
railways 273-6
urban 273
roads 268-73
haulage 271-2
safety measures 270-1, 281, 284
sea 279-81
taxis 273
traffic in towns 271
waterways, inland 276-7
see also Civil aviation. Waterways
inland, Ports, Railways, Roads
and Shipping
Travel
see Tourism
Treasury 52
Solicitor’s Department 52
Trustee Savings Banks 319
u 
Ulster
see Northern Ireland
Unemployment 133, 290-2
benefit 133
408
BRITAIN 1984: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Unit trusts 322
United Nations 80-1
economic and social affairs 81
human rights 80-1
international peace and security 80
Universities 148-9, 340-1, 358
libraries 358
Open University 149
research 340-1
V 
Visible trade 327-8
commodity composition 327-8
geographical distribution 328
see also Trade, overseas
Visual arts 353-6
crafts 356
Voluntary services 137-9, 153-5
organisations 138-9
young people 155
youth services 153-5
w 
Wales 1 -2, 10-12, 52, 198, 363
cultural and social life 11-12
economy 11
government 10-11
historical outline 1-2
press 363
Welsh Development Agency 198
Welsh Office 52
Water resources 173, 254-5
development projects 255
England and Wales
statutory water companies 255
supplies 255
water authorities 254-5
Northern Ireland 255
pollution control 173
research 255
Scotland 255
Waterways, inland 276-7
Welsh Office 52
Wholesale trades 227-8
Widows 132
benefits and pensions 132
Women 25-6, 132, 297
benefits and pensions 132
employment 297
equal opportunities 26
Y 
Youth 111,349
theatre for 349
young adult offenders 111
Youth Service 153-5
organisations 154-5
voluntary service 155
workers 154
z 
Zoological gardens 343
Printed in the UK for HMSO
Dd.718538 Pro 19393 C232 4/84
PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY GEORGE PHILIP PRINTERS. LTD.
© 1 984 GEORGE PHILIP & SON, LTD . LONDON
