1 fi
■ Hi ■*"
■ ta4l
[P
1 'Hi mmm
1 -*lll1 *-*11
-I'HlWWfMVriTI Vi
sn
■i I
,^11 n SkI I
iiltmfflnmwBB ■ 1
iHlIiilillilllmillllliilt! * H 1
-M-r-s-e—~3
(JXX ■ n
Britain 1982
An official handbook
An official handbook
London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
© Crown copyright 1982
First published 1982
Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
Government Bookshops
49 High Holborn, London WCiV 6HB
13a Castle Street, Edinburgh EH2 3AR
41 The Hayes, Cardiff CFi iJW
Brazennose Street, Manchester M60 8AS
Southey House, Wine Street, Bristol BSi 2BQ
258 Broad Street, Birmingham Bi 2HE
80 Chichester Street, Belfast BT1 4JY
Government publications are also available
through booksellers
Obtainable in the United States of America
from Pendragon House Inc.
2595 East Bayshore Road
Palo Alto
California 94303
£12 00 net
iP
o
o
ISBN o 11 701024 3
Contents
Page
Introduction ix
1 Land and People i
Introduction i
The Four Lands 4
Physical Features 17
The Social Framework 18
2 Government 30
The Monarchy 30
Parliament 34
The Privy Council 44
Her Majesty’s Government • 45
Government Departments 48
The Civil Service 55
Local Government 57
The Fire Services 63
3 Overseas Relations
Membership of the European Community 68
The Commonwealth 73
International Peace and Security 76
Britain and the United Nations 79
Other International Organisations 81
Development Co-operation 82
4 Defence 88
Civil Defence 93
Defence Procurement 93
5 Justice and the Law 95
The Law 95
Criminal Justice 95
Civil Justice 109
Administration of the Law 113
6 Social Welfare 117
National Health Service 117
Personal Social Services 124
Social Security 127
Voluntary Service 134
7 Education 136
The Youth Service 148
8 The Environment 151
Housing J52
Conservation 160
Control of Pollution 165
9 The Churches i?0
10 National Economy i?4
11 Framework of Industry 183
12 Manufacturing and Service Industries 200
Manufacturing 200
Construction 221
Service Industries 222
13 Energy and Natural Resources 230
Energy 230
Non-fuel Minerals 247
Water 250
14 Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 252
Agriculture 252
Fisheries 260
Forestry 263
15 Transport and Communications 265
Inland Transport 265
Ports 274
Shipping 276
Civil Aviation 279
Communications 283
16 Employment 287
17 Public Finance 303
18 Banking and Financial Services 313
19 Overseas Trade and Payments 322
Overseas Trade 322
Balance of Payments 330
20 Promotion of Science and Technology 333
21 Promotion of the Arts 343
22 The Press 355
23 Television and Radio 363
24 Sport 369
Appendix i 3?8
Currency 3?8
Metric Equivalents for British Weights and Measures 378
Bank and Public Holidays in Britain, 1982 379
Appendix 2 380
Guide to Sources 380
Index 382
Diagrams
Households by size in Great Britain 1961 and 1979 24
Availability of certain durable goods 26
The Royal Family: genealogical tree 32
Regional distribution of bilateral aid 1980 83
Housing by tenure 153
Smoke: emissions from coal combustion 168
Final expenditure at current market prices 178
Distribution of personal income before and after tax 180
Components of consumers’ expenditure in 1970 and 1980 181
Manufacturing net output and index of production 201
Capital expenditure by manufacturing industry 1979 203
Primary energy consumption 232
Aircraft and helicopters operated by British Airways in May 1981 281
Planned public expenditure in 1981-82 304
Commodity composition of trade 323
Geographical distribution of trade 325
Maps
Fold-in map inside back cover
Britain 5
Membership of the European Community 69
Enterprise zones and new towns 159
The assisted areas 194
The proposed assisted areas 195
Oil 236
Gas 237
Coal 241
Electricity 244
Some minerals produced in Britain 248
Main passenger railway routes 272
Photographs
Wells Cathedral
Conference and exhibition centres
Some animals found in Britain
Laser systems
Cranes
Cameras
Information technology
Transport
Veterinary aids
Cloning oil palms
Sport
facing page 38
between pages 38 and 39
facing page 39
facing page 166
between pages 166 and 167
facing page 167
between pages 220 and 221
facing page 294
between pages 294 and 295
between pages 294 and 295
facing page 295
Acknowledgement is made for photographs to:
Royal Signals and Radar Establishment for
microchip (front cover); Unilever Ltd for cloning
oil palms (between pp 294 and 295); Priestman of
Hull for oil-rig crane (between pp 166 and 167).
Introduction
Britain 1982 is the thirty-third official handbook in the series; it has
been prepared and revised by Reference Services, Publications
Division, of the Central Office of Information. The handbook is
widely known as an established work of reference and is the mainstay
of the reference facilities provided by British information services in
many countries. It is on sale by Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
throughout the world.
Britain 1982 describes many features in the life of the country,
including the workings of government and other major institutions.
It does not attempt an analytical approach to current events.
Care should be taken when studying British statistics to note whether
they refer to England, to England and Wales (considered together for
many administrative and other purposes), to Great Britain, which
comprises England, Wales and Scotland, or to the United Kingdom
(Great Britain and Northern Ireland) as a whole.
The factual and statistical information in Britain 1982 is compiled
with the co-operation of other government departments and
agencies, and of many other organisations. Sources of more detailed
and more topical information (including statistics) are mentioned in
the text and a guide to official sources is given in Appendix 2.
The text, generally, is based on information available up to
September 1981.
Reference Services
Publications Division
Central Office of Information, London
ADDENDUM
In November 1981 the Civil Service Department
(see p 50) was disbanded and its functions were
distributed between the Treasury and the new
Management and Personnel Office attached to
the Cabinet Office. The responsibilities of the
Minister of the Civil Service (see p 49) were
transferred to the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
COVER DESIGN
The British electronics industry is one of the
largest and most comprehensive in the world and
British scientists and companies have made
important contributions to electronics
technology.
The front cover shows a simulation of the royal
arms made of electronic components used in a
variety of British products. The official arms of
Queen Elizabeth II are shown alongside the title.
An earlier form of arms, that used by William III
and Mary II during their joint reign from 1689 to
1694, is shown on the back cover.
i Land and People
Historical
Outline
England and
Wales
Introduction
Britain comprises Great Britain (England, Wales and Scotland) and Northern
Ireland, and is one of the ten member states of the European Community. Its full
name is the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
The word Britain derives from Greek and Latin names probably stemming from a
Celtic original, which is also reflected in the name of the region of north western
France (‘Brittany’ in English) settled by migrants from Britain in the fifth and sixth
centuries ad. Although, in the prehistoric time scale, the Celts were relatively late
arrivals in the British Isles (following cultures which had produced such notable
monuments as the stone circles of Avebury and Stonehenge) it is only with them
that Britain emerges into recorded history, and the term Celtic is often used rather
generally to distinguish the earlier inhabitants of the British Isles from the later
Anglo-Saxon invaders.
Following sorties by Julius Caesar in 55 and 54 bc Britain was occupied by the
Romans in the first century ad and an ordered civilisation was established under
their rule for two or three hundred years except in the territory north of Hadrian’s
Wall (across northern England) and in some western areas. Christian missionaries
arrived not only in Roman Britain but in Scotland and Ireland.
The final Roman withdrawal in the fifth century, however, followed a long
period of increasing disorder during which there began raids on the island from
northern Europe—mainly by peoples traditionally described as Angles (from
Schleswig), Saxons and Jutes. It is from the Angles (who are reputed to have settled
mainly in the region now known as East Anglia) that the name England derives. In
the following two centuries the raids turned into settlement and the establishment
of a number of small kingdoms (with the Britons, or Celts, maintaining an
independent existence in the areas now known as Wales and Cornwall). Among
these, powerful kingdoms claiming overlordship over the whole country were
established, first in the north (Northumbria), then in the central area (Mercia) and
finally in the south (Wessex). However, the rise of Wessex in the ninth century was
contemporaneous with further raids and settlement from Europe, in this case by
the Vikings from Scandinavia. In the tenth century the Wessex dynasty defeated
the invading Danes and established a wide-ranging authority in England. A second
wave of Danish invasions, however, led to the establishment of a Danish dynasty in
England between 1017 and 1042, when the Wessex line was restored.
The last successful invasion of England took place following a disputed
succession when Duke William of Normandy (a duchy established by the Vikings
and owing only nominal allegiance to the French king) enforced his claims by
defeating the English at the Battle of Hastings in 1066. There was considerable
settlement by Normans and others from France, French became the language of
the nobility for the next three centuries and the legal and, to some extent, social
structure was influenced by that which prevailed across the Channel. The
monarchy established by William and his successors was (except in intervals of civil
2
Scotland
Ireland
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
war) considerably more effective both in administrative and military terms than its
predecessors and it began to establish its authority over increasingly wide areas of
the British Isles. This policy was pushed forward with most energy by Edward I
(1272-1307). His most lasting success was in Wales, the main stronghold into
which the Britons had retreated. With the death in battle in 1282 of the Welsh
Prince Llewellyn the royal authority became firmly established there. Edward
gave his own heir the title of‘Prince of Wales’ which has subsequently been borne
by the eldest son of the sovereign. The rising led by Owain Glyndwr at the
beginning of the fifteenth century showed strong continuing Welsh national
feeling but a new dimension to the situation was provided by the accession to the
English throne in 1485 of Henry VII of the Welsh House of Tudor. Wales was
politically assimilated to England under the Act of Union of 1535.
A more difficult problem for English kings was that of relations with Scotland.
Hadrian’s Wall had proved no insurmountable barrier between the Romans and
their northern neighbours, and far-reaching expeditions both by the Romans into
Scotland and by the Piets into England took place. In the sixth century the Scots
from Ireland or ‘Scotia’ settled in the areas of Scotland now known as Argyll.
What is now Lothian was English in population and Welsh (Britons) moved north
from the invading English into Strathclyde. A united kingdom, under the Scots
king Kenneth MacAlpine, emerged in the ninth century while Scotland like
England was endeavouring to defend itself against the Vikings.
Whether and in what sense the Scottish kingdom owed allegiance to that of
England was, from its inception, a subject of endless dissension contributing to
intermittent and inconclusive border warfare throughout the Middle Ages,
though the idea of uniting the two countries by force ended with the English defeat
at Bannockburn in 1314.
The eventual unification of the crowns reflected the fact that, after the
reformation (Henry VIII’s break away in 1534 from the supreme authority of the
Roman Catholic Church), old national antagonisms had become less important
than religious differences. Following the death of Henry’s daughter Elizabeth I in
1603, the Protestant James Stuart, James VI of Scotland, was welcomed to the
English throne asjames I. England, Wales and Scotland were henceforth known as
Great Britain. Apart from the union of the monarchies, however, England and
Scotland remained separate during the seventeenth century, except for an enforced
unification by Oliver Cromwell early in the brief period of the Commonwealth
(1649-1660) after he had defeated royalist forces in Scotland. By the beginning of
the following century political and economic arguments for a closer union were
making themselves heard in both countries. Eventually, in I7°7> both sides agreed
on the formation of a single parliament for Great Britain although Scotland
retained its own system of law and church settlement. The union was put under
strain when Queen Anne died in 1714 and George, Elector of Hanover (descended
from James I) succeeded the Stuarts on the British throne. ‘Jacobite’ rebellions on
behalf of the exiled members of the House of Stuart took place in 1715 and 1745
and it was from the highlands of Scotland that they attracted most of their, in the
event, rather ineffective support.
In Ireland, out of a patchwork of Celtic and pre-Celtic peoples similar to that in
Britain, a number of kingdoms had emerged before the Christian era; any
supremacy established by one over the others in the following 1,000 years was of a
shadowy and temporary nature. In cultural matters Ireland was to compare
favourably with the remainder of Europe during the Dark Ages and, in particular,
Christianity survived in Ireland when it had been swamped for the time being in
LAND AND PEOPLE
3
England by pagan Anglo-Saxon invaders. Ireland, however, did not escape the
incursions of the Vikings, who were to dominate the country during the tenth
century.
In 1169 Henry II of England launched an invasion of Ireland, the overlordship of
which he had been granted by the Pope who was anxious to bring the Irish church
into full obedience to Rome. A large part of the country came under the control of
Anglo-Norman magnates but their descendants tended to assimilate to their new
country and little direct authority was exercised from England during the Middle
Ages.
The Tudor monarchs showed a much greater tendency to intervene in Ireland.
Henry VIII’s assumption of the title of King of Ireland in 1541 arose from his desire
to apply the reformation settlement and from this time on the religious issue was to
produce far-reaching and often tragic consequences. The determination to estab¬
lish royal authority in Ireland was strengthened during the reign of Elizabeth I
by the fear that the country might be used by Philip of Spain in his efforts to
subjugate England, and a series of bitterly fought campaigns were waged against
Irish insurgents. The main focus of the resistance was the northern province of
Ulster and, with its collapse in 1607, Ulster became an area of settlement by
immigrants from Scotland and England. (There was settlement by immigrants
elsewhere in Ireland though on a lesser scale.)
The English civil war of 1642—52 led to further risings in Ireland which were
ruthlessly crushed by Cromwell. The restoration of the monarchy in 1660 was
followed by the accession of the Roman Catholic James II to the throne in 1685,
and there was more fighting after his deposition three years later in favour of the
Protestant William of Orange and his wife Mary.
During most of the eighteenth century there was an uneasy peace and towards
its end various efforts were made by British governments to achieve stability. In
1782 the Irish Parliament (dating from medieval times) was given legislative
independence; the only constitutional tie with England was the Crown. The
Parliament represented, however, only the privileged Anglo-Irish minority, who
had obtained possession of most of the agricultural land, and Catholics were
excluded from it. Against the background of an abortive rebellion in 1798 and the
prospect of intervention by France (with which England was at war between 1793
and 1800) the Irish Parliament was induced to vote for union with what, from
1801, was to be the Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland.
The ‘Irish question’ continued as one of the major problems of British politics
during the nineteenth century. In 1886 the Liberal government under Gladstone
introduced a Home Rule Bill which would have given an Irish Parliament
authority over most internal matters while reserving to Britain control over
external affairs. This led to a split in the Liberal Party and the failure of the Bill. It
was not until 1914 that Home Rule was enacted by the Government of Ireland
Act. Its implementation was, however, prevented both by the threat of armed
resistance on the part of the Protestant majority in Ulster and by the outbreak of
the first world war.
A nationalist uprising in Dublin in 1916 was suppressed, but with the end of the
first war a guerrilla force known as the Irish Republican Army (IRA) began
operations against the British administration. In 1921 a settlement was reached
under which six of the nine counties of the province of Ulster received their own
Parliament, but remained represented in and subject to the supreme authority of
the British Parliament, while the remainder of Ireland as the Irish Free State (later
to become the Irish Republic) became a self-governing State outside the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
4
Channel Islands
and Isle of Man
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Although the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man are not part of the United
Kingdom, they have a special relationship with it because of the antiquity of their
connection with the Crown. The Channel Islands were integrated into the Duchy
of Normandy in the tenth and eleventh centuries and have been territories of the
Crown ever since the Conquest. The Isle of Man was under nominal sovereignty
of Norway until 1266 when it was ceded to Scotland, subsequently passing to the
Earls of Derby for a period but eventually coming under the direct administration
of the Crown in 1765. Today the territories are Crown dependencies, with their
own legislative assemblies and systems of local administration and of law, and their
own courts. The United Kingdom Government is responsible for their defence,
their international relations and, ultimately, their good government.
The Four Lands
In the following pages, brief descriptions of England, ^Vales, Scotland and
Northern Ireland bring together, for each of the countries, a number of topics
which are dealt with more fully in succeeding chapters. For Northern Ireland,
some background to the present political position is included.
TABLE 1. General Statistics
England Wales Scotland Northern United
Ireland Kingdom
Population
(’000, mid-1980)
Area
(sq km)
(sq miles)
Population density
(persons per sq km, mid-1980)
(persons per sq mile, mid-1980)
Gross domestic product
(_£ per head, mid-1979)
Employees in employment
(’000, mid-1980)
Percentage of employees in:
(mid-1980 provisional)
agriculture, forestry and fishing
engineering and allied industries
other manufacturing
construction
mining, quarrying, gas,
electricity and water
service industries
Unemployment rate
(per cent, mid-1980)
Average gross weekly earnings
(£, all full-time men, April 1979)
Identifiable public expenditure
(_£ per head, 1979—80)
46,467 2,778
130,438 20,769
50,362 8,019
356
923
2,918
18,986
i'5
I4'5
16-3
5'3
3 0
59'4
6-2
ioi-6
1,098
134
346
2,533
986
2-4
I 10
17-8
67
5-8
563
90
97.6
1,274
5H53
78,781
30,418
65
169
2,767
2,036
2-3
ii-3
16-2
8-o
31
591
99
1,363
H547
14,120
5,452
110
284
2,220
503
1- 8
8-0
17-8
7'2
2- 2
630
12'7
934
1,648
55,945
244,108
94,25i
229
584
2,866
22,511
1-6
13-9
16-5
56
3'i
593
69
1014
Sources: Regional Trends, 1981, Population Trends and Department of Employment Gazette
“Great Britain only
100 miles
0 50 100 150 kilometres
- —— International boundaries
 Country boundaries
  County boundaries in England
and Wales and regional
boundaries in Scotland
^-/northern1
> IRELAND ^
v*. Belfast
IRISH
REPUBLIC
FRANCE
Britain
Shetland Islands
Orkney Island's
Western Isles
Atlantic
Ocean
SCOTLAND
Cleveland
ENGLAND
Isle of Man
Irish Sea
Isle of ^
Anglesey
WALES
W. Glam.-
Mid. Glam.
S. Glam.
English Channel
Isles of Scilly
Channel Islands
6
ENGLAND
Government
The Economy
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
England is predominantly a lowland country. There are upland regions in the
north (the Pennine Chain, the Cumbrian mountains and the Yorkshire moorlands)
and in the south west in Devon and Cornwall. For the most part, however, the
country is undulating or flat and, in the south, crossed by low ranges of hills
including the Cotswolds and the Kent and Sussex Downs. The greatest
concentrations of population are in the London and Thames estuary areas, the west
Yorkshire and north west industrial cities, the midlands conurbation around
Birmingham, the north east conurbation on the rivers Tyne and Tees, and along
the Channel coast. (For main urban districts, see Table 2, p 21.) Immigration from
Europe over the centuries has led to the establishment of Irish and Jewish
communities in many of the larger cities. In the latter part of the twentieth century
immigrants from the South Asian subcontinent and the Caribbean have also
formed distinctive urban communities.
England has no government minister or department with sole responsibility for
the central administration of domestic affairs, in contrast to Wales, Scotland and
Northern Ireland. Instead responsibility is shared among a number of government
departments, whose responsibilities in some cases, also cover aspects of affairs in
Wales and Scotland. There are 516 members of Parliament for England in the
House of Commons, and arrangements are made for the discussion of English
affairs. Traditionally, of the two major political parties, the Conservatives find
their support chiefly in rural areas, while the Labour Party derives its main support
from urban industrialised areas. In the 1979 election England returned 284
Conservative members of Parliament, 225 Labour and 7 Liberal. Local govern¬
ment outside London is administered through a two-tier system of 45 counties
subdivided into districts. Apart from six metropolitan counties created in 1974 and
based on the largest conurbations, the counties’ histories can, for the most part be
traced back a thousand years to the administrative units, or ‘shires’, of the Saxon
period. The two-tier system was introduced among the local government reforms
of 1974, in response to the gradual expansion of local authority responsibilities.
London is administered, under reforms introduced in 1965, by a central council
and 33 bodies responsible for particular areas.
Eight ‘standard’ regions in England are delimited principally for statistical
purposes: South East, East Anglia, South West, West Midlands, East Midlands,
Yorkshire and Humberside, North West and North. They play no part in local
government and do not always coincide with the regional units adopted by central
government departments. (Standard regions are shown on p 159-)
The legal system of England comprises on the one hand a historic body of
conventions, known as ‘common law’ and ‘equity , and on the other
parliamentary and European Community legislation. Common law stems from
the work of the king’s judges after the Norman conquest of 1066 who sought to
bring together into a single body of legal principles the various local customs of the
Anglo-Saxons. Great reliance was placed on precedent, and the practice of
reporting on cases commenced in the thirteenth century. Equity law derives from
the practice of petitioning the king’s Chancellor in cases not covered by common
law. The English system is therefore distinct from many of the legal systems of
western Europe which have codes deriving from Roman Law. The Habeas
Corpus Act of 1679 is a fundamental statute forbidding imprisonment without
trial.
Up to the eighteenth century the English economy was mainly agrarian and the
chief manufacture was wool cloth. Trade, particularly following voyages of
exploration, developed rapidly. London as the capital city, and a major port and
7
LAND AND PEOPLE
mercantile centre, and the textile areas (East Anglia, south-western England and
west Yorkshire) were the most populous and prosperous regions. In the late
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, however, rapid growth took place in the
midlands, the north west, west Yorkshire and the north east, where the coalfields,
iron ore deposits and ports permitted Britain to become the first industrialised
nation, basing its wealth on coal mining, on the manufacture of iron and steel,
heavy machinery and textiles, on shipbuilding and on trade. London enhanced its
position with the growing strength of the economy but East Anglia and the west
country, remote from the main areas of industrial development, were affected by
agricultural depression, and entered a period of relative decline.
In the twentieth century, the second period of industrialisation, based on new
sources of energy, new manufacturing industries and new forms of transport, has
continued to change the broad pattern of regional and industrial development in
England. In the 1920s and 1930s the northern industrial centres saw their traditional
industries weakened owing to fluctuations in world trade and competition from
other industrialising countries and, in some cases, from substitute products.
London, its surrounding counties and the west Midlands generally benefited from
the newer, more mobile, industries. These included chemicals (such as
pharmaceuticals, dyes, plastics and artificial fibres), electrical and electronic
engineering, vehicle manufacture, aircraft building, instrument engineering,
aluminium and rubber manufacture and a wide range of consumer goods,
including processed food, drink and tobacco products as well as durables. In the
latter half of the century, the continued expansion of the newer industries has
combined with the effects of new and expanding towns programmes, aimed at
reducing overcrowding in the older urban centres, to produce further economic
growth in the counties around London (especially to the north of it), and
expansion in East Anglia and in the South West. At the same time successive
governments have supported measures to make the older industrial regions
attractive to new industries and more recently to revive economic activity in inner
urban areas. Rationalisation programmes for the steel, coal and shipbuilding
industries have been implemented.
East Anglia, still largely agricultural, was the fastest growing English region in
both population and industrial activity in the 1960s and 1970s. Particular growth
points have been Peterborough, the east coast ports (which, besides benefiting
from relative proximity to the northern European Community countries, have in
some cases become important bases for the development of gas resources in the
southern North Sea) and nine towns receiving population overspill from London.
Food processing, agricultural machinery, vehicle engines and electronic and
instrument engineering are the strongest industries, and the service sector has been
growing in Cambridge, Ipswich and Norwich.
Greater London and the industrial cities of the West Midlands, the North West,
Yorkshire and Humberside and the North continue to represent the largest
concentrations of manufacturing industry. London is an important area for
products of all kinds including food and drink (especially brewing), instrument
engineering, electrical and electronic engineering, clothing, furniture and
printing. Of importance in the surrounding south-eastern counties are oil refining
(along the Thames and near Southampton), pharmaceuticals, pumps, valves and
compressors, instrument engineering, electronics (particularly in Berkshire and
Hertfordshire, and around Chelmsford), motor vehicles, aerospace, building
materials, timber, paper and plastics products. There is diversity, too, in the North
West, with significant activity in food processing (especially grain milling, bread
and flour confectionery and biscuits), chemicals of all kinds, textile machinery,
insulated wires and cables, computers (Manchester being one of the largest centres
8
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
in the country), motor vehicles, aerospace, clothing, glass making (with the
world’s largest flat glass maker, Pilkington’s, based in St Helens), paper and rubber
products. Lancashire is the centre of the cotton and allied textile industries.
The characteristic manufactures of the West Midlands are metals (steel tubes,
iron castings and non-ferrous metals), machine tools, electrical engineering, motor
vehicles, carpets, pottery (with over 80 per cent of Britain’s ceramic industry
located in Staffordshire) and rubber production. Of the other regions, Yorkshire
and Humberside has important shares of cocoa, chocolate and confectionery
production, iron and steel, machine tools, textile machinery, woollen and worsted
goods (producing about two-thirds of Britain’s wool textiles), carpets, clothing
and glass containers. The North has general chemicals, iron and steel, process plant,
shipbuilding and marine engineering and clothing; the East Midlands has steel
tubes, iron castings, over two-thirds of Britain’s hosiery and knitted goods
industry, and footwear; and the South West has food processing (especially dairy
products), aerospace, pumps, valves and compressors and paper products.
In agriculture, large and medium-sized holdings are proportionately more
important in England than elsewhere in Britain, and the proportion of mixed
holdings has been falling, as part of a general tendency towards greater
specialisation. Dairying is most common in the west of England, where the wetter
climate encourages the growth of good grass; sheep and cattle are reared in the
hilly and moorland areas of northern and south-western England; and arable
farming, pig and poultry farming and horticulture are concentrated in the east and
south east. Horticulture is also important in the West Midlands. Forestry in
England is mainly to be found in the North, South East and South West regions.
The principal fishing ports are in the South West and on the east coast.
England has plentiful energy resources in its coalfields and from nuclear power
stations and has access to offshore oil and gas reserves. (The electricity grid of
England and Wales is the largest interconnected power network under unified
control in the western world.) About 60 per cent of Britain’s deepmined coal is
produced in the East Midlands and Yorkshire coalfields, the former being the most
productive in the country. There are seven nuclear power stations around the
coasts of southern England, and projects to construct two more in the north and
one on the south coast are nearing completion. The world’s first large-scale nuclear
power station was established at Calder Hall in Cumbria in 1956, while substantial
investment in reprocessing capacity is being undertaken nearby. Important
mineral deposits in England include aggregates for the construction industry (sand,
gravel and crushed rock), industrial minerals (including clay, salt from the North
West and china clay from Cornwall) tin ore, also from Cornwall, and iron ore
from the East Midlands and Humberside. Investment in water resources includes
the construction of the Kielder Reservoir in Northumbria, completed in 1980;
when it has filled, in 1982, it will be one of Europe’s largest man-made lakes.
A motorway network has been constructed in England since the 1950s and at
present comprises four long-distance arterial routes linking London and the cities
of the midlands, the north and north west and the south west, and over 30 shorter
motorways, mainly near London and Manchester. Priority is being given to the
London orbital route and schemes of industrial importance. Inter-city travel has
been improved by the introduction of high-speed rail services which are among
the fastest in the world. Many ports have been equipped to deal with new
developments in shipping (such as container ships) and to take account of changes
in the nature of trade brought about by the increase in oil traffic through North Sea
ports. The major airports are Heathrow (the largest international airport in the
world) and Gatwick, both serving London, and Manchester and Luton.
Employment in service industries has accounted for an increasing share of total
LAND AND PEOPLE
9
Cultural and
Social Life
employment in recent years, expansion being particularly marked in financial and
business services. London is one of the world s leading centres ot banking,
insurance and other financial services. Decentralisation of some office services from
the capital has led to a growth in office employment in the South West and East
Anglia in particular. London and the surrounding counties account for two-thirds
of advertising and market research activity, over hall of all services offered by
research establishments (other than those attached to businesses), half of central
government services and nearly half of non-food wholesale distribution in
England. After London and the South East, the North West, with its mam centre in
Manchester, is the next most important concentration of service industries.
Tourism and catering have also expanded: overseas visitors spent over ^2,675
million in England in 1980, two-thirds of it in London. They are, however,
tending to spend more time in areas outside London in the South East, the South
West and the Midlands. The South West is the most popular region for domestic
tourism, accounting for more than a fifth of main holidays. The Lake District, with
11 major lakes, and peaks including Scafell (England’s highest point, at 978 metres,
3,210 feet), is also very popular with walkers and climbers.
Apart from a wealth of attractive rural areas and coastal resorts England also offers
numerous historic cities, towns, villages, buildings and other sites of interest, in
addition to cultural events of all kinds. London is a natural centre of attention, with
its palaces, ceremonial occasions, shops, theatrical, musical and ballet centres, art
galleries and museums, and other varied entertainments. Oxford and Stratford-
upon-Avon, the birthplace of William Shakespeare, are well-known centres while
the prehistoric Stonehenge monument in Wiltshire is a leading attraction. Many
regions have special associations with the great English writers and artists, such as
Jane Austen, William Wordsworth, Charles Dickens, Thomas Gainsborough and
John Constable. There are seven national parks in the north of England and two in
the South West and two forest parks. Recreations of all kinds are pursued, many
sports and games having been devised in England.
Provision for welfare services is generally assumed by public authorities, but
there is also substantial private and voluntary provision, especially in housing.
Elealth services in England, provided under the National Health Service, are
administered by authorities acting for a government department, and are available
to all British residents and certain overseas visitors (such as European Community
nationals). Social security services are also the responsibility of central government,
while personal social services are provided by local authorities. Central and local
government are both concerned in education. The latter is responsible for school
and most post-school education, while universities, though government-funded,
are autonomous. There are 33 universities in England, two business schools with
university status and the Open University, which provides throughout Britain
part-time degree courses for people studying at home, largely through
broadcasting and correspondence. The famous universities of Oxford and
Cambridge are of medieval origin, while 15 of the universities have been
established since i960. The private sector of education includes the so-called
‘public schools’ of which Eton is, perhaps, the best known example, and the
University College at Buckingham.
Regional and local newspapers are produced throughout England, but of the
ten national newspapers nine are produced in London though some of them are
also printed in a northern edition in Manchester. Television broadcasting by the
British Broadcasting Corporation is mainly national, with some regional
programmes; the Independent Broadcasting Authority on the other hand provides
one television service organised on a regional basis through a network of
10
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
WALES
Government
The Economy
independent companies. National radio services have been supplemented by
numerous local radio services since the 1970s.
Wales is a country of hills and mountains with extensive tracts of high plateau and
shorter stretches of mountain ranges deeply dissected by river valleys. The highest
mountains are in Snowdonia in the north west; the highest peak is Snowdon (1,085
metres, 3,560 feet). The lower-lying ground is largely confined to the relatively
narrow coastal belt and the lower parts of the river valleys. The main areas of
settlement are in the southern valleys and coastal areas where two-thirds of the
population live. The chief urban centres are Cardiff, Swansea and Newport. Wales
is a principality; Prince Charles, the heir to the throne, was invested by the Queen
with the title of Prince of Wales at a special ceremony at Caernarfon Castle in 1969
when he was 21.
The country has its own Welsh language, spoken (according to the 1971 census)
by 20 per cent of the population, chiefly in the rural north and west. The Welsh
name of the country is Cymru. Measures have been adopted since the 1960s to
revive the use of the language, which is of Celtic origin, and closely resembles
Breton, spoken in Brittany in France. They include recognising the equal validity
of Welsh with English in law courts, the encouragement of bilingual education in
schools, and the extended use of Welsh for official purposes and in broadcasting. A
fourth television channel is to be established which will transmit a substantial
proportion of its programmes in Welsh.
There is no established church in Wales, the Anglican church having been
disestablished in 1920 following decades of pressure from adherents of the more
evangelical Methodist and Baptist persuasions. Methodism in particular had spread
rapidly in Wales in the eighteenth century, assuming the nature of a popular
movement among Welsh speakers and finding strong support later in industrial
communities.
The country returns 36 of the 635 elected members of Parliament and there are
special arrangements for the discussion of Welsh affairs. For the last 60 years
the industrial communities of Wales have always supported the Labour party in
elections, ensuring a Labour majority in Wales. In the 1979 election 21 Labour, 11
Conservative, 2 Plaid Cymru (Welsh Nationalist) and 1 Liberal members were
returned. The remaining Welsh seat is held by the Speaker. Substantial
administrative autonomy is centred on the Secretary of State for Wales, who is a
member of the Cabinet, and has wide-ranging responsibilities relating to the
economy, welfare services and the provision of amenities. The headquarters of the
administration is the Welsh Office in Cardiff, which also has an office in London. In
1979 proposals for the establishment of an elected Welsh assembly in Cardiff to
take over policymaking and executive powers from central government were
rejected in a referendum held in Wales. Local government is exercised through a
system of elected authorities similar to that of the English counties, and the legal
system is identical with that of England.
The south Wales coalfield was developed during the latter part of the industrial
revolution in the second half of the nineteenth century creating populous urban
centres which drew labour from the rural areas and from England and Ireland.
However the economy was narrowly based, mainly on coal, iron, steel and
tinplate, and contracted sharply during the 1920s and 1930s resulting in severe
employment problems and substantial emigration. Since 1945 the Government’s
regional policies have introduced a diverse spread of manufacturing firms to help
LAND AND PEOPLE
Cultural and
Social Life
11
to offset the contraction in the traditional basic industries. These new firms have
included investment by a growing number of overseas firms, most recently, for
example, by the Ford Motor Company and Japanese and American electronics
concerns. (Wales is now developing as an important centre for electronics in
Britain.) In addition there is a range of modern light engineering concerns as well
as chemical and plastics plants, while the Royal Mint was transferred to Llantrisant
from London in 1968. South Wales remains the principal industrial area but new
manufacturing firms have also been introduced on the smaller coalfield in north¬
east Wales, around Wrexham and Deesside, again to offset the decline in the older,
basic industries which previously dominated the area. Light industry has also been
attracted to the towns in the rural areas in mid- and north Wales and an important
refinery complex has developed around Milford Haven which is one of Britain’s
major oil ports.
Agriculture occupies about 72 per cent of the land area, the main activities being
sheep and cattle rearing in the hill regions and dairy farming in the lowlands. Wales
accounts for about 10 per cent of forest area in Britain and about 20 per cent of
public sector (Forestry Commission) timber production.
Wales produces about 9 per cent of Britain’s coal, including all of its anthracite,
and 9 per cent of its electricity; one of the biggest pumped storage power stations in
the world is under construction at Dinorwic. There are nuclear power stations at
Wylfa and Trawsfynydd. Wales is a major contributor to water resources,
exporting about a third of its supply to England.
Communications in the south have been greatly improved, with the building of
the Severn Bridge and the completion of motorway and high-speed rail links with
England.
There has been expansion in financial and professional services and in the
tourism and catering trades. With its north coast resorts, and the attractions of
three national parks (Snowdonia, the Brecon Beacons and the Pembrokeshire
Coast) Wales accounts for 15 per cent of Britain’s domestic tourism.
There is much literary, musical and dramatic activity in Wales and there is a
National Library and National Museum. Welsh literature is one of the oldest in
Europe. The country is well known for its choral singing and the Welsh National
Opera has achieved an international reputation. The special festivals of Wales,
known as eisteddfodau, encourage Welsh literature and music. The greatest of
these is the Royal National Eisteddfod of Wales, held annually, entirely in Welsh,
and consisting of competitions in music, singing, prose and poetry. The little town
of Llangollen has extended its eisteddfod to include artists from all over the world
in the annual International Eisteddfod. Famous modern Welsh artists have
included the opera singer Sir Geraint Evans and the poet Dylan Thomas.
Prominent orators have included the politicians David Lloyd George (a former
Prime Minister) and Aneurin Bevan. An active local press includes a number of
Welsh language publications. Great interest is aroused by the annual rugby
football competition against sides representing England, Scotland, Ireland and
France.
Health services are provided mainly under the National Health Service,
administered by the Welsh Office, while personal social services, and education
(except at university level) are provided mainly through the local authorities.
Educational provision is similar to that in England except for the use of Welsh in
some schools. The collegiate University of Wales, founded in 1893, comprises
seven member institutions. Wales has more old houses than other regions in
Britain, a situation which is being tackled in the public sector by a substantial
programme of improvement and rehabilitation.
12
SCOTLAND
Government
Economy
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Scotland may be divided broadly into three areas: the sparsely populated highlands
and islands in the north, accounting for just over half the total area of the country;
the central lowlands, an area of undulating country, with some hill ranges and
containing three-quarters of the population and most of the industrial centres and
cultivated farmland; and the southern uplands, containing a number of hill ranges,
which border on England. The highest mountains are the Grampians in the central
highlands, with Ben Nevis (1,342 metres, 4,406 feet) the highest peak. The chief
urban centres are the capital, Edinburgh, the main industrial centre, Glasgow,
Aberdeen and Dundee.
The period from 1750 onward has been one of considerable and continuous
emigration of Scots to England and overseas. The rate slowed markedly in the
1960s and 1970s as the offshore oil and gas industries began to develop and there
was inward migration to the north-east of Scotland. The large outflow of people
from Strathclyde has continued, however, though at a lower level than before. In
the mid-nineteenth century, as Scotland industrialised rapidly, there was large-
scale immigration from Ireland, which led to the establishment of sizeable Roman
Catholic communities in Scotland.
The period from 1750 until the beginning of the twentieth century was also one
of stability and economic progress and of remarkable achievements in many fields.
Among the famous men to emerge were David Hume, Adam Smith, Robert
Adam, James Watt, John MacAdam, Lord Kelvin and James Clerk-Maxwell.
The Church of Scotland, which became the established church in 1690, has
complete freedom in all matters of doctrine, order and discipline. It is a Protestant
church, which is Presbyterian in form—that is, governed by a hierarchy of church
courts, each of which includes laymen as well as ministers.
There are special arrangements for the conduct of Scottish affairs within the British
system of government and separate Acts of Parliament are passed for Scotland
where appropriate. In the 1979 general election the 71 Scottish seats in the House of
Commons were apportioned as follows: Labour 44, Conservative 22, Liberal 3
and Scottish National 2. Since 1959 Scotland, like Wales, has had a majority of
Labour members of Parliament. Administrative tasks relating to a wide range of
economic and social functions are the responsibility of the Secretary of State for
Scotland, a member of the Cabinet, working through the Scottish Office, with its
administrative headquarters in Edinburgh, and an office in London. As in Wales, a
referendum held in Scotland in 1979 revealed insufficient support for an elected
assembly in Scotland.
Local government generally operates on a two-tier basis broadly similar to that
in England and Wales but established by separate legislation.
The principles and procedures of the Scottish legal system (particularly in civil
law) differ in many respects from those of England and Wales, stemming from the
adoption of elements of other European legal systems, based on Roman law,
during the sixteenth century.
In the first half of the twentieth century Scotland experienced the same pressure on
its chief industries as did the north of England and Wales, but there has been
considerable transition in the economy since 1945.
The most important development has been the expansion of offshore-related
industries following the discovery of oil and gas under the North Sea. Some 75,000
to 90,000 jobs have arisen directly or indirectly as a result of North Sea activities.
While some traditional industries (coal, steel, shipbuilding, textiles) have been in
decline for a number of decades, oil-related expansion has helped other traditional
LAND AND PEOPLE
13
Cultural and
Social Life
industries such as engineering, and has combined with growth in newer industries,
government regional aid, and a high level of investment by overseas companies
(especially from the United States), to produce new areas of growth. The north
and north-east of Scotland have benefited most from the offshore developments,
with Aberdeen as the administrative centre.
Prominent among other newer industries is electronic engineering which has
developed greatly in the industrial centres of the Strathclyde, Lothian and Taysidc
regions. Scotland is now an important electronics and high technology centre.
Employment has also grown in chemicals, especially petro-chemicals, food and
drink industries and light engineering. The five new towns (East Kilbride,
Glenrothes, Livingston, Irvine and Cumbernauld) have been notable growth
areas.
The traditional Scottish manufactures—shipbuilding, textiles (high quality
tweeds, Harris tweed being especially well known, woollens and knitwear) and
whisky distilling—remain important.
Scotland has one-third of Britain’s total agricultural land, but almost three-
quarters of it consists of unimproved hill grazing. The leading activities are
livestock and dairy farming. About 10 per cent of the agricultural area is used for
crops, and 70 per cent of this is under barley. Scotland accounts for half of Britain’s
forest area and for a third of public sector timber production. Fishing remains an
important activity: more than half of total landings of fish in Britain are made by
Scottish vessels. The principal fishing ports are Aberdeen, Peterhead, Fraserburgh,
Lerwick, Ullapool, Mallaig, Ayr and Stornoway.
Despite the advent of oil, Scotland remains heavily dependent on electricity and
gas. Nuclear and hydro-electric generation supply a higher proportion of energy
than in any other part of Britain. Large supplies of unpolluted water form a major
resource.
Communications, both domestic and international, have improved in many
central and coastal areas, particularly in the north and north-east, owing to the
stimulus of the offshore oil industry and road and bridgebuilding programmes.
The offshore oil industry has also encouraged expansion in financial and business
services which have been traditionally strong in Scotland. Tourism is of major
importance, accounting for 11 per cent of domestic tourism in Britain. The chief
attractions are the cultural and historic associations of Scotland, particularly of
Edinburgh, the landscape and the opportunities for sport and recreation. Scotland
is the home of golf, while in Aviemore in the Cairngorm mountains there is a
flourishing ski-ing centre.
A vigorous cultural life in Scotland has as its highlight the annual Edinburgh
International Festival. The Scottish Arts Council (a committee of the Arts Council
of Great Britain with a large degree of autonomy) supports a wide range of
activities. Notable performing arts bodies are the Scottish National Orchestra,
Scottish Opera, Scottish Ballet, Scottish Chamber Orchestra, Scottish Baroque
Ensemble and the BBC Scottish Symphony Orchestra. Scotland possesses
excellent collections of the fine and applied arts, notably in the National Galleries
of Scotland, the Royal Scottish Museum and the National Museum of Antiquities
in Edinburgh, and the City of Glasgow Museums and Art Galleries.
The Gaelic language, of Irish Celtic origin, is still spoken by some 80,000 people
in Scotland. One of the former Scottish languages, it was displaced in southern and
centra] Scotland by ‘Scots’ or (‘Lallans’), which in turn has been largely replaced—
in common usage—by English. Both Gaelic and Scots have been the medium of
literary revivals; Scots was also drawn on memorably in the poetry of Robert
Burns and the novels of Sir Walter Scott.
H
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
NORTHERN
IRELAND
Government:
Background to
Civil
Disturbances
An active press includes two daily newspapers based in Edinburgh and Glasgow
which have circulation outside Scotland. There are ten other dailies and four
Sunday newspapers. Articles in some papers are printed in Gaelic. Television
programmes are produced by BBC (Scotland) and by three independent
companies, covering the highland, lowland and border regions. BBC Radio
Scotland covers most of the population and there are five ‘community’ services in
the highlands and islands, two of them mainly in Gaelic. Independent radio stations
provide services for Edinburgh, Glasgow and Dundee, and two more are planned
for Aberdeen and Ayr.
As in the rest of Britain the National Health Service, and local authority social
service, education and housing programmes provide for the welfare of the
community.
Local authorities are responsible for the provision of most education, except at
university level. Secondary education in Scotland is almost completely organised
on comprehensive lines. Independent bodies administer vocational further
education institutions and colleges of education. There are eight universities, of
which four (St Andrews, Glasgow, Aberdeen and Edinburgh) were established in
the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, while the other four have been established
since 1964. The educational tradition has been particularly strong in Scotland,
helping many Scots to positions of eminence in the arts and sciences.
Over 50 per cent of Scotland’s housing has been built since 1945, only Northern
Ireland having a larger percentage. Scotland has a high proportion of housing
rented from public authorities—over 50 per cent compared with a national
average of just over 30 per cent.
Northern Ireland is at its nearest point only 21 kilometres (13 miles) from Scotland.
It has a 412-kilometre (256-mile) border in the south and west with the Irish
Republic. At its centre lies Lough Neagh, Britain’s largest freshwater lake (368
square km, 142 square miles). Many of the principal towns lie in valleys leading
from the Lough, including the capital, Belfast, which stands at the mouth of the
river Lagan. The Mourne Mountains rising sharply in the south east include Slieve
Donard, Northern Ireland’s highest peak (852 metres, 2,796 feet).
Just under two-thirds of Northern Ireland’s population are descendants of Scots
or English settlers who crossed to north-eastern Ireland mainly in the seventeenth
century; most belong to the Protestant faith, and have a traditional loyalty to the
maintenance of the union with Great Britain. The remainder, over a third, are Irish
in origin, mainly Roman Catholic and, in varying degrees, republican in political
opinion, favouring union with the Irish Republic. Deeply divided for gen¬
erations, both sides of the community have tended to see themselves as besieged
minorities—Protestants as a minority in the whole of Ireland, Roman Catholics as
a minority within Northern Ireland.
From 1920 Northern Ireland had its own Parliament in which the mainly
Protestant ‘Unionists’ formed the Government after successive elections. Roman
Catholics in the community resented this continuing domination, believing
themselves deliberately excluded from office and, as a result, from some material
benefits and progress in political aims. Although substantial advances for the whole
population were achieved in social welfare and economic development, in some
respects provision for the Roman Catholics lagged behind that for the Protestants,
and during the late 1960s an active and articulate civil rights movement emerged.
The sectarian disturbances which followed and the introduction of the Army in
1969 in a peace-keeping role were exploited by extremists from both sections of
LAND AND PEOPLE
15
Direct Rule and
Political
Initiatives
the community, notably the Provisional Irish Republican Army (which broke
away from the Official IRA in 1970, claiming to protect the Roman Catholic
minority). In subsequent terrorist violence sectarian divisions have been
exacerbated by both sides.
The demands of the civil rights movement were met by a series of reforms.
Among the most important were measures to ensure the proper representation of
minorities in local government and fairer housing allocations in the public sector.
More recent measures include the outlawing of religious and political
discrimination in employment, and the establishment of an independent police
complaints board. Commissioners have been appointed to look into complaints of
maladministration, including discrimination, by central or local government;
actions by official bodies have been made illegal if they discriminate on religious or
political grounds; a human rights commission has been set up; and a law against
sex discrimination has been implemented. While terrorism continues, certain
emergency powers are in force (see p 97), but there has been much concern to
reconcile them as far as possible with respect for individual liberties; the measures
are temporary and need regular renewal by Parliament. Most traditional rights,
including the freedom of the communications media and the right to prosecute the
security forces if they exceed their authority, remain in force. Northern Ireland’s
legal system, and the safeguards it enshrines, is broadly similar to that in England
and Wales.
The activities of many groups and individuals, including those who joined peace
marches in 1976, have indicated a wish in both parts of the community to
overcome intimidation by armed terrorists and to resolve sectarian conflict by
peaceful means, and, although terrorism continues, the level of violence is much
lower than some years ago. The police again have the primary role of maintaining
order; the Army’s task is one of assisting the civil authorities, and the number of
soldiers on service has been considerably reduced. Security policy rests on the
principle of fair and effective enforcement of the law by bringing terrorists to
justice through the courts. They are tried for criminal offences and not for political
beliefs. At the heart of the policy is a determination to develop the effectiveness of
the police to the point where military involvement in the maintenance of law and
order is no longer needed.
When, despite the Northern Ireland Government’s substantial reform
programme, the inter-communal violence continued, the United Kingdom
Government concluded that the best hope of ending terrorism and achieving
political progress would be for the United Kingdom Parliament and Government
to take over the responsibilities for law and order in Northern Ireland. The
Northern Ireland Government felt unable to accept this and resigned, and in 1972 a
period of‘direct rule’ began, with a United Kingdom Cabinet minister responsible
for functions previously exercised by the Northern Ireland Government and for
the Northern Ireland departments (see p 54).
Several major but unsuccessful initiatives towards stable and effective devolved
government supported by both sides of the community have since been made. A
new constitution which devolved powers to an elected legislative assembly and
a ‘power-sharing’ executive representing all sections of the community, en¬
countered Protestant ‘Loyalist’ opposition culminating in a general strike in 1974;
in 1976 an elected constitutional convention failed to agree on a system of
government that would command widespread acceptance; in 1978 a planned
framework for a form of devolution to consolidate common ground among the
political parties was rejected; and in 1980 there was a political conference and
extensive discussions. Following this, however, the Government concluded that
l6 BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
there was insufficient agreement among Northern Ireland political parties to
justify bringing forward proposals for setting up a devolved administration.
Direct rule, extended annually on Parliament’s authority, has therefore
continued. The Government’s aim is to restore peace and stability and to promote
social and economic well-being. It believes that locally elected representatives
should have a greater role in government, and is continuing to explore ways of
making government more responsive to the wishes of the people. The future of
Northern Ireland is a matter for the United Kingdom Government and Parliament
and the people of Northern Ireland, and the principle of self-determination is
enshrined in law. A 1973 ‘border poll’ showed clearly that the majority of people in
Northern Ireland wished to remain part of the United Kingdom. At the same time,
the Government attaches importance to co-operation with the Irish Republic,
particularly in security matters.
Northern Ireland at present returns 12 representatives to the United Kingdom
Parliament (see p 38).
The Economy Northern Ireland’s geographical position on the western edge of Europe, its lack of
many mineral or energy resources (both coal and oil have to be imported, and
there is no access to supplies of natural gas), and the small size of the local market
have all tended to favour the concentration of industry and population on the
eastern seaboard close to trading links with the rest of the United Kingdom. Most
of Northern Ireland’s trade is with, or through, Great Britain. With certain
exceptions, the parts of the region beyond the immediate influence of the
industrialised area around Belfast have stayed mainly rural, with generally small
and often scattered communities relying largely on farming.
Much of the nineteenth and early twentieth century growth of the economy
derived from important linen and shipbuilding industries supported by a large
agricultural sector. Since 1956 major changes have taken place, and the former
dependence on a few traditional industries has given way to a far more diversified
industrial structure—to a considerable extent as a result of policies to encourage
industrial development in order to broaden the region’s economic base. At the
same time there has been a marked growth in the service sector.
Belfast has Britain’s largest shipyard; and other well established industrial
activities include the manufacture of aircraft, textile machinery and a wide range of
engineering products, tobacco and clothing. There has also been extensive
development in vehicle components, oil-well equipment, electronic instruments,
telecommunications equipment, carpets and synthetic rubber.
Agriculture (predominantly livestock and products) is still the single most
important industry, and accounts directly for almost a tenth of total civil
employment, over three times the sector’s proportion in Britain as a whole.
The Government’s economic measures have helped to promote major industrial
development in Northern Ireland despite the effects of terrorism. However, the
world recession has led to rising unemployment as in the rest of the country; the
Northern Ireland unemployment rate is persistently the highest of any of the
standard regions. To meet this special problem successive Governments have
off ered higher incentives than are available in the rest of the country to encourage
new investment both from within Britain and from overseas, and assistance to
mitigate high energy costs. Between 1945 and the end of 1979 more than 300
industrial establishments were set up with government help; together they
employed about half the total manufacturing workforce. Northern Ireland s
productivity and industrial relations records for some years have been better than
those in the country as a whole.
The modern diversification of the economy has helped to stimulate output,
LAND AND PEOPLE
I?
Cultural and
Social Life
productivity and incomes, and has assisted in narrowing the gap between living
standards in Northern Ireland and those in the rest of the United Kingdom. Gross
domestic product per person, which tends to be depressed in Northern Ireland
relative to the country as a whole as a result of higher unemployment, lower
activity rates and larger family sizes, has nonetheless risen from just under two-
thirds of the British average in 1963 to about four-fifths. Average earnings are
more than nine tenths of the national average.
The principle underlying Northern Ireland’s financial relations with the rest of
the country is that it has parity, both of taxation and services, with England,
Scotland and Wales. To maintain social services at the level of those in Great
Britain, to meet the cost of security measures, and to compensate for the natural
disadvantages of geography and lack of resources, the United Kingdom
Government made transfers to Northern Ireland amounting to ^1,091 million in
1980-81.
Despite the civil unrest and economic recession, for thousands of visitors (710,000
in 1980), as well as for local people, Northern Ireland’s landscape and natural
features, its cultural traditions and its festivals continue to offer special attractions.
For many North Americans the land from which their forebears emigrated (some
14 United States presidents are said to have been descended from Northern Ireland
families) has a unique interest. The story of this contribution to American life, the
history of Northern Ireland, and aspects of its culture—from the dialects and
strong literary tradition (poets Louis MacNeice and Seamus Heaney have
international reputations) to the songs and dances and folk art—are recorded in
the Ulster-American Folk Park, the Ulster Museum and the Ulster Folk and
Transport Museum respectively.
With its own Arts Council, Northern Ireland has orchestras, much theatre and
ballet and the recently restored Belfast Grand Opera House. The Queen’s Festival,
one of several annual events, is a major international occasion. The strong arts
tradition has produced such soloists as flautist James Galway and soprano Heather
Harper.
In day-to-day social life Northern Ireland is in many ways similar to the rest of
the United Kingdom. The National Health Service provides both hospital and
practitioner services, and health and personal social services correspond fairly
closely although the administrative framework is different. Education, too, is
much the same, from school to university level (there are two universities, Queen’s
in Belfast and the New University in Coleraine); emphasis on the comprehensive
principle in secondary schools has however been very small. Housing and the
improvement of the urban environment present significant, though not unique,
problems for the authorities, notably in Belfast where a continuing rehabilitation
programme is being carried out, but planning and conservation arrangements are
much like those in the rest of the country.
Distinctive local programmes are broadcast and there is a local press; national
radio and television networks are received, however, and the national press is sold
widely. Sport plays an important role in the community, and many world-class
sportsmen and women have come from Northern Ireland.
Physical Features
Britain constitutes the greater part of the British Isles, a geographical term for a
group of islands lying off the north-west coast of mainland Europe. The largest of
the islands is Great Britain (the mainlands of England, Wales and Scotland). The
next largest comprises Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic. Off the southern
i8
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
coast of England is the Isle of Wight and off the extreme south-west are the Isles of
Scilly; off north Wales is Anglesey. Western Scotland is fringed by small islands
and to the north-east are the Orkneys and Shetlands. All these have administrative
ties with the mainland, but the Isle of Man in the Irish Sea and the Channel Islands
between Great Britain and France are largely self-governing, and are not part of
England, Wales, Scotland or Northern Ireland.
Britain’s area is some 244,100 square km (94,300 square miles), of which nearly
99 per cent is land and the remainder inland water. This is about the same size as the
Federal Republic of Germany, New Zealand or Uganda, and half the size of
France. It is just under 1,000 km (some 600 miles) from the south coast to the
extreme north of Scotland and just under 500 km (some 300 miles) across in the
widest part. There are numerous bays and inlets and no place in Britain is as much
as 120 km (75 miles) from tidal water. The prime meridian ofo° passes through the
old observatory at Greenwich (London).
The seas surrounding the British Isles are shallow—usually less than 90 metres
(50 fathoms or 300 feet)—because the islands lie on the continental shelf. To the
north-west along the edge of the shelf the sea floor plunges abruptly from 180
metres (some 600 feet) to 900 metres (about 3,000 feet). The shallow waters are
important because they provide breeding grounds for fish. The North Atlantic
current, the drift of warm water which reaches the islands from across the Atlantic,
spreads out over the shelf magnifying its ameliorating effect on the air.
Britain has a generally mild and temperate climate. The prevailing winds are
south-westerly and the weather from day to day is mainly influenced by
depressions moving eastwards across the Atlantic. The weather is subject to
frequent changes but to few extremes of temperature. It is rarely above 32°C (90°F)
or below — io°C (i4°F). Near sea level in the west the mean annual temperature
ranges from 8°C (46°F) in the Hebrides to 11 °C (52°F) in the extreme south-west of
England; latitude for latitude it is slightly lower in the east. The mean monthly
temperature in the extreme north, at Berwick (Shetland), ranges from 3°C (37°F)
during the winter (December, January and February) to I2°C (54°F) during the
summer (June, July and August): the corresponding figures for the Isle of Wight,
in the extreme south, are 5°C (4i°F) and i6°C (6i°F). The annual rainfall is about
1,100 millimetres (over 40 inches), the mountainous areas of the west and north
having far more rain than the lowlands of the south and east. Rain is fairly well
distributed throughout the year, but, on average, March to June are the driest
months and October to January the wettest. The distribution of sunshine shows a
general decrease from south to north, a decrease from the coast inland, and a
decrease with altitude. During May, June andjuly (the months of longest daylight)
the mean daily duration of sunshine varies from five hours in northern Scotland to
eight hours in the Isle of Wight; during the months of shortest daylight—
November, December and January—sunshine is at a minimum, with an average of
half an hour a day in some parts of northern Scotland and two hours a day on the
south coast of England.
The Social Framework
The way of life of the people of Britain has been changing rapidly throughout the
twentieth century. As in many other countries underlying causes include two
major wars, a lower birth rate, longer expectation of life, a higher divorce rate,
widening educational opportunities, technical progress, and a better standard of
living.
This section gives information on population in Britain followed by some
points of general interest about household structure and social characteristics as a
LAND AND PEOPLE
19
POPULATION
Birth Rates
Mortality
background to the information given in later chapters. It deals with topics in very
broad and informal terms.
With nearly 56 million people, Britain ranks about fourteenth in the world in
terms of population. The estimated home population in April 1981 was 55,671,000
compared with 38-2 million in 1901, about 6-5 million at the end of the seventeenth
century and some 2 million at the end of the eleventh century. Early figures are
based on contemporary estimates, but from the beginning of the nineteenth
century relatively plentiful and reliable information is available. Most of it comes
from two main sources: the regular flow of statistical information based on
compulsory registration of births, marriages and deaths, and the censuses taken
regularly every ten years since 1801 (because of war there was no census in 1941).
The most recent was in April 1981. In the period 1975-78 for the first years since
records began (other than in war) the population fell slightly, reflecting a
temporary decline in the birth rate. The upward trerld was resumed in 1979.
Projections for the future suggest that population growth will take place at a
much slower rate than was expected a few years ago. Britain’s total population is
expected, on 1979 estimates, to be 56-4 million in 1986, 58-4 million in 2001 and 60
million in 2019.
In 1980 there were 754,000 live births (23 per cent less than in 1966) which
outnumbered deaths (661,000) by 93,000. The birth rate declined from 18-0 live
births per 1,000 people in 1966 to an unprecedentedly low figure of n-8 in 1977,
but has risen subsequently and in 1980 was 13-5. Most of the recent rise represents
an increase in the rate of childbearing, only a small part being attributable to
increasing numbers of women of childbearing age. Nevertheless, as in many other
developed countries, the fertility rate (64 births per 1,000 women of childbearing
age) is low compared with past rates and remains below the level required for the
long-term replacement of the population.
Several factors may have contributed to the relatively low birth rate.
Contraception has become more widespread and effective, making it easier to plan
families, and sterilisation of men and women has also become more common. An
appreciable proportion of pregnancies (nearly 40 per cent of those conceived
outside marriage and about 8 per cent of those conceived within marriage) are
ended by legal abortion.
The postponement of conception within marriage coupled with a trend towards
later marriage has led to an increase, to 25, in the average age at which women have
their first child in marriage. Other features have been lengthening intervals
between births and the current preference for smaller families, especially two-
children families, than in the past, which has led to a significant decline in the
proportion of families with four or more children.
At birth the expectation of life for a man is about 70 years and for a woman 76 years
compared with 49 years for men and 52 years for women in 1901. The improving
health of the population has mainly had the effect of increasing young people’s
chances of reaching the older age groups. Life expectancy in the older age groups
has increased relatively little.
The general death rate has remained about the same for the past 50 years, at
about 12 per 1,000 population, reflecting the gradual ageing of the population since
there has been a considerable decline in mortality at most ages, particularly among
children and young adults. The infant mortality rate (deaths of infants under one
year old per 1,000 live births) was 12-9 in 1979; neonatal mortality (deaths of
20
Marriage and
Divorce
Age and Sex
Structure
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
infants under four weeks old per 1,000 live births) was 8-3 ; and maternal mortality
was o-i per 1,000 live births.
The causes of the decline in mortality include better nutrition, rising standards of
living, the advance of medical science, the growth of medical facilities, improved
health measures, better working conditions, education in personal hygiene, and the
smaller size of the families. Major changes since I951 the causes of death have
included the virtual disappearance of deaths resulting from infectious diseases
(notably tuberculosis) and an increase in the proportion of deaths caused by
circulatory diseases and by cancer.
During the last decade there has been a marked change in the pattern of marriage.
In 1972 there were 480,300 marriages in Britain, but the number declined to
404,000 in 1977, before recovering to 414,000 in 1980. The proportion ot the
population of England and Wales who were or had been married has remained at
around 60 per cent. Of the population aged 16 or over in England and Wales in
1979, 65 per cent were married, 22 per cent single, over 9 per cent widowed and 3
per cent divorced (more than three times the proportion in 1961). The trend of the
1960s towards earlier marriage was reversed at the beginning ot the 1970s, since
when there has been a slow increase in the average age for first marriages, which in
England and Wales is now just over 25 for men and nearly 23 for women.
Remarriages account for about one-third of all marriages in Great Britain,
compared with 20 percent in 1971 and 15 percent in 1961. A related trend has been
a fall in the proportion of church marriages. In England and Wales two-thirds of
marriages in 1966 were solemnised with a religious ceremony, but since 1977 more
than 50 per cent of marriages have been by a civil ceremony in a Register Office.
The divorce rate has been increasing steadily and in 1980 about 12 decrees of
divorce were made absolute for every 1,000 married couples in England and
Wales, compared with 2 in 1961. The rates are much lower in Scotland and
Northern Ireland. In 1980 about 150,000 divorces were granted in Britain; the
proportion granted to wives was about 70 per cent. The average age of people at
the time of divorce in England and Wales has been falling and is now about 38 for
men and 35 for women.
Another feature, common to many other Western European countries, has been
a considerable increase in cohabitation. It was reported in the 1979 General
Household Survey that more than 20 per cent of women in Great Britain marrying
for the first time in the late 1970s had lived with their husbands before marriage
(compared with about 10 per cent in the early 1970s) and about 10 per cent of single
women aged 20 to 29 were cohabiting. Cohabitation occurred more frequently
among couples where one or both were divorced or separated trom their spouse.
There is some evidence of a growing number of stable non-married relationships
and in the proportion of illegitimate births (which now account for about 11 per
cent of live births in Britain compared with 6 per cent in 1961) registered by both
parents.
Although the total population has remained relatively stable in the last decade,
there have been noticeable changes in the age and sex structure, including a decline
in the proportion of young people under 16 and an increase in the proportion of
elderly people, especially those aged 85 and over. The estimated age distribution of
the British population in mid-1980 was roughly as follows: under 16 years, about
23 per cent; 16-64, 62 per cent; and 65 and over, 15 per cent. Some 18 per cent of
the population were over the normal retirement ages (65 for men and 60 for
women), compared with 15 per cent in 1961.
In April 1981 there were 28-6 million females and 27 million males in Britain,
LAND AND PEOPLE
21
Distribution of
Population
representing a ratio of nearly 106 females to every too males. There arc about 6 per
cent more male than female births every year. Because of the higher mortality of
men at all ages, however, there is a turning point, at about 50 years of age, at which
the number of women exceeds the number of men. This imbalance increases with
age so that there is a preponderance of women among the elderly.
The population density is about 229 per square km which is relatively high in
comparison with most other countries. England is the most densely populated
with 354 people per square km (with Greater London having a density of 4,238
people per square km), and Scotland the least densely populated with 65 people per
square km, while Wales and Northern Ireland have 134 and 110 people per square
km respectively.
TABLE 2: Size and Population of Some of the Main Urban Districts, April 1981
Area
square
km
square
miles
Population
Greater London
Birmingham
Glasgow
Leeds
Sheffield
Liverpool
Bradford
Manchester
Edinburgh
Bristol
Belfast
Coventry
Cardiff
1,580
264
198
562
368
113
370
116
261
110
140
97
120
609-7
102-0
76-3
2I7-0
141- 9
436
142- 9
44-9
ioo-6
42-3
54-0
37'3
46-3
(thousands)
6,6960
1,006-9
762-2
705-0
536-8
510-3
457-7
449-2
419-2
388-0
345-8*
3Hi
273-9
<,Mid-i98o estimate
Table 2 gives figures of some of Britain’s largest urban areas. About half the
population lives in a belt across England with south Lancashire and West Yorkshire
at one end, and the London area at the other, having the industrialised Midlands at
its centre. Other areas with large populations are: the central lowlands of Scotland;
north-east England from north of the river Tyne down to the river Tees; south¬
east Wales; the Bristol area; and the English Channel coast from Poole, in Dorset,
eastwards. Less densely populated areas are the eastern fringes of England between
the Wash and the Thames estuary, and the far south-west. The eight major
metropolitan areas which have been denoted as ‘conurbations’ in successive
population censuses accommodate a third of Great Britain’s people while
comprising less than 3 per cent of the total land area. They are: Greater London,
Central Clydeside, Greater Manchester, Merseyside, South Yorkshire, Tyne and
Wear, the West Midlands and West Yorkshire. Most of the mountainous parts,
including much of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland and the central Pennines,
are very sparsely populated.
As in many other developed countries the recent trend (strongly brought out by
22
Migration
Nationality
Immigration
Control
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the 1981 Census) has been a movement of people away from the main
conurbations (particularly their centres) to the surrounding suburbs. This is
reflected in the declining population in Greater London (which was the world’s
third city in terms of population in the mid-1960s but is now eleventh) and in falls
in the proportion of people resident in most of the metropolitan counties. There
has also been a geographical redistribution of the population from Scotland and the
northern regions of England to East Anglia, the South West and the East Midlands.
Another feature has been an increase in the rate of retirement migration, the main
recipient areas (where in some towns the elderly can form over one-third of the
population) being the south coast of England and East Anglia.
Traditionally Britain has had a net outflow of people to the rest of the world, but in
1979 for the first time for many years there was a small net inflow of some 6,000
people.1 However, in 1980 the traditional pattern was restored, with a net outflow
of 55,000 people. Between 1971 and 1980 some 2-25 million people left Britain to
live abroad and nearly 1-9 million came from overseas to live in Britain, so that
net emigration reduced the population by about 350,000. Of the emigrants in
1980, 29 per cent left for Australia, Canada or New Zealand, 15 per cent for other
European Community countries and 12 per cent for the United States. Of the
174,000 immigrants in 1980, 13 per cent came from Australia, Canada or New
Zealand, 28 per cent from other Commonwealth countries and 13 per cent from
other European Community countries. A significant number of those leaving or
entering Britain were returning migrants.
Under the British Nationality Act 1948, people born in the United Kingdom, the
Channel Islands, the Isle of Man, a ship or aircraft registered in the United Kindom,
or a territory which is still a colony, are, with insignificant exceptions, citizens of
the United Kingdom and Colonies by birth. Citizenship may also be acquired: by
descent from a father who is himself a citizen otherwise than by descent and, in
certain specified circumstances, from a father who is a citizen by descent only; by
registration, for citizens of Commonwealth member countries or of the Irish
Republic, for minor children and for women married to citizens of the United
Kingdom and Colonies; in consequence of a United Kingdom adoption order;
and, for aliens, by naturalisation. The requirements for naturalisation include five
years residence in the United Kingdom or. Colony, good character, a sufficient
knowledge of the English language and the intention to live in the United
Kingdom or Colony. The requirements for registration are similar. In 1980 27,500
people acquired citizenship by naturalisation and registration.
New legislation is before Parliament which would replace citizenship of the
United Kingdom and Colonies with three new citizenships: British citizenship,
citizenship of the British Dependent Territories, and British Overseas citizenship.
Almost all citizens of the United Kingdom and Colonies who at present have a
right of abode in Britain would become British citizens. British citizenship would
automatically confer the right of abode on its holders.
Immigration into Britain is controlled by the Immigration Act 1971 and
administered according to rules made under it. The Act confers a right of abode—
and exemption from control on citizens of the United Kingdom and Colonies
who are connected with Britain by birth, adoption, naturalisation or registration
or are children or grandchildren of such persons, on citizens of the United
‘International migration statistics exclude movements to and from the Irish Republic.
LAND AND PEOPLE
23
THE
ECONOMIC
AND SOCIAL
PATTERN
Housing and
the
Environment
Kingdom and Colonies from overseas who have been resident in Britain for a
continuous period of five years, and on Commonwealth citizens with a parent
born in the United Kingdom. Those having this right of abode are known as
‘patrials’. In general, others wishing to enter Britain for employment must hold
work permits. Exceptions include Commonwealth citizens with a grandparent
born in Britain, certain permit-free categories, and nationals of European
Community countries. The dependants of work permit holders and of those who
may enter without work permits may also be admitted, as may the wives and
children of men already settled in Britain and certain other categories.
The majority of people (some 97 per cent) live in private households (in families or
on their own). The remainder include residents in hotels, and people in the armed
services and in educational or other institutions. In 1979 eight out of ten people
lived in a family unit headed by a married couple. Of these nearly half contained
one or two dependent children and a fifth had no children. Only 2 per cent of
people lived in households containing more than one family, a proportion which
has been falling as fewer young married couples live with their parents.
Among many changes in household and family structure during the 1970s is the
greater proportion of people living on their own (9 per cent) or in one-parent
families (8 per cent). There has been a continuing fall in the average size of
households in Great Britain, from over 4 persons in 1911 to 31 in 1961 and 2 67 in
1979 (see diagram p 24). The fall reflects both the increasing number of elderly
people (more of whom are living alone) and the preferences of parents for smaller
families. The trend towards smaller households is expected to continue and the
number of one-person households is forecast to increase from 4 million to 6 million
by 1991.
Three British households out of four live in houses rather than flats and over half
of all households own or are buying their own homes. Terraced housing, most
of it built in the early years of the present century, still provides accommodation
for over a quarter of all households. In inner urban areas slum clearance and
redevelopment have been major features of post-1945 public housing pro¬
grammes, but the modernisation and conversion of sub-standard housing have
increasingly been encouraged as alternatives to clearing and rebuilding. Emphasis
in new building is on low-rise, high density designs, often incorporating gardens
or patios. Nearly half of Britain’s housing stock has been built since 1945.
The main housing development of the past 50 to 60 years, however, has been
suburban. Many families now live in houses grouped in small terraces, or semi¬
detached or detached, usually of two storeys with gardens, and providing two
main ground-floor living rooms, a kitchen, from two to four bedrooms, a
bathroom, and one or two lavatories. Originally many houses were located in
‘ribbon development’ along main roads, but in recent years housing estates have
nearly always been sited away from main roads.
Housing standards are continually improving; some 95 per cent of households
in Great Britain have exclusive use of a bath or shower, and 93 per cent sole use of
an inside lavatory—high percentages by international standards.
An important influence on the planning of housing and services has been the
growth of car ownership. Greater access to motorised transport and the
construction of a network of modern trunk roads and motorways have resulted in
a considerable increase in personal mobility and changed leisure patterns, as well as
changes in the design of housing and shopping areas. Most detached or semi¬
detached houses in new suburban estates have garages, and out-of-town shopping
centres, usually including large supermarkets, are often specially planned for the
24
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Households by Size in Great Britain 1961 and 1979
motorist and offer an alternative to shopping in the centres of older towns.
The growth in car ownership has brought very great benefits but also a number
of problems, notably, in many towns and cities, increased congestion, noise and air
pollution. Public transport, too, has been affected, and many services have been
reduced or eliminated, especially in rural areas. The people without access to a car
include those among the poorer sections of the community, or the elderly or
infirm; mobility allowances help the disabled. Restrictions on bus licensing have
been relaxed in order to make it easier for new services to develop, and car-sharing
is being encouraged for journeys such as those to work.
There has been a steady reduction of the main atmospheric and fresh water
pollutants that have been of concern in the past, producing dramatic improve¬
ments in, for example, the quality of the air in cities and the condition of major
rivers, including the Thames, although various forms of pollution remain a
problem in some areas. There is a high degree of concern for the natural environ¬
ment, as shown by the enormous growth in the past few decades in the number of
organisations (especially voluntary societies) concerned with conservation.
LAND AND PEOPLE
25
Living
Standards
Marked improvements in the standard of living have taken place during the
twentieth century, but generally at a slower rate than in some other major
industrialised countries. Real personal disposable income in 1980 amounted to
^84,554 million at 1975 prices, 15 per cent higher than in 1975.
The volume of consumer spending, after allowing for inflation, increased
substantially in 1979 (by 4-7 per cent) and continued to rise in 1980, although at a
much lower rate (0-7 per cent), reflecting the current economic recession. Long¬
term trends in the pattern of expenditure show a substantial rise in expenditure on
housing, alcohol, motor vehicles, televisions, telephones, electrical and some other
durable goods, and entertainment, and in expenditure overseas. As real incomes
have risen, the share of expenditure on food has fallen. The share devoted to
tobacco has also declined; an increasing number of people have stopped smoking
for health reasons.
The general level of nutrition remains high. Over the last 20 years there have
been substantial rises in the consumption of poultry, instant coffee, pork and
processed (including frozen) vegetables, while home consumption per person of
mutton and lamb, beef and veal, bread, potatoes, eggs, milk, butter, sugar, tea and
some other foods has fallen. However, another feature has been an increase in the
number of meals eaten away from home, cither at work or in restaurants, and a
growth in the consumption of food from ‘take-away’ and ‘fast food’ shops. In
addition, in the 1960s and 1970s the amount of convenience foods eaten grew as
women increasingly went out to work (see p 26) and had less time to prepare meals
and as the variety of prepared foods rose in line with the growth in ownership of
refrigerators and freezers. Other features have included the continuing popularity
of health foods and slimming products.
Alcohol consumption has risen substantially since the 1950s, although the level is
well below that of some other European Community countries, and alcohol abuse
has become a growing problem. Beer remains much the most popular alcoholic
drink, but consumption of wines and spirits has been growing. A high proportion
of beer is drunk in public houses (‘pubs’), which are a traditional social centre for
many people, but recent features have been for more beer to be drunk at home and
in clubs; beer consumption has recently been falling. A notable development has
been the large increase in consumption of lager, now estimated to account for
about 30 per cent of the beer consumed.
Ownership of many durable goods has been increasing and some goods, such as
televisions, vacuum cleaners and refrigerators, are available in more than 90 per
cent of households. Of durable goods shown in the diagram on p 26, ownership of
telephones and central heating systems is growing most rapidly, while other
durable goods not listed but which are growing in popularity include freezers
(available in some 44 per cent of households), music centres and other audio
equipment, and video recorders.
Alterations in the pattern of income distribution have included a fall in the share
of the top 10 per cent from 33-2 per cent of total pre-tax income in 1949 to 26-1 per
cent in 1978—79, although successive falls have been mainly retained in the top half
of the distribution. Income before tax of the self-employed is more unevenly
distributed than total income, largely because of the very large incomes of a small
number of people, mainly professionals such as lawyers, accountants and doctors.
The combined effect of the tax system and the receipt of transfer payments and
direct and indirect benefits in kind is to redistribute incomes on a more equal basis.
Wealth is much more unevenly distributed, with the top 1 per cent owning
about 23 per cent of marketable wealth, the top 10 per cent having 58 per cent and
the top 50 per cent having 95 per cent. The inclusion of non-markctable rights in
occupational and state pension schemes (which represent an increasingly important
26
Women
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Availability of Certain Durable Goods
Per cent of households with goods
component of personal wealth) reduce these shares substantially to around 13, 36
and 80 per cent respectively. In the first half of the 1970s there were substantial falls
in the shares of wealth held by the richest groups, but subsequently there has been
little change in the distribution of wealth.
Probably the greatest changes in society have occurred in the economic and
domestic lives of women, due, in part, to the removal of almost all theoretical sex
discrimination in political and legal rights. At the heart of women’s changed role
has been the rise in the number of women, particularly married women, at work.
With the availability of highly effective and generally acceptable methods of
family planning there has been a decline in family size. Women as a result are
involved in child-bearing for a much shorter time and this, together with a variety
of other factors which have made housework less burdensome, has made it possible
for women with even young children to return to work.
Since 1951 the proportion of married women who work has grown to more
than half of those under 45 and three-fifths of those between 45 and 60. The
proportion of the total workforce accounted for by married women increased
from 4 per cent in 1921 to an estimated 26 per cent in 1980. Compared with their
counterparts elsewhere in the European Community, British women comprise a
relatively high proportion of the workforce, about two-fifths (only Denmark has a
comparable percentage). There is still a significant difference between women’s
average earnings and men’s, but the equal pay legislation which came into force at
the end of 1975 appears to have helped to narrow the gap between women’s and
men’s basic rates. During the 1970s women’s wages rose proportionately more
than men’s but remain relatively low because women tend to work in lowly paid
sectors of the economy, and they work less overtime than men.
LAND AND PEOPLE
27
Equal
Opportunities
Ethnic and
National
Minorities
Women’s average hourly earnings, exclusive of overtime (for full-time
employees), increased from just under two-thirds of those of men in 1970, to about
three-quarters in 1980. Families have come to rely on married women’s earnings as
an essential part of their income.
The changes have been significant but, because tradition and prejudice can still
handicap women in their careers and personal lives, major legislation to help to
promote equality was passed in the 1970s.
Under the Equal Pay Act 1970 (and corresponding legislation in Northern
Ireland), women in Great Britain are entitled to equal pay with men when doing
work that is the same or broadly similar, or work which has been given an equal
value under a job evaluation scheme. The Sex Discrimination Act 1975 makes
unlawful discrimination between men and women in employment, education,
training and the provision of housing, goods, facilities and services. Discriminatory
advertisements which breach the Act are also unlawful. (Northern Ireland has
similar legislation.) In most cases complaints of discrimination may be taken before
the county courts in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, or the sherifF courts in
Scotland; complaints concerning employment are dealt with by industrial
tribunals. The Equal Opportunities Commission was set up in 1975 (1976 in
Northern Ireland under separate legislation) to enforce the Sex Discrimination Act
and the Equal Pay Act. Its aims are to eliminate sex discrimination and promote
equal opportunities. The Commission advises people of their rights under both
Acts and may give financial or other assistance to help individuals to conduct a case
before a court or tribunal. It also has power to conduct investigations and to issue
notices requiring discriminatory practices to stop. In addition, it keeps legislation
under review and may submit proposals for amending it to the ministers
concerned.
Britain has a long history of accommodating minority groups and in the last
hundred years or so a variety of people have settled in the country, some to avoid
political or religious persecution, others seeking a better way of life or an escape
from poverty.
The Irish have long made homes in Britain, and comprise the largest single
minority group. Many Jewish refugees started a new life in the country towards
the end of the nineteenth century and in the 1930s, and after 1945 large numbers of
other European refugees settled in Britain. The large communities from the West
Indies and the Indian sub-continent date from the 1950s and early 1960s. There are
also sizeable groups of Americans, Australians, Chinese and various European
communities such as Greek and Turkish Cypriots, Italians and Spaniards. Most
recently, refugees from Indo-China have found new homes in Britain.
In 1979 the population of New Commonwealth1 and Pakistani ethnic origin
was estimated at just over 2 million (about 3 7 per cent of the total population of
Great Britain) of whom over 40 per cent were born in Britain. Most of them share
aspirations that are broadly similar to those of the British community as a whole
and, as Commonwealth citizens, have full political and civic rights. They make an
important contribution to the economic and cultural life of the country and many
individuals have achieved distinction in their careers and in public life.
As relative newcomers these groups experience particular difficulties of an
economic and social nature. For example, they suffer disproportionately from
limited employment opportunities and often live in poor housing in the older
urban areas. These difficulties are being alleviated by continuous social
‘All Commonwealth countries except Canada, Australia and New Zealand.
Race Relations
Act
Commission for
Racial Equality
Leisure Trends
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
programmes, some of which benefit the whole community, while others are
directed towards meeting the minorities’ special needs. Although fewer children
than formerly go to school with no knowledge of English, there are still many who
have an insufficient grasp of the language. Language teaching is recognised to be of
prime importance in schools and additional teachers have been appointed to
schools with ethnic minorities. For adults, classes at or outside their place of work
are run by local authorities and voluntary organisations. Government grants are
available to authorities with substantial ethnic minority groups towards the salaries
of extra staff such as teachers, health visitors and interpreters.
The welfare of ethnic minorities and good relations between minorities and the
local community are promoted by community relations councils and other
voluntary bodies. In recognition of the special problems and tensions that can arise
between the police and ethnic minorities, police community liaison work is seen as
having particular importance. Policies for promoting equality of opportunity
among ethnic minorities are pursued against a background of legislation designed
to protect them from discrimination.
The Race Relations Act 1976 makes discrimination unlawful on grounds of
colour, race or ethnic or national origin in the provision of goods, facilities and
services, in employment, training and related matters, in education, in housing and
in advertising. It strengthened legislation passed in 1968 which, in turn, widened
the scope of the first race relations legislation enacted in 1965 ; it also strengthened
the criminal law on incitement to racial hatred.
The 1976 Act brought the law against racial discrimination into line with that
against sex discrimination (see above), and gave complainants direct access to civil
courts and, in the case of employment complaints, to industrial tribunals.
The Commission for Racial Equality works towards the elimination of
discrimination and to promote equality of opportunity and good relations
between different racial groups. It has power to investigate unlawful
discriminatory practices and to issue non-discrimination notices, enforceable in the
courts, requiring that such practices should cease. It has an important educational
role and has power to issue codes of practice in employment. It is also the principal
source of advice for the general public about the Race Relations Act and has
discretion to assist individuals with their complaints.
The Commission supports the work of the 100 or so community relations
councils, which are independent, voluntary bodies set up in most areas with a
significant ethnic minority population to promote harmonious community
relations at the local level. It makes grants towards the salaries of the community
relations officers employed by the councils, most of whom also receive funds from
their local authorities, and gives grants to ethnic minority self-help groups and to
other projects run by or for the benefit of the minority communities.
Most people have considerably more free time, more ways in which to spend it and
higher real incomes than had previous generations. Agreed hours of full-time
work are usually from 35 to 40 hours a week, although many people actually work
somewhat longer because of voluntary overtime. A large majority of employees
work a five-day week.
The most common leisure activities are home based, or social, with visiting or
entertaining relatives or friends and television watching among the most popular.
Nearly all households have a television set and in winter the population aged five
and over spend on average 20 hours a week watching programmes. Growing
numbers are using video recorders to provide television viewing suited to their
LAND AND PEOPLE
29
individual taste. Renting of televisions and related equipment is much more
widespread than in many other countries, enabling people to benefit continually
from developments in technology at less cost than would be involved in buying
new equipment. Other popular pursuits include: listening to the radio, records or
cassettes; reading; do-it-yourself home improvements such as house painting and
decorating; going out for a meal or for a drink or to the cinema or to watch a
sporting event; gardening; open-air outings (such as visits to the countryside,
seaside or to museums); going to social clubs and leisure centres; and social and
voluntary work.
Sports and other pastimes have grown in popularity, reflected by increasing
membership of the main organisations concerned with outdoor activities,
although for some sports, such as football, attendances have been declining. About
half the households in Britain have a pet, the most common being dogs (of which
there are more than 5 million in Britain) and cats (nearly 5 million).
Almost all full-time employees are entitled to a paid holiday each year in
addition to public holidays and in practically every case the minimum period is
three weeks.
The number of holidays (of four or more nights) taken in Great Britain by
British residents was 36-5 million in 1980 compared with 34 million in 1971.
Holidays abroad in 1980 numbered 11-8 million, compared with 7 million in 1971,
and well over half involved ‘package’ arrangements. More than four-fifths of
overseas holidays are taken in other European countries, with Spain being the most
popular destination; it receives over a quarter of all British holiday-makers abroad.
The next most popular destinations are France, Italy and Greece, while the advent
of cheaper transatlantic flights has resulted in a big increase in holidays taken in the
United States. A third of the population each year, however, takes no holiday
away from home.
2 Government
The United Kingdom constitution, unlike that of most other countries, is not
contained in any single document. Formed partly by statute, partly by common
law and partly by conventions, it can be altered by Act of Parliament, or by general
agreement to create, vary or abolish a convention. The constitution thus adapts
readily to changing political conditions and ideas.
The organs of government are clearly distinguishable although their functions
often intermingle and overlap. The legislature. Parliament, is the supreme
authority. The executive consists of: (a) the Government—Cabinet and other
ministers who are responsible for initiating and directing national policy (b)
government departments, which are responsible for national administration (c)
local authorities, which administer and manage many local services and (d) public
corporations responsible for the operation of particular nationalised industries or,
for example, of a social or cultural service, subject to ministerial control in varying
degrees. The judiciary determines common law and interprets statutes, and is
independent of both the legislature and the executive.
The Monarchy
The British people look to the Queen not only as their head of State, but also as the
symbol of their nation’s unity. The monarchy is the most ancient secular
institution in the United Kingdom. During the last thousand years its continuity
has only once been broken (by the establishment of a republic which lasted from
1649 to 1660) and, despite interruptions in the direct line of succession, the
hereditary principle upon which it was founded has always been preserved. The
royal title in the United Kingdom is: ‘Elizabeth the Second, by the Grace of God of
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and of Her other
Realms and Territories Queen, Head of the Commonwealth, Defender of the
Faith’. The form of the royal title is varied for those other member States of the
Commonwealth of which the Queen is head of State,1 to suit the particular
circumstances of each. (For a full list of members of the Commonwealth see p 73.)
The seat of the monarchy is in the United Kingdom. In the Channel Islands and
the Isle of Man the Queen is represented by a Lieutenant-Governor. In the other
member nations of the Commonwealth of which the Queen is head of State, her
representative is the Governor-General appointed by her on the advice of the
ministers of the country concerned and completely independent of the United
Kingdom Government.
In the United Kingdom dependencies the Queen is usually represented by
governors, who are responsible to the British Government for the good
government of the countries concerned.
^he other Commonwealth countries of which the Queen is head of State are: Australia, The Bahamas,
Barbados, Belize, Canada, Fiji, Grenada, Jamaica, Mauritius, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Solomor Islands and Tuvalu.
GOVERNMENT
31
Succession,
Accession and
Coronation
Acts of
Government
The title to the Crown derives partly from statute and partly from common law
rules of descent. Lineal Protestant descendants of Princess Sophia (the Electress of
Hanover, grand-daughter of James I of England and VI of Scotland) are alone
eligible to succeed, and although succession is not bound to continue in its present
line, it can be altered only by common consent of the member nations of the
Commonwealth of which the Queen is Sovereign.
The sons of the Sovereign have precedence over the daughters in succeeding to
the throne. When a daughter succeeds, she becomes Queen-Regnant, and the
powers of the Crown are vested in her as though she were a king. While the
consort of a king takes her husband’s rank and style, the constitution has never
given any special rank or privileges to the husband of a Queen-Regnant although
in practice he fills an important role in the life of the nation, as does the Duke of
Edinburgh.
The Sovereign succeeds to the throne as soon as his or her predecessor dies and
there is no interregnum. He or she is at once proclaimed at an Accession Council to
which all members of the Privy Council are summoned. The Lords Spiritual and
Temporal (see p 35), the Lord Mayor and Aldermen and other leading citizens of
the City of London are also invited to attend.
The Sovereign’s coronation follows the accession after a convenient interval. It
is a ceremony which has remained essentially the same for over a thousand years,
even if details have often been modified to conform to the customs of the time. It
takes place at Westminster Abbey in London in the presence of representatives of
the Houses of Parliament and of all the great public interests of the United
Kingdom, of the Prime Ministers and leading members of the other
Commonwealth nations, and of representatives of other countries.
The Queen personifies the State. In law, she is head of the executive, an integral
part of the legislature, head of the judiciary, the commander-in-chief of all armed
forces of the Crown and the ‘supreme governor’ of the established Church of
England. As a result of a long process of evolution, during which the monarchy’s
absolute power has been progressively reduced, the Queen acts on the advice of her
ministers, which she cannot ignore. The United Kingdom is governed by Her
Majesty’s Government in the name of the Queen.
Within this framework, and in spite of a trend during the past hundred years
towards assigning powers directly to ministers, there are still important acts of
government which require the participation of the Queen. These include
summoning, proroguing (discontinuing until the next session without dissolution)
and dissolving Parliament; giving royal assent to Bills passed by both Houses of
Parliament; appointing every important office holder, including government
ministers, judges, officers in the armed forces, governors, diplomats and bishops
and some other senior clergy of the Church of England; conferring peerages,
knighthoods and other honours;1 and remitting all or part of the penalty imposed
on a person convicted of a crime. An important function is appointing the Prime
Minister and by convention the Queen invites the leader of the political party
which commands a majority in the House of Commons to form a government. In
international affairs, the Queen as head of State has the power to declare war and
make peace, to recognise foreign States and governments, to conclude treaties and
to annexe or cede territory.
With rare exceptions (as when appointing the Prime Minister), acts involving
1 Although most honours are conferred by the Queen on the advice of the Prime Minister, a few are
conferred on her personal selection—the Order of the Garter, the Order of the Thistle, the Order of
Merit and the Royal Victorian Order.
The Royal Family
From the reign of Queen Victoria up to September 1981
QUEEN VICTORIA, 1819-1901,
1. Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha (Prince Consort)
(UD<D&<&< $3m0-g —
ooO!h_
G C fi « 2 G G'O'S’C’O
•CCS « « •c.2 « 5 « «
a,a,(i,Q-N o->JQ w J
.S ^ 05 L> 0»—5 5
^ S< O G ^
pi <g
>. 2 °-o >>-2 >> a
*-»T3 tT3 5
JQW JJJiJ a,
«Q”.
” o<
a
>-gQ
l—Q «5
Sis
Q S<
W«Z
O'sS
Z^W
2e^
\o><
S!«
I
“Z
>w
Wnr
og'
00
<u
Wh
1^
Is
g'G o\’S 2
J ° « M g -
Q E
£ >.
U'O
S 1 3 ^
." 2 8
Jsg E G<%
iU^
Wo2'"3
*72 On ”7^ O
fa y >> V 175 ^
^•So ,Uw 2
< n 05 ^ ,
>> G x
•O-" o,
-'
UjG
. B t~
>>•- r-
Hi
bDS(
«_X1
<! a
W
<2 EK
Wj 2
^ -1
a Em „
O * r* O J C
w s
^-s z~
a
H-s-
W S
n-S
O iJ-,.2
w0*
Sh
a
§
^ .Q^a
c S' E
»I@3|
i-Sr
q Z'-' E
S
“ & r-.
>h C ^
ai-§“
g S ^ 21
«< o M
5! . G-T3
— < g C/3 <U "
05 ^
2 o o o
« m—. >
^ O'tJGl
tc -0
a ^
H °
N SlW 3
l32'&s
w^|S
Z 0-
W G
W E
a
a
fa 1 ■'t
A Mjno
. C/3 fl 2s
>>2 .
'V 2x>
« 2
JE
^ c
3 »-J NO
■ > G M
a g M
Q§^
Tj VO
W S'
•a o
gvo
e „.sl
<d23
-ss^-
.S’0
s
CL,
. ^ ON
CL, ^
IS ^
■ !T ^
CL, m
—H V
- S'SS'JW
y 6 B
#H W
'S
■S5
t3 ^ g
3N3.G
C a>-~,
's’S t
co ^ t
•? G
-« O 5j
2
C c!-G
•2 c a
S~a s
^ <3
Nj 2
s ^ ?
co^S!
r- rs v
rf »Z5 U~i U, C
On ON On D. 3
« 
J3 c “ S
♦3 O 01 G N ^
—
« O'0 N
N N
w
£ ill
^ -2 55 c ’O ^
q|8§II
S<omO
GOVERNMENT
33
Ceremonial and
Royal Visits
Royal Income
and
Expenditure
the use of ‘royal prerogative’ powers are nowadays performed by government
ministers who are responsible to Parliament and can be questioned about a
particular policy. It is not necessary to have Parliament’s authority to exercise these
powers, although Parliament has the power to restrict or abolish a prerogative
right.
Ministerial responsibility in no way detracts from the importance of the Queen’s
role in the smooth working of government. She holds meetings of the Privy
Council, gives audiences to her ministers and other officials at home and overseas,
receives accounts of Cabinet decisions, reads dispatches and signs innumerable
State papers; she must be informed and consulted on every aspect of national life;
and she must show complete impartiality.
Such is the significance attached to these royal functions that provision has been
made for a regent to be appointed to perform them should the Queen be totally
incapacitated. The regent would be the Queen’s eldest son, the Prince of Wales,
then those in succession to the throne who are of age. In the event of the Queen’s
partial incapacity or absence abroad, there is provision for appointing Counsellors
of State (the Duke of Edinburgh, the four adult persons next in line of succession,
and the Queen Mother) to whom the Queen may delegate certain royal functions.
However, Counsellors of State may not, for instance, dissolve Parliament (except
on the Queen’s express instructions), or create peers.
Ceremonial has always been associated with British kings and queens, and, in spite
of the change in the outlook of both the Sovereign and the people, many
traditional customs and ceremonies are retained. Royal marriages and royal
funerals are marked by public ceremony, and the Sovereign’s birthday is officially
celebrated early in June by Trooping the Colour on Horse Guards Parade. State
banquets take place when a foreign monarch or head of State visits Britain;
investitures are held at Buckingham Palace to bestow honours; and royal
processions add significance to such occasions as a State opening of Parliament,
when the Queen drives from Buckingham Palace to Westminster. Each year the
Queen and other members of the royal family visit many parts of the United
Kingdom. Their presence at scientific, artistic, industrial and charitable events of
national importance encourages nationwide interest and publicity. The Queen
pays state visits to foreign governments, accompanied by the Duke of Edinburgh.
She also undertakes lengthy tours in the other countries of the Commonwealth.
Other members of the royal family pay official visits overseas, occasionally
representing the Queen, and often in connection with an organisation or a cause
with which they are associated.
More than three-quarters of all expenditure arising from the royal family’s official
duties is met by public departments. This includes the costs of the royal yacht, the
Queen’s Flight, travel by train and the upkeep of the royal palaces. Apart from this
the Queen’s public expenditure on staff and expenses incurred in carrying out
official duties as head of State is financed from the Civil List, approved by
Parliament.. Her private expenditure as Sovereign is met from the Privy Purse,
which is supplied mainly from the revenues of the Duchy of Lancaster;1 and her
personal expenditure as a private individual from her own personal resources.
There are annual allowances approved by Parliament to other members of the
royal family, though not to the Prince of Wales, who as Duke of Cornwall is
1 The Duchy of Lancaster is an inheritance which, since 1399, has always been enjoyed by the reigning
Sovereign; it is kept quite apart from his or her other possessions and is separately administered by the
Chancellor of the Duchy.
34
The Functions
of Parliament
The Meeting of
Parliament
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
entitled to the net revenue of the estate of the Duchy of Cornwall (he has
voluntarily surrendered a proportion of the revenue to the nation). The Queen
pays into the Exchequer a sum equivalent to that provided by Parliament in respect
of certain members of the royal family.
Parliament
Parliament is the supreme legislative authority. Its three elements, the Queen, the
House of Lords and the elected House of Commons, are outwardly separate, are
constituted on different principles, and meet together only on occasions of
symbolic significance such as the State opening of Parliament when the Commons
are summoned by the Queen to the House of Lords. As a law-making body,
however, Parliament as a rule needs the concurrence of all its parts.
Parliament can legislate for the United Kingdom as a whole, for any of the
constituent parts of the country separately, or for any combination of them. It can
also legislate for the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man, which are Crown
dependencies and not part of the United Kingdom, having subordinate legislatures
which make laws on island affairs.1
Free from any legal restraints imposed by a written constitution, Parliament is
able to legislate as it pleases: generally to make, unmake, or alter any law; to
legalise past illegalities and make void and punishable what was lawful when done
and thus reverse the decisions of the ordinary courts; and to destroy established
conventions or turn a convention into binding law. It can prolong its own life
beyond the normal period without consulting the electorate.
In practice, however, Parliament does not assert its supremacy in this way. Its
members bear in mind the common law and have tended to act in accordance with
precedent and tradition. The validity of an Act of Parliament which has been duly
passed, promulgated and published cannot be disputed in the law courts, but no
Parliament would be likely to pass an Act which it knew would receive no public
support. The system of party government helps to ensure that Parliament legislates
with its responsibility to the electorate in mind.
As a member of the European Community, the United Kingdom recognises the
various types of Community legislation, and sends 81 elected members to the
European Parliament (see p 70).
The main functions of Parliament are (1) to pass laws (2) to provide, by voting
taxation, the means of carrying on the work of government and (3) to scrutinise
government policy and administration, particularly proposals for expenditure. In
discharging these functions Parliament helps to bring the relevant facts and issues
before the electorate. By custom, Parliament is also consulted before the
ratification of all important international treaties and agreements, the making of
treaties being, in theory at least, a royal prerogative exercised on the advice of the
Government and not subject to parliamentary approval.
A Parliament has a maximum duration of five years, but is often dissolved and a
general election held before the end of this term. The maximum life has been
prolonged by legislation in such rare circumstances as the two world wars.
Dissolution and writs for a general election are ordered by the Queen on the advice
of the Prime Minister.
1 The legislatures of the Channel Islands (the States of Jersey and the States of Guernsey) and the Isle of
Man (the Tynwald Court) consist of the Queen, the Privy Council and the local assemblies. It is the
duty of the Home Secretary, as the member of the Privy Council primarily concerned with island
affairs, to scrutinise each legislative measure before it is submitted to the Queen in Council.
GOVERNMENT
35
The House of
Lords
The life of a Parliament is divided into sessions. Each usually lasts for one year—
beginning and ending most often in October or November and interspersed with
‘adjournments’ at night, at weekends, at Christmas, Easter and the late (English)
Spring Bank Holiday and during a long summer recess starting in latejuly or early
August. The average number of‘sitting’ days in a session is about 175 in the House
of Commons and about 140 in the House of Lords. At the start of each session the
Queen’s speech to Parliament outlines the Government’s broad policies and
proposed legislative programme. Each session is terminated by prorogation.
Parliament then ‘stands prorogued’ until the new session opens (on rare occasions
Parliament has been dissolved without prorogation). A short speech is made on
behalf of the Queen summarising Parliament’s work during the past session. An
adjournment does not affect uncompleted business, but prorogation terminates
nearly all parliamentary business, so that all public Bills not completed lapse, and
must be reintroduced in the next session unless they are to be abandoned.
The House of Lords consists of the Lords Spiritual and the Lords Temporal. The
Lords Spiritual are the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, the Bishops of
London, Durham and Winchester, and the 21 senior diocesan bishops of the
Church of England. The Lords Temporal consist of (1) all hereditary peers and
peeresses of England, Scotland, Great Britain and the United Kingdom who have
not disclaimed their peerages (2) all life peers and peeresses and (3) those Lords of
Appeal (‘law lords’) created life peers to assist the House in its judicial duties.
Hereditary peerages carry a right to sit in the House (subject to certain
disqualifications), provided the holder is 21 years of age or over, but anyone
succeeding to a peerage may, within 12 months of succession, disclaim that peerage
for his or her lifetime. Disclaimants lose their right to sit in the House but gain the
right to vote at parliamentary elections and to offer themselves for election to the
House of Commons.
Temporal peerages, both hereditary and life, are conferred on the advice of the
Prime Minister (although no hereditary peerage has been conferred since 1965).
They are usually granted either in recognition of service in politics or other walks
of life or because the Government of the day wishes to have the recipient in the
House of Lords. The House also provides a place in Parliament for men and
women whose advice is useful to the State, but who do not wish to be involved in
party politics.
At the beginning of 1981 there were 1,168 members of the House of Lords,
including the two archbishops and 24 bishops. In order of precedence the Lords
Temporal consisted of three Peers of the Blood Royal, 25 Dukes, 29 Marquesses,
157 Earls and Countesses, 105 Viscounts and 823 Barons and Baronesses, of whom
316 were life peers. There were some 120 Irish peers, but these are not members of
the House of Lords unless they hold an English, Scottish or United Kingdom
peerage as well; the latter numbered 48 and are included in the figures given above.
Not all peers with a right to sit in the House of Lords attend the sittings. Those
who do not wish to attend apply for leave of absence for the duration of a
Parliament.
Peers who frequently attend the House (the average daily attendance is about
290) include elder statesmen and others who have spent their lives in public service.
Lords receive no salary for their parliamentary work, but can recover expenses
incurred in attending the House and certain travelling expenses.
The House is presided over by the Lord Chancellor, who takes his place on the
woolsack as ex officio Speaker of the House. In his absence his place may be taken by
a deputy speaker, a deputy chairman or, if neither is present, by a speaker chosen by
the Lords present. The first of the deputy speakers is the Lord Chairman of
36
The House of
Commons
Parliamentary
Electoral
System
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Committees, who is appointed at the beginning of each session and takes the chair
in all committees, unless the House decides otherwise. The Lord Chairman and the
Principal Deputy Chairman of Committees are salaried officers of the House.
The permanent officers include the Clerk of the Parliaments who is responsible
for the records of proceedings including judgments and for the promulgation of
Acts of Parliament; the other Clerks at the Table who, with the Clerk of the
Parliaments and the other officers and officials of the House, are collectively
known as the Parliament Office; the Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod, who is
also Serjeant at Arms in attendance upon the Lord Chancellor and is responsible for
security and for accommodation and services in the House of Lords’ part of the
Palace of Westminster; and the Yeoman Usher who is Deputy Serjeant at Arms
and assists Black Rod in his duties.
The House of Commons is a representative assembly elected by universal adult
suffrage and consists of men and women (members of Parliament, ‘MPs’) from all
sections of the community. There are 635 seats in the House of Commons (516 for
England, 36 for Wales, 71 for Scotland, and 12 for Northern Ireland1).
General elections are held after a Parliament has been dissolved and a new one
summoned by the Queen. When an MP dies or resigns2 or is given a peerage, a by-
election takes place. Members are paid an annual salary of XI3»95° ar>d an
allowance for secretarial and research expenses. They also have a number of other
allowances, including travel allowances, a supplement for London members and,
for provincial members, subsistence allowances. (For ministers’ salaries, see p 46.)
The chief officer of the House of Commons is the Speaker, elected by MPs to
preside over the House. Other officers are the Chairman of Ways and Means, and
two deputy chairmen who act as Deputy Speakers, elected by the House on the
nomination of the Government. They, like the Speaker, neither speak nor vote
other than in their official capacity. The House is administered by a Commission
chaired by the Speaker.
Permanent officers (who are not MPs) include the Clerk of the House of
Commons, who is the principal adviser to the Speaker of the House on its
privileges and procedures; his department has responsibilities relating to the
conduct of the business of the House and its many committees. The Clerk is also
accounting officer for the House. The Serjeant at Arms, who waits upon the
Speaker, carries out certain orders of the House, is the official housekeeper of the
Commons part of the building, and is responsible for its security.
For electoral purposes the United Kingdom is divided into constituencies, each of
which returns one member to the House of Commons. To ensure equitable
representation, four permanent Boundary Commissions for England, Wales,
Scotland and Northern Ireland make periodic reviews of constituencies and
recommend any redistribution of seats that may seem necessary in the light of
population movements or for some other reason.
Elections are by secret ballot. British subjects (including Commonwealth
citizens) and citizens of the Irish Republic can vote provided they are aged 18 or
over, resident in the United Kingdom, registered in the annual register of electors
for the constituency and not subject to any disqualification. People not entitled to
vote include members of the House of Lords, sentenced prisoners and people
1 The number of Northern Ireland seats is to be increased from 12 to 17.
2 An MP who wishes to resign from the House can do so only by using the technical device of applying
for an office under the Crown (Bailiff of the Chiltern Hundreds or Steward of the Manor of
Northstead), ancient offices which disqualify the holder from membership of the House but which
carry no salary and have no responsibilities.
GOVERNMENT
37
The Party
System
convicted within the previous five years of corrupt or illegal election practices.
Service voters (members of the armed forces and their spouses, Crown servants
and staff of the British Council employed overseas, together with their wives and
husbands if accompanying them) may be registered for an address in a constituency
where they would live but for their service.
Each elector may cast one vote, normally in person at a polling station. Service
voters resident abroad and merchant seamen may vote by proxy or, if in the
United Kingdom at the time of the election, by post. Electors who are physically
incapacitated or unable to vote in person because of the nature of their
employment are also entitled to vote by post.
Voting is not compulsory; nearly 76 per cent of a total electorate of almost 41
million people voted in the general election of May 1979. The candidate who polls
the most votes in a constituency is elected.
British subjects and citizens of the Irish Republic can stand and be elected as MPs
provided they are aged 21 or over and are not subject to any disqualification. Those
disqualified include undischarged bankrupts, people sentenced to more than one
year’s imprisonment, clergy of the Church of England, Church of Scotland,
Church of Ireland and Roman Catholic Church, peers, and holders of certain
offices listed in the House of Commons Disqualification Act 1975. They include
holders of judicial office, civil servants, some local government officers, members
of the regular armed forces, members of the police forces and some members of
public corporations and government commissions. A candidate’s nomination for
election must be supported by the signatures of a nominator, a seconder and eight
assentors registered in the constituency. He or she does not require any party
backing. A candidate must also deposit £150, which is forfeited if his or her votes
do not exceed 12-5 per cent of those validly cast.
The maximum sum a candidate may spend on an election campaign is 1,750,
plus 1 ^ pence for each elector in a borough constituency or 2 pence for each elector
in a county constituency. A candidate may post free of charge an election address to
each elector in the constituency. All election expenses, except the candidate’s
personal expenses, are subject to the statutory limit.
The party system, existing in one form or another since the seventeenth century, is
an essential element in the working of the constitution.
The present system relies heavily upon the existence of organised political
parties, each laying policies before the electorate for approval. The parties are not
registered or formally recognised in law, but in practice most candidates in
election, and almost all winning candidates, belong to one of the main political
parties.
The percentages of votes cast for the main political parties in the general election
held in May 1979 and the resulting distribution of seats in the House of Commons
are given in Table 3.
The party which wins most seats (although not necessarily the most votes) at a
general election, or which has the support of a majority of members in the House
of Commons, usually forms the Government. By tradition, the leader of the
majority party is appointed Prime Minister by the Sovereign; and about 100 of its
members in the House of Commons and the House of Lords receive ministerial
appointments (including appointment to the Cabinet—see p 47) on the advice of
the Prime Minister. The largest minority party becomes the official Opposition
with its own leader and own ‘shadow Cabinet’; while members of other parties or
any independents who have been elected support or oppose the Government
according to their party or their own view of the policy being debated at any given
time. Leaders of the Government and Opposition sit on the front benches of the
38
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Commons with their supporters (the back-benchers) sitting behind them. Similar
arrangements for the parties also apply in the House of Lords; however, Lords who
do not wish to be associated with either the Government or the Opposition may sit
on the ‘cross-benches’. The effectiveness of the party system in Parliament rests
largely on the relationship between the Government and the opposition parties.
Depending on the relative voting strengths of the parties in the House of
Commons, the Opposition might seek to overthrow the Government by securing
its defeat on a ‘matter of confidence’. In general, however, its aims are to contribute
to the formulation of policy and legislation by constructive criticism; to oppose
government proposals that it considers objectionable; to secure concessions on
government Bills; and to increase public support and enhance its chances of
electoral success.
The detailed arrangements of government business are settled, under the
direction of the Prime Minister and the Leaders of the two Houses, by the Chief
Government Whips in consultation with the Chief Opposition Whips. The Chief
Whips together constitute the ‘usual channels’ often referred to when the question
of the possibility of finding time for debating some particular issue is discussed. The
Leaders of the two Houses are primarily responsible for the direction of business
and for providing reasonable facilities for the Houses to debate matters about
which they are concerned.
Outside Parliament, party control is exercised by the national and local
organisations. Inside Parliament, it is exercised by the Chief Whips and their
assistants (chosen within the party) whose duties include keeping members
informed of forthcoming parliamentary business, maintaining the party’s voting
TABLE 3. Percentages of Votes Cast, and Members Elected, in the May 1979 General
Election
Party
% of Votes
Cast
Party
Members
Elected
Conservative
Labour
Liberal
Others
43’9
36-9
13-8
5'4
100.0
Conservative
Labour
Liberal
Scottish National
Plaid Cymru (Welsh Nationalist)
Official Unionist (Northern Ireland)
Democratic Unionist (Northern Ireland)
United Ulster Unionist
Ulster Unionist
Social Democratic and Labour
(Northern Ireland)
Independent (Northern Ireland)
Speaker
339
268
11
2
2
5
3
I
1
1
1
1
635
In September 1981 the state of the parties (excluding the Speaker and his three deputies) was as follows:
Conservative 335; Labour 252; Liberal 11; Social Democratic 16 (a new party was formed in 1981
whose members comprised, on 30 September 1981, 15 former Labour MPs and one former
Conservative MP); Scottish Nationalist 2; Plaid Cymru (Welsh Nationalist) 2; Official Unionist
(Northern Ireland) 5; Democratic Unionist (Northern Ireland) 3; United Ulster Unionist 1; Ulster
Progressive Unionist—elected as Ulster Unionist 1; Independent Socialist (Northern Ireland)—elected
as Social Democratic and Labour 1; Anti-H Block Proxy Prisoner (Northern Ireland) 1; vacant 1.
Conference and
exhibition centres
Below: The Barbican Centre, within a large
residential complex close to St Paul’s
Cathedral, London, is due to be opened in
1982 and will contain a conference and
concert hall seating more than 2,000, three
cinemas and a 1,000-seat theatre, an art
gallery, a library and two exhibition halls.
Right: In North Yorkshire, Harrogate’s new
Conference Supercentre is under con¬
struction. When completed it will provide an
auditorium seating 2,000, six interlinked
exhibition halls and banqueting facilities.
Centre right: A model of London’s
International Conference Centre which is
being built at Broad Sanctuary, close to
Westminster Abbey and the Houses of
Parliament. The auditorium will seat 650 and
there will be five smaller conference rooms.
Below right: The interior and exterior of the
Brighton Centre, East Sussex, which is one
of Britain’s largest conference, exhibition,
sports and entertainment centres.
Situated facing the sea, it has
a main hall seating over
5,000 and a foyer hall
seating 800.
•if
! * a.*'*'
: * r -rrr
’ !l II (f i B
t.,"« ;,V
rap.
V
*.
Some animals
found in Britain
GOVERNMENT
39
Parliamentary
Procedure
strength by ensuring that members attend important debates, and .conveying to the
party leadership the opinions of back-bench members. The importance a party
attaches to a vote on a particular issue is indicated to the MPs by the underlining
(once, twice or three times) on the notice sent to them; failure to comply with a
‘three-line whip’ is usually seen as rebellion against the party’s policy. Party
discipline tends to be less strong in the Lords than in the Commons.
The Chief Government Whip in the Commons is Parliamentary Secretary to
the Treasury ; of the other Government Whips, three (one of whom is deputy
Chief Whip) are officers of the Royal Household, five hold titular posts as Lords
Commissioners of the Treasury and five are Assistant Whips. Salaries are likewise
paid to the Chief Opposition Whips in both Houses and to two of the Assistant
Whips for the Opposition in the Commons. The Government Whips in the Lords
hold offices in the Royal Household and act as government spokesmen.
Annual assistance from public funds helps opposition parties in Parliament to
carry out their business. It is limited to parties which had at least two members
elected at the last general election or one member elected and a minimum of
150,000 votes cast. The formula is: -£1,962-50 for every seat and ^i-92i f°r every
200 votes, up to a maximum of ^£290,000.
Parliamentary procedure is based on custom and precedent, partly formulated in
standing orders governing details of practice in each House. The system of debate is
much the same in the two Houses: the subject originates in the form of a motion (a
proposal made by a member in order to elicit a decision from the House). When a
motion has been moved and seconded, the Speaker proposes the question as the
subject of debate. Members speak from wherever they have been sitting.
Questions are decided by a vote on a simple majority. The main difference
between the two Houses is that in the Lords the office of Speaker carries with it no
authority to check or curtail debate, such matters being decided by the general
sense of the House, whereas in the Commons the Speaker has full authority to give
effect, promptly and decisively, to the rules and orders of the House. The Speaker
must guard against abuse of procedure or infringement of minority rights, and has
discretion to allow or disallow a closure motion (to end discussion so that the
matter may be put to the vote). The Speaker has powers to check irrelevance and
repetition in debate, and to save time in other respects. In cases of grave disorder the
House can be adjourned or the sitting suspended on the Speaker’s initiative. Voting
in the Commons is under the direction of the Speaker whose duty it is to
pronounce the final result. In the event of a tied vote the Speaker gives the casting
vote, but only in accordance with established conventions which preclude an
expression of opinion on the merits of the question.
The voting procedure in the House of Lords is similar to that in the Commons,
except that the Speaker or chairman has an original, but no casting, vote. Bills and
subordinate legislation are in general allowed to proceed in the form before the
House unless a majority votes to reject or amend them; on other motions the
question is decided in the negative unless there is a majority in favour. When the
House is sitting judicially (see pp 102 and in) the judgment under appeal is not
changed if the votes are equal.
The Commons has a public register of MPs’ financial interests. Members with a
relevant pecuniary interest in a matter before the House, direct or indirect, must
declare it when taking part in debate, though to operate as a disqualification from
voting the interest must be direct, immediate and personal. In any other
proceedings of the House or in transactions with other members or with ministers
or civil servants, MPs must also disclose any relevant financial interest or benefit.
Proceedings of both Houses are public, except on extremely rare occasions; the
40
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Legislative
Proceedings
minutes (in the Commons called Votes and Proceedings and in the Lords, Minutes
of Proceedings) and the speeches (The Official Report of Parliamentary Debates,
Hansard) are published daily. The records of the Lords from 1497 and of the
Commons from 1547, together with the parliamentary and political papers of
certain past members of the Houses, are available to the public in the House of
Lords Record Office. Parliament is not televised,1 but proceedings are recorded
and sound transmissions of some are made on television and radio, either live or in
recorded form. A Parliamentary Sound Archive has been established.
The law undergoes constant reform in the courts as established principles are
interpreted, clarified or reapplied to meet new circumstances, but substantial
changes are the responsibility of Parliament and the Government through the
normal legislative process.
A draft law takes the form of a parliamentary Bill. Most Bills are public Bills
involving measures relating to public policy, but there are also private Bills which
deal solely with matters of individual, corporate or local interest. Public Bills can
be introduced, in either House, by a government minister or by a private member.
Most public legislation is in practice sponsored by the Government.
Before a Government Bill is finally drafted, there is normally considerable
consultation with professional bodies, voluntary organisations and other agencies
interested in the subject matter, such as major interest groups and ‘pressure’ groups
which aim to promote a specific cause. Proposals for legislative changes are
sometimes set out in Government ‘White Papers’ which may be debated in
Parliament before the introduction of a Bill. From time to time consultative
documents, sometimes called ‘Green Papers’, set out for public discussion
government proposals which are still at the formative stage.
Bills must, in principle, be passed by each House (see also p 41). As a rule
Government Bills likely to raise political controversy go through the Commons
before the Lords, while those of an intricate but uncontroversial nature often pass
through the Lords first. A Bill with a mainly financial purpose is nearly always
introduced in the Commons, and a Bill involving taxation must be based on
resolutions agreed by that House, often after debate, before it can be introduced. If
the main object of a Bill is to create a public charge, it can only be introduced by a
minister or, if brought from the Lords, be proceeded with in the Commons if
taken up by a minister, which gives the Government considerable control over
legislation.
At the beginning of each session private members of the Commons ballot for
precedence in introducing a Bill on one of the Fridays specially allocated; the first
20 are successful. A private member may also present a Bill after question time (see
P 43)> or seek to introduce a Bill under the ‘ten minute rule’ which allows two
speeches, one in favour of and one against the measure, after which the House
decides whether to allow the Bill to be brought in. Private members’ Bills do not
often proceed very far, but a few become law each session. If one secures a second
reading, the Government usually introduces any necessary money resolution.
Private members Bills may be introduced in the House of Lords at any time, but
the time that can be given to them in the Commons is strictly limited.
The process of passing a public Bill is similar in both Houses. The Bill receives a
formal first reading on introduction, it is printed, and after a while (between one
day and several weeks depending on the nature of the Bill) is given a second
1 Debates on televising proceedings have taken place on several occasions and in 1968 an internal
television experiment took place in the Lords. In 1980 the Commons voted to allow the introduction of
a private member s Bill to permit the televising of proceedings, but it progressed no further.
GOVERNMENT
41
Delegated
Legislation
reading after a debate on its general principles and merits. In the Commons a non-
controversial Bill may be referred to a second reading committee to decide
whether it should be read a second time. After a second reading in the Commons, a
Bill is usually referred for detailed examination to a standing committee (see p 42).
If the House so decides, the Bill may be referred to the whole House sitting in
committee. The committee stage is followed by the report stage, during which
further amendments may be considered. At the third reading a Bill is reviewed in
its final form. In the Commons this stage is taken without a debate unless there is a
motion in the name of six MPs that the question ‘be not put forthwith’—a
procedure frequently used. It is considered by a committee of the whole House
unless the House takes the rare decision to refer it to a Public Bill Committee.
After the third reading a Commons Bill is sent to the Lords where it goes
through broadly the same stages. The House may vote to limit the time devoted to
examining a Bill by passing a timetable motion, commonly referred to as a
‘guillotine’. A Bill which starts in the Lords and is passed by that House is then sent
to the Commons for all the stages there. Amendments made by the second House
generally must be agreed by the first, or a compromise reached, before a Bill can
become law.
Most Government Bills introduced and passed in the Lords pass through the
Commons without difficulty because of their non-controversial nature. However,
if a non-governmental Lords Bill were unacceptable to the Commons it would
generally not become law because no debating time would be allotted to it. The
Lords, on the other hand, do not in general prevent a Bill insisted upon by the
Commons from finally becoming law. Normally they either accept the Bill
without changes, or amend and return it for consideration by the Commons, who
frequently agree to the amendments made. In practice, the Lords pass without
amendment Bills such as those authorising taxation or national expenditure. A Bill
that deals only with taxation or expenditure must become law within one month
of being sent to the Lords, whether or not they agree to it, unless the Commons
directs otherwise. If no agreement is reached between the two Houses on a non-
financial Commons Bill (or an amendment to it) the Lords can in practice delay the
Bill (with certain exceptions) for about 13 months. At the end of this time it
becomes law in the form originally passed by the Commons. A Bill to lengthen the
life of a Parliament would require the full assent of both Houses in the normal way.
The limitations on the power of the Lords are based on the belief that the
principal legislative function of the non-elected House nowadays is to act as a
chamber of revision, complementing, not rivalling, the elected House.
When a Bill has passed through all its parliamentary stages, it is sent to the
Queen for royal assent, after which it is part of the law of the land and known as an
Act of Parliament. The royal assent has not been refused since 1707.
Private Bills, promoted by people or organisations outside Parliament, go
through substantially the same procedure as public Bills, but most of the work is
done in committee, where proceedings follow a semi-judicial pattern: the
promoter must prove the need for the powers or privileges sought and the
objections of opposing interests are heard. Both sides may be legally represented.
Delegated legislation, used to relieve pressure on parliamentary time, gives
ministers and other authorities the power to regulate administrative details after a
law has been passed. To minimise the risk that powers thus conferred on the
executive might supersede or weaken parliamentary government, they are
normally delegated to authorities directly responsible to Parliament. Moreover,
the Acts of Parliament by which particular powers are delegated normally provide
for some measure of parliamentary control over legislation made in the exercise of
Parliamentary
Committees
Committees of the
Whole House
Standing
Committees
Select Committees
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
these powers, for instance, by reserving to Parliament the right to affirm or annul
the orders themselves. Certain Acts also require direct consultation with
organisations affected before rules and orders can be made.
A joint committee of both Houses reports on the technical propriety of these
‘statutory instruments’. In order to save time, the Commons also uses standing
committees to consider the merits of instruments, with any decisions reserved to
the House.
Either House may resolve itself into a committee (of the whole house) to consider
Bills in detail after their second reading. A committee of the whole house is
presided over by the Chairman of Ways and Means (the Chairman of Committees
in the House of Lords) or a deputy chairman.
House of Commons standing committees include those which examine public
Bills at the committee stage and, in certain cases, at the second reading and report
stages; two Scottish standing committees; the Scottish Grand Committee; the
Welsh Grand Committee; and the Northern Ireland standing committee.
Ordinary standing committees have no distinctive names, being referred to simply
as Standing Committee A, B, C, and so on, and are each appointed specially to
consider a specific Bill. Each has between 16 and 50 members with a party balance
reflecting as far as possible that in the House as a whole. The Scottish Grand
Committee, which comprises all 71 Scottish members and 10 to 15 others,
considers the principles of Scottish Bills referred to it at second reading stage, the
Scottish estimates and other matters concerning only Scotland. The Welsh Grand
Committee, with all 36 Welsh members and up to five others, considers Bills
referred to it at second reading stage, and matters concerning only Wales. The
Northern Ireland committee considers matters relating specifically to the
province. A standing committee on regional affairs attended by any of the 516
members from the English constituencies is occasionally appointed to consider
matters relating to the English regions. The Lords equivalent to a standing
committee, a Public Bill Committee, is rarely used.
Select committees in each House help Parliament to control the executive by
examining and reporting on aspects of policy or administration. They are also
appointed to consider matters concerning the House itself. They may be appointed
as occasion demands, for a session, or for the rest of the life of a Parliament. On rare
occasions a parliamentary Bill is examined by a select committee (a procedure
additional to the usual legislative process). Select committees are constituted in the
Commons on a party basis, in approximate proportions to party strength in the
House. In the Commons 12 committees examine the expenditure, administration
and policy of the main government departments and related bodies. The Foreign
Affairs Committee, for example, ‘shadows’ the work of the Foreign and
Commonwealth office. Select committees on Scottish Affairs and on Welsh Affairs
have also been appointed; and a Liaison Committee to consider general matters
relating to select committees has been established. Other regular committees
include those on European Legislation, Public Accounts, Members’ Interests, the
Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration, and Sound Broadcasting. The
Committee of Selection and the Standing Orders Committee have duties relating
to private Bills, and the Committee of Selection also chooses members to serve on
standing and select committees.
In their scrutiny of government policies, the committees question ministers,
senior civil servants and interested bodies and individuals. Through hearings and
published reports, they bring before Parliament and the public a body of fact and
GOVERNMENT
43
Joint Committees
Party Committees
Other Forms of
Parliamentary
Control
informed opinion on many important issues, and build up considerable expertise in
their subjects of inquiry.
In the House of Lords, there are the Appeal and Appellate Committees in which
the bulk of the House’s judicial work is transacted. There are also committees on
the European Communities, Science and Technology, House of Lords Offices,
Hybrid Instruments, Leave of Absence, Lords’ Expenses, Personal Bills, Private
Bills, Standing Orders, Privileges, Procedure, Selection and Sound Broadcasting.
The two Houses may agree to set up joint select committees, and joint committees
are also appointed in each session to deal with Consolidation Bills and delegated
legislation.
In addition to the official committees of the two Houses there are several unofficial
party organisations or committees. The Conservative and Unionist Members
Committee, the 1922 Committee, consists of the back-bench membership of the
party. The Parliamentary Labour party is a corporate body comprising all
members of the party in both Houses; when the Labour Party is in office a liaison
committee acts as a channel of communication between the Government and its
back-benchers in both Houses; when the party is in opposition the Parliamentary
Labour Party is organised under the direction of a Parliamentary Committee often
referred to as the ‘shadow Cabinet’.
The effectiveness of parliamentary control of the Government is a subject of
continuing discussion, both inside and outside Parliament. Control is exercised
finally by the ability of the House of Commons to force the Government to resign
by passing a resolution of ‘no confidence’ or by rejecting a proposal which the
Government considers so vital to its policy that it has made it a ‘matter of
confidence’ or, ultimately, by refusing to vote the money required for the public
service. In addition to the system of close scrutiny by select committees (see p 42)
the House of Commons offers a number of opportunities for a searching
examination of government policy by both the Opposition and the Government’s
own back-benchers.
These include:
1. Question time when for an hour on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and
Thursday, ministers answer MPs’ questions. Parliamentary questions are one
means of eliciting information about the Government’s intentions, as well as a
way of airing, and possibly securing redress of, grievances brought to MPs’
notice by constituents.
2. The right of MPs to use motions for the adjournment of the House to open
discussions on constituency cases or matters of public concern. There is a half-
hour adjournment period at the end of the business of the day; and immediately
before the adjournment for the Christmas, Easter, spring and summer recesses a
day is spent discussing matters raised by private members. Moreover, an MP
wishing to discuss a ‘specific and important matter that should have urgent
consideration’ may, at the end of question time, ask leave to move the
adjournment of the House. If the Speaker accepts the terms of the motion, the
MP asks the House for leave for the motion to be put forward. Leave can be
given unanimously, or if 40 or more MPs support the motion, or if fewer than
40 but more than 10 support it and the House (on a vote) is in favour. Once leave
has been given, the matter is debated for three hours, usually on the following
day.
3. The 29 ‘supply’ days each session, formerly used to discuss details of proposed
government expenditure, but which are nowadays time for the Opposition to
Parliamentary
Commissioner for
Administration
Parliamentary
Privilege
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
choose subjects for debate. (Scrutiny by small committees has been found more apt
for detailed expenditure proposals.)
Procedural opportunities for criticism of the Government also arise during the
debate on the Queen’s speech at the beginning of a session, during debates or
motions of censure for which the Government gives up part of its own time, and
during debates on the Government’s legislative proposals.
Opportunities for criticism are also provided in the House of Lords at daily
question time, during debates on specific motions and in (debatable) questions at
the end of the day’s business.
The involvement of Parliament, and more particularly the House of Commons,
in the management of the revenues of the State and payments for the public service
is described in Chapter 17.
To keep the two Houses informed ofEuropean Community developments, and
to enable them to scrutinise and debate Community policies and proposals there
are two select committees (see above), and ministers make regular statements
about Community business.
The Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration (the ‘Parliamentary
Ombudsman’) investigates, independently, complaints of maladministration
when asked to do so by MPs on behalf of members of the public. Powers of
investigation extend to administrative actions by central government departments
but not to policy decisions (which can be questioned in Parliament) nor to matters
affecting relations with other countries. Complaints by British citizens arising
from dealings with British posts overseas are open to investigation in some
circumstances. The Commissioner has access to departmental papers and reports
the findings to the MP who presented the complaint. The Commissioner reports
annually to Parliament and may submit other special reports.
A Commons select committee makes recommendations over the
Commissioner’s work but does not review individual cases.
Each House of Parliament has certain rights and immunities to protect it from
unnecessary obstruction in carrying out its duties. The rights apply collectively to
each House and individually to each member.
For the Commons the Speaker formally claims ‘their ancient and undoubted
rights and privileges’ at the beginning of each Parliament. These include freedom
of speech; freedom from arrest in civil actions; exemption from serving on juries,
attending as witnesses or serving as sheriffs; and the right of access to the Crown, a
collective privilege of the House. Further privileges include the rights of the House
to control its own proceedings (so that it is able, for instance, to exclude ‘strangers’
if it wishes), to pronounce upon legal disqualifications for membership and to
declare a seat vacant on such grounds; and to penalise for breach of its privileges
and for contempt.
The privileges of the House of Lords closely resemble those of the House of
Commons.
The Privy Council
Until the eighteenth century, the Sovereign in Council, or Privy Council, was the
chief source of executive power in the State. As the system of Cabinet government
developed, however, the Privy Council became less prominent. Many powers
were transferred to the Cabinet as an inner committee of the Council, and much of
its work was handed over to newly created government departments, some of
which were originally committees of the Privy Council.
Nowadays the main function of the Privy Council is to advise the Queen to
GOVERNMENT
45
Committees of
the Privy
Council
Composition
Prime Minister
approve Orders in Council (those made under prerogative powers, such as Orders
approving the grant of royal charters of incorporation); and those made under
statutory powers. Members of the Privy Council attending meetings at which
Orders are made do not thereby become personally responsible for the policy upon
which the Orders are based; this rests with the minister responsible for the subject
matter of the Order in question, whether or not he or she was present at the
meeting.
The Privy Council also advises the Crown on the issue of royal proclamations,
some of the most important of which relate to prerogative acts (such as
summoning or dissolving Parliament). The Council’s own statutory
responsibilities, which are independent of the powers of the Sovereign in Council,
include powers of supervision over the registering bodies for the medical and allied
professions.
Apart from Cabinet ministers, who must be Privy Counsellors and are sworn in
on first assuming office, membership of the Council (retained for life) is accorded
by the Sovereign on the recommendation of the Prime Minister to eminent people
in independent monarchical countries of the Commonwealth. There are about 370
Privy Counsellors. A full Council is summoned only on the death of the Sovereign
or when the Sovereign announces his or her intention to marry.
There are a number of advisory Privy Council committees whose meetings differ
from those of the Privy Council itself in that the Sovereign cannot constitutionally
be present. These may be prerogative committees, such as those dealing with
legislative matters submitted by the legislatures of the Channel Islands and Isle of
Man and with applications for charters of incorporation; or they may be provided
for by statute as are those for the universities of Oxford and Cambridge and the
Scottish universities.
The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council is the final court of appeal from
the courts of the United Kingdom dependencies, courts of independent members
of the Commonwealth which have not discontinued the appeal, courts of the
Channel Islands and the Isle of Man, and certain other courts, some professional
and disciplinary committees and church sources.
Administrative work is carried out in the Privy Council Office under the Lord
President of the Council, a Cabinet minister.
Her Majesty’s Government
Her Majesty’s Government is the body of ministers responsible for the
administration of national affairs.
The Prime Minister is appointed by the Queen, and all other ministers are
appointed by the Queen on the recommendation of the Prime Minister.
The majority of ministers are members of the Commons, although the
Government is also fully represented by ministers in the Lords. The Lord
Chancellor is always a member of the House of Lords.
The composition of the Government can vary both in the number of ministers and
in the titles of some offices. The creation of a paid ministerial office with entirely
new functions, the abolition of an office, the transfer of functions from one
minister to another, or a change in the designation of a minister may be effected by
Order in Council.
The Prime Minister is also, by tradition, First Lord of the Treasury and Minister for
the Civil Service. The head of the Government became known as the Prime
Minister during the eighteenth century. The Prime Minister’s unique position of
46
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Departmental
Ministers
Non-Departmental
Ministers
Lord Chancellor
and Law Officers
Ministers of State
Junior Ministers
Ministerial
Salaries
authority derives from majority support in Parliament and from the power to
choose ministers and to obtain their resignation or dismissal individually. By
modern convention, the Prime Minister always sits in the House of Commons.
The Prime Minister informs the Queen of the general business of the
Government, presides over the Cabinet, and is responsible for the allocation of
functions among ministers.
The Prime Minister’s other responsibilities include recommending to the Queen
a number of appointments. These include: Church of England archbishops,
bishops and deans and some 200 other clergy in Crown ‘livings’; high judicial
offices, such as the Lord Chiefjustice, Lords of Appeal in Ordinary, and the Lords
Justices of Appeal; Privy Counsellors, Lords-Lieutenant and certain civil
appointments, such as Lord High Commissioner to the General Assembly of the
Church of Scotland, Poet Laureate, Constable of the Tower, and some university
posts; and appointments to various public boards and institutions, such as the
British Broadcasting Corporation, as well as various royal and statutory
commissions. Recommendations are likewise made for the award of many civil
honours and distinctions and of Civil List pensions (to people who have achieved
eminence in science and the arts and who are in some financial need). The Prime
Minister also selects the trustees of certain national museums and institutions.
Ministers in charge of government departments, who are usually in the Cabinet,
are known as ‘Secretary of State’ or ‘Minister’, or may have a special title, as in the
case of the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
The holders of various traditional offices, namely the Lord President of the
Council, the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, the Lord Privy Seal, the
Paymaster General (and from time to time Ministers without Portfolio) may have
few or no departmental duties and are thus available to perform any special duties
the Prime Minister may wish to give them. The Lord President of the Council, for
example, is responsible for the day to day administration of the Civil Service
Department.
The Lord Chancellor holds a special position, being a minister with departmental
functions and also head of the judiciary in England and Wales. The four Law
Officers of the Crown are: for England and Wales, the Attorney General and the
Solicitor General; for Scotland, the Lord Advocate and the Solicitor General for
Scotland.
Ministers of State usually work with ministers in charge of departments with
responsibility for specific functions, and are sometimes given courtesy titles which
reflect these particular functions. More than one may work in a department. A
Minister of State can be given a seat in the Cabinet and paid accordingly.
Junior ministers (generally Parliamentary Under Secretaries of State or, where the
senior minister is not a Secretary of State, simply Parliamentary Secretaries) share
in parliamentary and departmental duties. They may also be given responsibility,
directly under the departmental minister, for specific aspects of the department’s
work. The Parliamentary Secretary to the Treasury and other Lords
Commissioners of the Treasury are in a different category as Government Whips
(see p 39).
The salaries of ministers in the House of Commons range1 from £ 15,100 a year for
junior ministers and ,£19,775 to f,23,22S for more senior ministers to ^£27,825 for
1 The Leader of the Opposition in the Commons receives a salary for the post, as well as a parliamentary
salary; in the Lords the Leader of the Opposition receives a salary.
The Cabinet
Cabinet Meetings
The Cabinet
Office
GOVERNMENT 47
Cabinet ministers. The Prime Minister and the Lord Chancellor also receive
^27,825.
Ministers in the Commons, including the Prime Minister, also have
parliamentary salaries of £8,130 a year in recognition of their constituency
responsibilities and are entitled to claim the other allowances which are paid to
all MPs.
The Cabinet is composed of about 20 ministers chosen by the Prime Minister and
may include departmental and non-departmental ministers. Its origins can be
traced back to the informal conferences which the Sovereign held with leading
ministers, independently of the Privy Council, during the seventeenth century.
After the Sovereign’s withdrawal from an active role in politics in the eighteenth
century, and the development of organised political parties stimulated by
successive extensions of the franchise from 1832 onwards, the Cabinet assumed its
modern form.
The functions of the Cabinet are: the final determination of policies, the
supreme control of government and the co-ordination of government
departments. The exercise of these functions is vitally affected by the fact that the
Cabinet is a group of party representatives, depending upon majority support in
the House of Commons.
The Cabinet meets in private and its proceedings are confidential. Its members are
bound by their oath as Privy Counsellors not to disclose information about its
proceedings. The Official Secrets Acts forbid the publication of Cabinet as well as
other State papers (although after they have been in existence for 30 years they
may be made available for inspection in the Public Record Office) and a resigning
minister wishing to make a statement involving disclosure of Cabinet discussions
should first obtain permission through the Prime Minister. Diaries published by
several former ministers have given the public an insight into Cabinet procedures
in recent times.
Normally the Cabinet meets for a few hours once or twice a week during
parliamentary sittings, and rather less often when Parliament is not sitting. To keep
the amount of work coming before the Cabinet within manageable limits, a great
deal of work is carried on through the committee system, which involves the
reference of any issue either to a standing Cabinet committee or to an ad hoc
committee composed of the ministers primarily concerned. The committee then
considers the matter in detail and either disposes of it or reports upon it to the
Cabinet with recommendations for action. The present Cabinet has four standing
committees: a defence and overseas policy committee and an economic strategy
committee both under the chairmanship of the Prime Minister; a home and social
affairs committee under the chairmanship of the Home Secretary; and a legislation
committee under the chairmanship of the Lord President of the Council. Sub¬
committees of the standing committees may be established. Membership and
terms of reference of all Cabinet committees are confidential.
Non-Cabinet ministers may be invited to attend meetings on matters affecting
their departments, and may be members of Cabinet committees. The Secretary of
the Cabinet and other senior officials of the Cabinet Office also attend meetings of
the Cabinet and its committees as appropriate.
The Cabinet Office, headed by the Secretary of the Cabinet, under the direction of
the Prime Minister, comprises the Cabinet Secretariat, the Central Policy Review
Staff, the Central Statistical Office and the Historical Section.
The Cabinet Secretariat serves ministers collectively in the conduct of Cabinet
48
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Ministerial
Responsibility
business and operates as an instrument in the co-ordination of policy at the highest
level.
The Central Policy Review Staff advises ministers collectively on major issues
of policy.
The Central Statistical Office is concerned with the preparation and
interpretation of the statistics necessary to support economic and social policies and
management and co-ordinates the statistical work of other departments.
The Historical Section of the Cabinet Office is in the process of completing the
official histories of the second world war, and is responsible for the preparation of
official histories of certain peacetime events.
‘Ministerial responsibility’ refers both to the collective responsibility which
ministers share for government policy and actions and to ministers’ individual
responsibility to Parliament for their departments’ work.
The doctrine of collective responsibility means that the Cabinet acts
unanimously even when Cabinet Ministers do not all agree on a subject. The
policy of departmental ministers must be consistent with the policy of the
Government as a whole. Once the Government’s policy on a matter has been
decided, each minister is expected to support it or resign. On rare occasions,
ministers have been allowed free votes in Parliament on government policies
involving important issues of principle.
The individual responsibility of a minister for the work of his or her department
means that, as political head of that department, he or she is answerable for all its
acts and omissions and must bear the consequences of any defect of administration,
any injustice to an individual or any aspect of policy which may be criticised in
Parliament, whether personally responsible or not. Since most ministers are
members of the House of Commons, they must answer questions and defend
themselves against criticism in person. Departmental ministers in the House of
Lords are represented in the Commons by someone qualified to speak on their
behalf, usually a junior minister.
Departmental ministers normally decide all matters within their responsibility,
although on important political matters they usually consult their colleagues
collectively, through the Cabinet or a Cabinet committee. A decision by a
departmental minister binds the Government as a whole.
The responsibility of ministers for their departments is an effective way of
keeping government under public control, for the knowledge that any
departmental action may be reported to and examined in Parliament discourages
the taking of arbitrary and ill-considered decisions.
On assuming office ministers must resign directorships in private and public
companies, and must order their affairs so that there is no conflict between public
duties and private interests.
Government Departments
Government departments are the main instruments for giving effect to
government policy when Parliament has passed the necessary legislation, and for
advising ministers. They may, and frequently do, work with and through local
authorities, statutory boards, and government-sponsored organisations operating
under various degrees of government control.
A change of government does not necessarily affect the number or general
functions of government departments, although a radical change in policy may be
accompanied by some organisational change.
The work of some departments (for instance, the Ministry of Defence) covers
GOVERNMENT
49
Non-
Departmental
Public Bodies
Advisory
Bodies
the United Kingdom as a whole. Other departments (like the Department of
Employment) cover England, Wales, and Scotland, but not Northern Ireland.
Others, such as the Department of the Environment, are mainly concerned with
affairs in England. There are separate departments for Scotland, Northern Ireland
and Wales.
Some departments, such as the Department of Trade, maintain a regional
organisation, and some which have direct contact with the public throughout the
country (for example, the Department of Employment) also have local offices.
Although departments are usually headed by a minister, some in which
questions of policy do not normally arise are headed by a permanent official, and a
minister with other duties is responsible for them to Parliament. For instance, the
minister in charge of the Civil Service Department is responsible for the Central
Office of Information, Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, and the Department of the
Government Actuary; and Treasury ministers are responsible for the Customs and
Excise, the Inland Revenue, the Department for National Savings and a number of
small departments including the Treasury Solicitor’s Department, the Royal
Mint, and the National Debt Office. Departments generally receive their funds
directly out of money provided by Parliament and are staffed by the Civil Service.
A number of bodies with a role in the process of government are neither
government departments nor part of a department. Popularly described as
‘quangos’ (which is often taken to stand for ‘quasi-autonomous non-governmental
organisations’, although there is no precise definition of the term), they are of three
kinds: executive bodies, advisory bodies and tribunals. Executive bodies generally
employ staff and spend money on their own account; advisory bodies and
tribunals do not normally employ staff or spend money themselves, but their
expenses are paid by government departments concerned. Many of the more
important executive bodies are mentioned in this Handbook; a note on advisory
bodies is set out below; and the position of tribunals is dealt with on p 112.
As a result of a review of non-departmental public bodies undertaken by the
Government in 1979, some 436 are being abolished.
Many government departments are assisted by advisory councils or committees
which undertake research and collect information, mainly to give ministers access
to informed opinion before coming to a decision involving a legislative or
executive act. In some cases a minister must consult a standing committee, but
usually advisory bodies are appointed at the discretion of the minister concerned
because of the need for their advice.
The membership of the advisory councils and committees varies according to
the nature of the work involved, and may include civil servants and representatives
of varying interests and professions—for instance, industrialists, trade unionists,
university and industrial scientists, educationists, lawyers and local government
councillors and officers.
In addition to these standing advisory bodies, there are committees set up by the
Government to examine and make recommendations on specific matters. For
certain important inquiries Royal Commissions, whose members are chosen for
their wide experience and diverse knowledge, may be appointed. Royal
Commissions examine written and oral evidence from government departments
and interested organisations and individuals and submit recommendations. The
Government may accept the recommendations in whole or in part, or may decide
to take no further action or to delay action. Inquiries may also be undertaken by
departmental committees.
50
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Distribution of An outline of the principal functions of the main government departments is given
Functions below. Departments are arranged in alphabetical order, except for the Civil
Service Department, and the Treasury (which, in view of their central positions,
are placed first) and the Scottish and Northern Ireland departments (which are
grouped at the end of the section). Further information on the work of some
departments is given in later chapters under the relevant subject headings.
DEPARTMENT Main areas of responsibility
Civil Service
Department
Treasury
Ministry of
Agriculture,
Fisheries and
Food
Board of
Customs and
Excise
Ministry of
Defence
The work of many departments listed below covers the United Kingdom as a
whole. Where this is not the case, the following abbreviations are used: (GB) for
functions covering England, Wales and Scotland; (E, W & NI) for those covering
England, Wales and Northern Ireland; (E & W) for those covering England and
Wales; and (E) for those concerned only with England.
Management of the Civil Service, including personnel management, advising on
public appointments made by ministers, general efficiency, and pay and conditions
of service. (GB)
Broad economic strategy with particular responsibilities for public finance and
expenditure.
Policies for agriculture, forestry, horticulture and fishing (E); food matters in the
United Kingdom.
Collecting and accounting for revenues of Customs and Excise, including value
added tax; agency functions including controlling certain imports and exports and
compiling overseas trade statistics.
Defence policy and control and administration of the armed services.
Department of General promotion of education (E); arts (GB), libraries (E with advice to W), and
Education and museums (E in consultation with S and W); the Government’s relations with
Science universities (GB); fostering civil science in Britain and internationally.
Department of Manpower policies; labour legislation; payment of unemployment benefit
Employment through local offices; issue of work permits to workers from overseas; Race
Relations Employment Advisory Service (E); policy for the Careers Service (E);
relations with International Labour Organisation and European Community.
Department of Policies in relation to all forms of energy, including its conservation and the
Energy development of new services; the Government’s relationships with the
nationalised energy industries, the Atomic Energy Authority and the British
National Oil Corporation.
Department of Urban affairs; local government; regional affairs; finance and policy of housing
the programme; construction industries; planning, development control and land;
Environment sport and recreation; control of pollution; water and sewerage; minerals;
countryside affairs; Property Services Agency; conservation. (E)
GOVERNMENT
51
DEPARTMENT
Export Credits
Guarantee
Department
Foreign and
Commonwealth
Office
Department of
Health and
Social Security
Home Office
Department of
Industry
Central Office
of Information
Board of Inland
Revenue
The Law
Officers’
Department
The Lord
Chancellor’s
Office
Ordnance
Survey
Overseas
Development
Administration
Parliamentary
Counsel Office
Paymaster
General’s Office
Main areas of responsibility
Provision of insurance for exporters against risk of not being paid for goods and
services, and access to bank finance for exports.
Conduct of Britain’s overseas relations.
National Health Service, personal social services provided by local authorities, and
certain aspects of public health, including hygiene (E & W); the social security
system (GB).
Administration of law and order including criminal justice, police service, and
prisons. Responsibility for immigration and nationality; community relations;
race relations; sex discrimination policy; and regulation of firearms, dangerous
drugs, and gaming and lotteries. Licensing of theatres and cinemas and sale of
liquor. Approval of local authority by-laws. (E & W)
Industrial policy; financial assistance to industry other than through the tax
system; sponsorship of private and state-owned manufacturing industries.
Provision, as a common service department, of publicity material and of publicity
and information services required by other government departments.
Administration of the tax laws.
Provision of advice to the Government on English law and representation of the
Crown in appropriate domestic and international cases, both civil and criminal, by
the Law Officers of the Crown for England and Wales—the Solicitor General and
the Attorney General. (E, W & NI)
Administration of the courts and the law. (The Home Office has important
responsibilities for the criminal law.) The Lord Chancellor is involved in most
appointments to the magistracy and judiciary outside Scotland. (E, W & NI)
The surveying and mapping of Great Britain, including geodetic surveys and
associated scientific work and topographic surveys. (GB)
Administration of financial aid to, and technical co-operation in, developing
countries.
Drafting of Government Bills (except those related exclusively to Scotland);
advising departments on parliamentary procedure. (E, W & NI)
Provision of banking services for government departments other than the Boards
of Inland Revenue and Customs and Excise, and the payment of public service
pensions.
52
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
DEPARTMENT Main areas of responsibility
Office of
Population
Censuses and
Surveys
Department of
the Procurator
General and
Treasury
Solicitor
Her Majesty’s
Stationery
Office
Department of
Trade
Department of
Transport
Welsh Office
Administration of the Marriage Acts and local registration of births, marriages and
deaths; population estimates; compilation of health statistics; censuses (E & W);
surveys for other government departments (GB).
Provision of a common legal service for a large number of government
departments. Duties include instructing Parliamentary Counsel on Bills and
drafting subordinate legislation; providing litigation and conveyancing services;
and giving general advice on the interpretation and application of the law. (E & W)
Publication of parliamentary and government papers; procurement of office
supplies.
Commercial policy and relations with overseas countries; consumer affairs and
competition policy; companies legislation; the insurance industry; patent, trade
mark and copyright matters; civil aviation, marine and shipping policy; and
policies for tourism, the hotel and travel industries, the newspaper, printing,
publishing and film industries and the distributive and service trades.
Policies for the main transport industries; responsibility for the planning and
maintenance of motorways and trunk roads, for local transport, road and vehicle
safety, and for vehicle and driver licensing. (E)
Many aspects of Welsh affairs including health and personal social services;
housing; local government; education (except universities); town and country
planning; new towns; water and sewerage; roads; agriculture; forestry; tourism;
national parks; ancient monuments and historic buildings; careers service and
work in Wales of the Manpower Services Commission; certain responsibilities
relating to the National Library and the National Museum, the Wales Tourist
Board and Sports Council for Wales; and shared responsibility for the
administration of urban grants to areas _of acute social deprivation; selective
financial assistance to industry; and general responsibility for economic
development (Wales only).
SCOTLAND Scotland has its own system of law and wide administrative autonomy. The
Secretary of State for Scotland, a Cabinet minister, has responsibility in Scotland
(with some exceptions) both for formulating and carrying out policy relating to
agriculture and fisheries, education, law and order, local government and
environmental services, social work, health, housing, roads and certain aspects of
shipping and road transport services.
The Secretary of State also has a major role in the planning and development of
the Scottish economy, and important functions related to industrial development,
with responsibility for selective financial assistance to industry, for the Scottish
Development Agency, and the Highlands and Islands Development Board and for
the work of the Manpower Services Commission and the careers service. The
Secretary of State plays a full part in determining energy policy, particularly in
relation to responsibility for the electricity supply industry in Scotland.
The Secretary of State is responsible for legal services in Scotland, and other
GOVERNMENT
53
important functions are exercised by the two Scottish Law Officers: the Lord
Advocate and the Solicitor General for Scotland. On many domestic matters, the
distinctively Scottish features and the different conditions and needs of the country
and its people are reflected in separate legislation relating wholly to Scotland, or
else in sections of special application to Scotland only inserted in Acts which
otherwise apply to the United Kingdom generally. The Secretary of State is also
responsible for the government interest in a range of other functions from fire
services to sport and tourism.
The United Kingdom Government’s administrative functions arising from
these responsibilities are carried out principally by five Scottish departments
supported by Central Services, based in Edinburgh (although with some staff
dispersed over Scotland and with an office in London), known collectively as the
Scottish Office. The Scottish Office Management Group, under the chairmanship
of the Permanent Under-Secretary of State, with a membership consisting of the
head of each of the departments and the Deputy Secretary, Central Services,
advises the Secretary of State, particularly on questions such as the allocation of
resources and forward planning, with which more than one of the departments are
concerned.
United Kingdom government departments with significant Scottish
responsibilities have offices in Scotland with delegated powers and work closely
with the Scottish Office.
An outline of the main functions of the Scottish departments is given below.
DEPARTMENT Functions
Department of Promotion of the agriculture, forestry and fishing industries.
Agriculture and
Fisheries in
Scotland
Scottish
Development
Department
Scottish
Economic
Planning
Department
Scottish
Education
Department
Scottish Home
and Health
Department
Central
Services
Crown Office
Town and country planning; housing; roads; water supplies and sewerage:
pollution control; general policy relating to local government organisation:
ancient monuments; certain transport functions.
Industrial and regional economic development matters; energy.
Education (excluding universities); student awards; libraries; museums and
galleries; sport and recreation; the arts; social work services.
Central administration of law and order (including police service, criminal justice,
legal aid and penal institutions); the National Health Service; fire, home defence
and civil emergency services.
Services to the five Scottish departments. These include the Office of the Solicitor
to the Secretary of State, the Scottish Information Office, and Finance Divisions.
Provision of legal advice to the Government on issues affecting Scotland and the
principal representation of the Crown for litigation in Scotland by the Law
Officers of the Crown for Scotland (the Lord Advocate and the Solicitor General
for Scotland); control of all prosecution in Scotland.
54
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
DEPARTMENT Functions
Scottish Courts Organisation, administration and staffing of the courts and court offices;
Administration jurisdiction and procedure of civil courts; enforcement of judgments; and
programme of Scottish Law Commission.
Other Department of the Registrar General for Scotland; Scottish Record Office;
Administrative Department of the Registers of Scotland.
Departments
NORTHERN The Northern Ireland Office is the department of the Secretary of State for
IRELAND Northern Ireland, a Cabinet minister who has responsibility, and is answerable to
Parliament, for the government of Northern Ireland. Through this Office the
Secretary of State has responsibility for constitutional developments, law and
order and security, and electoral matters.
The Northern Ireland departments are subject to the direction and control of the
Secretary of State. Their principal functions are listed below. (Proposals for
departmental reorganisation in 1982 have been made.)
DEPARTMENT Functions
Department of
Agriculture
Department of
the Civil
Service
Department of
Commerce
Department of
Education
Department of
the
Environment
Department of
Finance
Department of
Health and
Social Services
Department of
Manpower
Services
Development of agricultural, forestry and fishing industries.
General management and control of the Northern Ireland Civil Service
Development of industry and commerce and administration of schemes of
assistance to industry.
Central policy, co-ordination, legislation and financial control of the education
and library service; recreation, culture and entertainment.
Road construction and maintenance; water supplies and sewerage, planning;
public health; public transport, road traffic management, motor taxation; historic
monuments and buildings; and certain controls over housing and local
government.
Control of public expenditure; liaison with the United Kingdom Treasury and the
Northern Ireland Office on financial matters, economic and social planning and
research; rating policy and the collection of rates; Ordnance Survey; valuation;
Public Record Office; registration of births, marriages and deaths; registry of
deeds; registration of title of land.
Health and personal social services and social security.
Administration of employment service and labour training schemes.
GOVERNMENT
55
The Northern
Ireland Civil
Service
Structure
The Civil Service
The Civil Service is concerned with the conduct of the whole range of government
activities as they affect the community ranging from policy formulation to
executing the day to day duties that public administration demands.
Civil Servants are servants of the Crown. They are responsible to the minister in
whose department they work for the execution of the minister’s policies. Ministers
alone are answerable to Parliament for their policies and the actions of their staff. A
change of minister for whatever reason, does not involve a change of staff.
(Ministers sometimes appoint special policy advisers from outside the Civil
Service; the advisers are paid from public funds, but their appointments come to an
end when the Government’s term of office finishes.)
Including part-time staff (two part-time officers being reckoned as equivalent to
one full-time), there are about 690,000 civil servants (some 40 per cent of them
women), roughly 331,000 of whom are engaged in the provision of public
services, such as paying sickness benefits and pensions, collecting taxes and
contributions, running employment services, staffing prisons, and providing
services to industry and agriculture. About 230,000 are employed in the Ministry
of Defence, including the Royal Ordnance factories and Royal Dockyards. The
rest are divided between: central administrative and policy duties; service-wide
support services, such as accommodation, printing and information; and largely
financially self-supporting services, for instance those provided by the Department
for National Savings and the Royal Mint.
Three-quarters of civil servants work outside London. As part of its policy of
reducing the claims of the public sector on the country’s resources the Government
plans to reduce the service to 630,000 by 1984.
The total number includes about 150,000 ‘industrial’ civil servants, mainly
manual workers in government industrial establishments, whose pay and
conditions of service are on the whole separately administered from those of‘non-
industrial’ civil servants.
The Northern Ireland Civil Service is modelled on its counterpart in Great Britain,
and has its own Civil Service Commission. Interchange of staff between the two
Civil Services occurs to a minor extent only.
The structure of the Home Civil Service is designed to allow for a flexible
deployment of staff so that talent can be used to the best advantage, with higher
posts open to people of outstanding ability, whatever their specialist background
or original method of entry into the Service. Although work requiring specialist
skill is always done by appropriately qualified individuals, personnel management
policies are designed to ensure that people with the necessary qualities gain suitable
wide experience to fit them for higher posts.
At the top levels of the Civil Service there is an open and unified structure,
comprising three grades—permanent secretary, deputy secretary and under
secretary. With very few exceptions, staff at this level share the same pay and
grading system whatever their background and duties.
At other levels the structure is based on a system of categories and occupational
groups, which are the basic groupings of staff for the purposes of pay, recruitment
and personnel management. These include the General Category (covering the
Administration, Economist, Statistician, Information Officer and Librarian
groups), the Science Category, the Professional and Technology Category
(including architects, surveyors, electrical and mechanical engineers, graphics
officers and marine services stafl), and the Training, Legal, Police, Secretarial, Data
56
The Diplomatic
Service
Recruitment
and Training
Promotion and
Conditions of
Service
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Processing, Research Officer, Social Security, Security and Museum Categories.
These 12 categories account for some 75 per cent of non-industrial staff.
The Diplomatic Service, a separate service, provides the staff for the Foreign and
Commonwealth Office and at United Kingdom diplomatic missions and consular
posts abroad. Its functions include advising on policy, negotiating with overseas
governments and conducting business in international organisations; promoting
British exports and trade generally, administering aid, presenting ideas, policies
and objectives to the people of overseas countries; and protecting British interests
abroad.
The Service has its own grade structure, linked for salary purposes with that of
the Home Civil Service, and conditions of work are in many ways comparable
while taking into account the special demands of the Service, particularly of
postings overseas. Members of the Home Civil Service and the armed forces, and
individuals from the private sector, may serve in the Foreign and Commonwealth
Office and at overseas posts on loan or attachment.
Recruitment to the Home Civil Service and the Diplomatic Service is the
responsibility of the Civil Service Commission which, in conjunction with
departments, ensures that staff are selected solely on merit through fair and open
competition. The selection of junior staff such as those engaged in clerical and
manual work, is undertaken almost entirely by departments. The appointment of a
successful candidate is made by the department concerned.
For the Administration Group, the central part of the Home Civil Service, entry
is at three levels relating broadly to the academic achievements of: a second class
honours degree, or better; GCE Advanced level; and GCE Ordinary level. The
selection procedure for the highest of these levels (the Administration Trainee
entry) comprises qualifying tests, followed by tests and interviews at the Civil
Service Selection Board and an interview by the Final Selection Board. For the
next level (the Executive Officer entry) selection involves qualifying tests for those
possessing the necessary academic qualifications, followed by an interview. For the
lower level (the clerical entry) selection is normally by interview of those holding
the prescribed educational qualifications.
Entry to the professional and technical grades usually requires appropriate
qualifications, and selection is on the basis of past record and by interview.
Most government departments employ foil-time training officers and tutors to
help identify staff training needs and to organise training by the most appropriate
methods (for example, formal courses or self-instruction). The Civil Service
College provides that training which is most efficiently undertaken centrally.
Considerable use is also made of external institutions.
Civil servants under the age of 18 may continue their education by attending
appropriate courses usually for one day a week (‘day release’ schemes). Adult staff
may be entitled to financial assistance to undertake, mainly in their own time,
private studies leading to recognised educational or professional qualifications in
approved subjects. There are also opportunities for civil servants in mid-career to
obtain fellowships or to go on sabbatical leave to undertake research in areas of
interest to themselves and their departments.
Promotions are made partly through centrally conducted competitions and partly
by the departments themselves. Normally promotion is from grade to grade, but
there can be accelerated promotion for staff who show exceptional promise.
Promotion or appointment to deputy secretary-level posts and above and all
transfers between departments at these levels are approved by the Prime Minister,
advised by the official head of the Home Civil Service.
GOVERNMENT
57
Political and
Private
Activities
Security
Civil servants are encouraged to join the trade union which represents the grade
to which they belong. The National Whitley Council, consisting of senior officials
(the Official Side) and representatives of the unions (the Trade Union Side),
discusses conditions of service of staff and provides a forum for consultation. There
are Whitley committees in all government departments. Pay negotiations are
conducted directly with the individual unions or with the Trade Union Side
representing all the unions.
Civil servants are expected to serve loyally the Government of the day, regardless
of its political composition. To maintain their reputation for political impartiality,
some restrictions are placed on their freedom to participate in political activities.
No civil servant may be a member of Parliament, or (with certain exceptions
corresponding to the ‘politically free’ group shown below) be adopted as
parliamentary candidate.
Civil Service rules place staff in three groups for the purpose of political
activities: (i) the ‘politically free’ group, consisting of industrial and non-office
grades, who are free to engage in any political activity including standing for
Parliament (although they would have to resign from the Service if elected); (2)
the ‘politically restricted’ group, consisting of all staff above Executive Officer
level, together with those Executive Officers and certain related grades such as
Information Officers, who are debarred from national political activities but may
apply for permission to take part in local political activities; and (3) the
‘intermediate’ group, comprising all other staff—mainly clerical and typing
grades—who may apply for permission to take part in national or local political
activity apart from adoption as a parliamentary candidate.
Where required, permission is granted to the maximum extent consistent with
the reputation of the Civil Service for political impartiality and the avoidance of
any conflict with official duties. It is granted subject to a code of discretion
requiring moderation and the avoidance of embarrassment to ministers.
Generally, there are no restrictions on the private activities of civil servants,
provided that these do not bring discredit on the Civil Service, and that there is no
possibility of conflict with official duties. For instance, a civil servant is required to
seek permission before taking part in any outside activity which involves the use of
official experience, or before accepting a directorship in any company holding a
contract with his or her department.
As a general rule the political views of civil servants are not a matter of official
concern. However, no one whose loyalty is in doubt may be employed on work
vital to the security of the State. For this reason certain posts are not open to anyone
known to be a member of a Communist or Fascist organisation, or associated with
such an organisation in a way that raises legitimate doubts about his or her
reliability, or to anyone whose reliability may be in doubt for any other reason.
Each department is responsible for its own internal security, advised as necessary
by the Security Service. The Security Commission, if requested to do so by the
Prime Minister after consultation with the Leader of the Opposition, may
investigate any report on breaches of security in the public service and advise on
changes in security procedure.
Local Government
A wide range of public services is provided by democratically elected local
authorities throughout the United Kingdom. The gradual expansion of local
authority services, particularly in the period between the late 1940s and mid-19703,
has inevitably led to a steady rise in local government expenditure and in its
58
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Principal Types
of Local
Authority
Election of
Councils
support from central funds. In recent years central government has sought to check
this growth as part of a general policy of reducing public expenditure, and at local
level sections of the electorate have protested at having to meet the considerable
annual increases in ‘rates’ (local property taxes—see p 62). The Government has
emphasised the need to achieve substantial reductions in public expenditure in
order to redress the balance between the public and private sectors of the national
economy and has asked local authorities to reduce their expenditure in line with
reductions being made in its own spending. In particular, since manpower forms
such a significant part of expenditure, they have been urged to reduce staff levels.
The specific powers and duties of local authorities are conferred on them by
Parliament, or by measures made under its authority. The actual administration,
and the exercise of discretion within statutory limits, are the responsibility of the
local authority. In the case of certain services, however, ministers have powers to
secure a measure of national uniformity in the standard of a service provided, to
safeguard public health, or to protect the rights of individual citizens. For some
services the minister concerned has wide powers of supervision; for others there
are strictly limited powers.
The main links between local authorities and the central government are: in
England, the Department of the Environment; in Scotland, the Scottish
Development Department; in Wales, the Welsh Office; and in Northern Ireland,
the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland.
England and Wales (outside Greater London) is divided into 53 large county
authorities, within which there are 369 smaller district authorities. Both types of
authority have independent, locally elected councils, and have separate functions
to perform. County authorities normally provide the large-scale local government
services, while the districts are responsible for the more local ones (see pp 59—60).
However, in six of the English counties, which are heavily populated and known as
‘metropolitan’ counties, responsibility for some large-scale services rests with the
district authorities. The local government system in Wales closely resembles that in
non-metropolitan areas in England. English parish councils or meetings serve as
focuses for local opinion as bodies with limited powers of local interest. In Wales
community councils have similar functions.
Greater London—an administrative area of about 1,5 80 sq km (61 o sq miles) and
a population of some 7 million—is administered by the Greater London Council,
the councils of 32 London boroughs and the Corporation of the City of London.
On the mainland of Scotland local government is on a two-tier basis: nine
regions are divided into 53 districts, each area having its own elected council. There
are three virtually all-purpose authorities for Orkney, Shetland and the Western
Isles. Provision is made for local community councils to be formed, although these
councils have no statutory functions and are not local authorities.
The pattern of local authorities, and of their electoral arrangements, is kept up to
date by Boundary Commissions for England, Wales and Scotland.
In Northern Ireland 26 district councils are responsible for local environmental
and certain other services. Statutory bodies and local offices, responsible to central
departments, administer major services such as roads, water, education, health, and
housing.
Local authority councils consist of a number of elected unpaid councillors presided
over by a chairman. They can claim a flat-rate attendance allowance for
performing council business; they are also entitled to travelling and subsistence
allowances. Parish and community councillors cannot claim expenses for duties
within their own areas.
GOVERNMENT
59
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland each council annually elects a chairman
and vice-chairman. Some districts have the ceremonial title of borough, or city,
both granted by royal authority (in Northern Ireland by the Secretary of State). In
boroughs and cities the chairman is normally known as the Mayor (in the City of
London and certain other large cities, he or she is known as the Lord Mayor). In
Scottish regions and islands areas the chairman is called the convener and the
chairman of the district councils of each of the four cities is called the Lord Provost.
No general title is laid down for the chairmen of the other district councils, but
some are known as conveners, while others continue to use the old title of
‘provost’.
Elections for any form of local government normally take place every four
years. Metropolitan district elections are held for a third of the seats in each year
when there is no county council election. Non-metropolitan district councils may
adopt the same procedure or opt for whole council elections.
Anyone is entitled to vote at a local government election in Great Britain
provided that he or she is aged 18 years or over, is a British subject or a citizen of the
Irish Republic, is not subject to any legal incapacity and is registered as a local
government elector for the area for which the election is held. To qualify for
registration a person must be resident in the council area on the qualifying date. In
Northern Ireland there are slightly different requirements.
A candidate for election as councillor normally stands as a representative of one
of the national political parties, of some local interest, or as an independent.
Candidates must be British subjects or citizens of the Irish Republic and aged 21 or
over. In addition they must be registered as a local elector in the area of the local
authority to which they seek election; or have resided or occupied (as owner or
tenant) land or other premises in that area during the whole of the 12 months
preceding the day on which they are nominated as candidates or, in that 12 months,
have had their principal or only place of work there. Candidates are also subject to
a number of statutory disqualifications.
Local authority areas are generally divided into electoral areas for local council
elections. Administrative counties in England and Wales are divided into electoral
divisions returning one or more councillors. Districts in England, Wales and
Northern Ireland are divided into electoral ‘wards’. In Scotland in the regions and
islands areas the electoral areas are called electoral divisions, each returning a single
member; the districts are divided into wards, similarly returning a single member.
For parish or community council elections in England and Wales, each parish or
community, or ward of a parish or community (or, in some cases, a combination of
parishes or communities) forms an electoral area which returns one or more
members. For elections to the Greater London Council, Greater London is divided
into electoral divisions, each returning one councillor.
The procedure for local government voting in Great Britain is similar to that for
parliamentary elections, although postal voting is more restricted. There is no
postal voting for parish or community council elections. Each elector has one vote
for each seat contested in the electoral area: he or she need not record every vote,
but must not give more than one vote for each candidate. In Northern Ireland local
government elections are held on the basis of proportional representation and
electoral wards are grouped into district electoral areas.
Functions and Local authorities’ functions are far reaching. Some are primarily duties, others
Services purely permissive.
Broadly speaking, functions in England and Wales are divided between county
and district councils on the basis that county councils are responsible for matters
requiring planning and administration over wide areas or requiring the support of
6o
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Internal
Organisation of
Local
Authorities
substantial resources. Within the metropolitan areas district councils are
responsible for functions needing substantial resources because they have
populations large enough to give such support. District councils as a whole
administer functions of more local significance. In London the division of
functions is slightly different.
English county councils are generally responsible for strategic planning,
transportation planning, highways, traffic regulation, consumer protection, refuse
disposal, police and the fire service. Education, libraries and the personal social
services are functions of county councils in non-metropolitan areas and of district
councils in metropolitan areas. All district councils are responsible, for instance, for
environmental health, housing, decisions on most planning applications, and
refuse collection. They may also provide off-street car parks subject to the consent
of the county council. Powers to operate some functions—such as the provision of
museums, art galleries and parks—are available at both levels; arrangements
depend on local agreement.
In Greater London the boroughs and the City Corporation are responsible for
the same range of functions as district councils in metropolitan areas (with the
addition of consumer protection). The Greater London Council (GLC) deals only
with services which require unified administration and control over the whole
area. In inner London education is administered by the Inner London Education
Authority, an autonomous committee of the GLC. Responsibility for highways in
London is divided according to the type of road: the main strategic road network is
a matter for the GLC, while the boroughs look after other roads. The boroughs
have prime responsibility for the provision of housing. The GLC has transferred its
housing stock to the boroughs and surrounding districts and has offered tenants the
chance to buy their own homes. It now concentrates on its strategic role focusing
attention on areas of particular housing need. London’s police force (see p 97) is
directly responsible to the Home Secretary.
In Wales the division of functions between county and district councils is much
the same as that between county and district councils in non-metropolitan areas of
England.
Local authorities in England and Wales may arrange for most of their functions
to be carried out on their behalf by another local authority. Exceptions are
functions relating to education, police, the personal social services and national
parks.
In Scotland the regional and district authorities discharge local government
functions in a way broadly similar to that of authorities in England and Wales.
Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles, because of their isolation from the
mainland, have single, virtually all-purpose authorities.
In Northern Ireland, local environmental and certain other services are
administered by the district councils, but responsibility for planning, roads, water
supply and sewerage services is exercised in each district by a local office of the
Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland working closely with the
district council and its staff. Area boards, responsible to central departments,
administer locally education, public libraries and the health and personal social
services. The Northern Ireland Housing Executive, responsible to the Department
of the Environment, administers housing.
Local authorities have considerable freedom to make internal arrangements for
carrying out their duties. Most use the committee system, whereby policy and
principle are decided in full council, and committees administer the various
services. Parish and community councils in England and Wales are often able to do
their work efficiently in full session although they appoint committees from time
Officers and
Employees
Local
Government
Finance
Government
Grants
GOVERNMENT 6l
to time as necessary. Some councils have policy advisory or co-ordinating
committees with powers to originate policy, subject to the approval of the full
council. The powers and duties of local authority committees (which may be
advisory or executive) are usually laid down in the appointing council’s standing
orders.
A council is free to delegate all its powers to committees, except those in
connection with raising loans, levying rates (see p 62), or making financial
demands on other authorities liable to contribute; these are legally reserved to the
council as a whole.
Local authorities can co-operate or share among themselves the discharge of
their functions.
The public and the press are admitted to all council and committee meetings but
may be excluded while a particular item is considered if the council or committee
decides that publicity would not be in the public interest.
The execution of council policy rests with salaried officers and employees, of
whom there are over 2 million in Great Britain. These include administrative,
professional and technical staff, teachers and manual workers. Although a few
appointments must be made by all the authorities responsible for the functions
concerned, councils are individually responsible within national policy require¬
ments for determining the size, composition and deployment of their workforces.
An authority must not, however, employ one of its own councillors. In Northern
Ireland, each council must by law appoint a clerk of the council as its chief officer.
As a general rule, employees are of three kinds: heads of departments or chief
officers; administrative, professional, clerical and technical staff; and manual
workers. Senior staff appointments are usually made on the recommendation of
the committee or committees particularly concerned; most junior appointments
are made by heads of departments, who are also responsible for engaging manual
workers. Appointments and engagements always conform to the council’s set
establishment, and committees are informed of appointments which they have not
made themselves.
Pay and conditions of service for local authority staff are a matter for each
council, although there are recommended scales.
Local authority expenditure in the United Kingdom (on both current and capital
accounts) was about ^28,000 million in 1980. A clear distinction is made between
capital and current expenditure. Capital expenditure (just under a quarter of the
total) is financed partly from the current account surplus (about half), partly from
borrowing (two-fifths) and the remainder from grants and other income.
Housing, the major element, accounted for over half the total in 1980. Current
expenditure by local authorities accounts for just over a quarter of total current
account spending by central and local government. The education service
represents over a third of this expenditure, followed by the police, personal social
services, roads (including lighting), public health and debt interest. Current
expenditure is financed mainly from central government grants (about three-
fifths) and from local rates (about one-third). Each local authority is responsible for
its own finance, although in a few cases several authorities combine to provide a
specialist service which it would be uneconomic for each to provide on its own.
Government ‘rate support grants’ to local authorities are paid in aid of revenues
generally. Grants are also paid towards the cost of specific services—either towards
current expenditure, such as on the police, or towards capital expenditure, such as
on the acquisition and clearance of derelict land. (In Wales and Scotland approved
schemes for acquiring and clearing derelict land are financed by the Welsh and
62
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Rates
Scottish Development Agencies.) Annual subsidies are paid for local authority
housing.
Grants are also made towards the cost of rate rebates for people with low
incomes.
A new system for the distribution of rate support grant in England and Wales
took effect in 1981—82. This consists of a single block grant together with
prescribed ceilings for the level of total local authority capital expenditure.
Authorities receive annual capital amounts for housing, education, social services,
transport and other services, but are free to determine their own spending priorities
by the transfer of resources from one category to another. One of the effects of the
new system is to ensure that high-spending authorities do not pre-empt even larger
shares of government money, reducing the amount available to those which
observe national financial guidelines.
In Scotland, the old system has been retained, the grant being distributed in three
parts: the ‘needs’ element, designed to give most help to authorities whose
spending needs are greatest; the ‘resources’ element, used to supplement the rate
income of authorities whose rateable value per head of population falls below a
standard figure, prescribed for each year; and the ‘domestic’ element, which
compensates authorities for loss of rate income from reductions in rate poundage
which they are required to give to householders. Excessive and unreasonable
expenditure levels, however, are discouraged by central government which can
make selective grant reductions. Local authority capital expenditure has been
subject to central government control since 1975.
In Northern Ireland district councils receive certain specific grants (for example,
for the acquisition of open space) and grants to compensate them for loss of rate
income arising from the partial derating of industrial premises. In addition,
councils whose rating resources are below a standard level receive a resources grant
to bring them up to that level.
Rates are local taxes paid by the occupiers of land and property (with certain
exceptions, see below) to meet part of the cost of local services. Each occupier’s
payment is calculated annually by the rating authority by multiplying the rateable
value of a property (broadly equivalent to its annual rental value) by the rate
poundage—an amount per £ of rateable value fixed by the authority according to
its projected financial needs. Rateable values are assessed periodically, and there is a
system of appeals for disputed assessments. Crown (government) property is not
rateable but payments are made, based on values assessed by the Treasury Valuer,
in lieu of rates.
Government grants reduce domestic rates below the levels paid by commercial
concerns, and provide rebates for people with low incomes. Rating relief is
available in certain circumstances on premises adapted for the use of the disabled.
Agricultural land and buildings (apart from living accommodation) and places of
religious worship are exempted from rates. Charities pay half the full rate on
premises occupied for charitable purposes and may be given further relief by rating
authorities, who can also reduce or remit the rates for a wide range of non-profit-
making bodies. Rates may be levied on empty properties at any percentage up to
the full amount and in the case of empty commercial property a surcharge may be
payable.
In Scotland industrial (including freight transport) premises in Scotland are
rated at a half of the net annual value. There is empty property rating but no empty
property surcharge.
In Northern Ireland industrial (including freight transport) premises are rated at
a quarter of net annual value. Empty properties are not rated.
GOVERNMENT
63
Loans
Control of Finance
Local
Government
Complaints
System
Local authorities may raise loans to finance capital expenditure under general
powers. For items of expenditure in key sectors (such as education, housing and
roads) those in England and Wales must seek prior central government approval.
For other capital expenditure, each authority receives an annual loan authorisation
within which it determines the sums to borrow and the projects to undertake. The
GLC applies annually for parliamentary sanction to raise the money needed for
capital expenditure while the City of London has ancient charter powers to cover
its borrowings. In Northern Ireland long-term borrowing by district councils is
subject to central approval; in Scotland central approval is given to capital
expenditure, not to loans.
Local authorities may raise long-term loans by means of private mortgages,
issuing stock upon the Stock Exchange and bonds which may or may not be
quoted on the Stock Exchange. Local authorities also have right of access to the
Public Works Loan Board, financed by the Exchequer, or, in Northern Ireland, to
the Government Loans Fund, for long-term borrowing to finance a proportion of
their reckonable capital payments, and may borrow temporarily for a limited
proportion of their current outstanding loan debt.
Local councils normally have a finance committee to keep their financial policy
under constant review. They must have their accounts audited.
A complaints system for local government in England, Wales and Scotland
involves independent statutory Commissions for Local Administration
comprising local commissioners (local government Ombudsmen). The English
Commission consists of three local commissioners and the Welsh and Scottish
commissions have one each. All commissioners are responsible in their particular
area for investigating citizens’ complaints of maladministration by local
authorities. The commissioners help local authority councillors to protect the
interests of constituents.
In Northern Ireland a Commissioner for Complaints deals with complaints
alleging injustices suffered as a result of maladministration by district councils and
certain other public bodies.
The Fire Services
Every part of Britain is covered by a local fire service, which is subject to a measure
of central control. Other than in Northern Ireland, the cost is borne by local
authorities aided by central government through the rate support grant.
Each of the 64 fire authorities must by law make provision for fire-fighting, and
maintain a brigade of sufficient strength to meet all normal requirements (in some
parts of Scotland, authorities combine to provide fire cover). Other fire-fighting
organisations are maintained, for instance, by the Army and Air Force
Departments of the Ministry of Defence; by the Department of Industry at certain
establishments; and by some large industrial and commercial concerns.
The Home Secretary and the Secretary of State for Scotland have central
responsibility in England and Wales and in Scotland respectively. Central control
is directed mainly towards ensuring the operational efficiency of brigades.
Ministers make regulations on such matters as appointments and promotions,
standards of training and equipment, pensions, and disciplinary matters. Their
approval is also required for reductions in the operational establishments of fire
brigades. Each minister is advised by a Central Fire Brigades Advisory Council,
consisting of officers of the respective home departments, representatives of local
authorities and of the associations representing members of fire brigades and other
64
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Fire Prevention
Research
Special Services
Fire Losses
people with special qualifications, appointed by the minister concerned.
Inspectorates of fire services advise on operational and technical matters. Most fire
brigades include part-time personnel to augment and support the full-time
strength in return for a retaining fee and call-out and attendance fee. Fire
authorities also employ people for duties in controls communications and
mobilising and staff duties. There are about 39,000 full-time and 18,500 part-time
operational members of fire brigades in Britain.
Every fire authority must buy appliances and equipment to meet all normal fire¬
fighting requirements in its area. Certain equipment is standardised so that there is
complete interchangeability when a fire is attended by more than one brigade. The
principal types of fire-fighting appliances are bought by fire authorities to
specifications approved by central government on the advice of the Central Fire
Brigades Advisory Councils. The specifications ensure that minimum standards
are maintained, and allow sufficient freedom of design to meet special
circumstances and encourage further developments.
' Each fire authority must appoint a Chief Fire Officer (Firemaster in Scotland)
who exercises central control from brigade headquarters. Divisional officers in
charge of the geographical divisions into which most brigade areas are divided are
responsible for mobilising forces to deal with outbreaks of fire. Constant
communication is maintained between divisional and brigade headquarters and, if
a fire should be beyond the capabilities of a division, help is sent from one or more
neighbouring divisions, or even from another fire authority. The nearest available
force is sent to a fire, regardless of area boundaries.
Fire authorities are concerned in some way with fire precautions in most buildings
used by the public and have major responsibility in enforcing legislation
concerning fire precautions. They must also make efficient arrangements for
giving advice on fire prevention, restricting the spread of fires, and means of
escape. Courses in fire prevention are held at the Fire Service Technical College for
fire brigade officers. In addition to their enforcement and advisory duties, brigades
are also involved in education and publicity to promote fire safety, particularly in
the home. The Government is advised on prevention by thejoint Fire Prevention
Committee of the Central Fire Brigades Advisory Councils, representing the fire
service and central and local authorities.
Research into health hazards to firemen, brigade organisation and fire-fighting
equipment is conducted by the Home Office with the help of the fire service under
the auspices of thejoint Committee on Fire Research of the Central Fire Brigades
Advisory Councils. Individual projects are undertaken by the Home Office
Scientific Advisory Branch or, under contract to the Home Office, by other
government agencies, notably the Fire Research Station, which is part of the
Building Research Establishment of the Department of the Environment, or by
private consultants. The Fire Research Station is the main organisation studying
and investigating technical aspects of fire.
Fire authorities have discretion to use their brigades and equipment, free of charge,
in a variety of non-fire emergencies (such as rail, road and aircraft accidents,
collapse of buildings, flooding of premises, leakage of harmful gas or liquids and
the rescue of people or animals from dangerous situations).
The direct cost of damage to buildings and goods destroyed by fires in Great
Britain in 1980 amounted to an estimated ^470 million (consequential losses from
the interruption of business are not included in this total). Most fires involving
GOVERNMENT
65
Fire Casualties
heavy losses occur when the premises are unattended; and fires are more likely to
start in storage areas than in production departments. Industries which suffer most
severely include engineering and electrical firms, textiles, food, drink and tobacco,
warehousing, chemical and allied industries, paper, printing and publishing firms,
and retailing.
About 1,000 people, particularly young children and the elderly, die in fires every
year (most of them at home) and a further 9,000 or so suffer injuries. Among the
chief causes of fatal fires are ignition of upholstery, bedding and clothing by
smokers’ materials and heaters.
3 Overseas Relations
Administration
Britain’s varied and world-wide overseas relations reflect both its traditional
position as a major trading and maritime power whose people have settled in many
countries throughout the world, and its present concern to help to maintain peace
and to secure world-wide economic and social progress through international co¬
operation. It has diplomatic relations with some 150 countries, and with about 20
of these has common security arrangements, principally through the North
Atlantic Treaty Organisation. Commercial activities have helped Britain to
maintain its position as a world financial centre. It has considerable overseas
investments and its international trading pattern reflects its dependence on imports
for nearly half its food and more than half of its raw material requirements and the
relatively high proportion of its gross national product accounted for by exports
(over a third); for details of trade and payments, see Chapter 19. British
development assistance is provided to over 120 countries.
Since 1945 Britain has placed itself in a number of common decision-making
structures or consultative processes with other nations with a view to achieving
common solutions to shared problems—a recognition that, in an increasingly
inter-dependent world, the attainment of overseas objectives and the ability to
exert influence in support of them can best be provided for through co-operation
on a regional or global basis. As a result, Britain is now a member of some 120
international organisations ranging from the world-wide United Nations
concerned with problems of world peace, international economic co-operation
and social issues to regionally based and technically orientated bodies. In particular,
it is a member of the European Community whose policies it helps to determine,
and is increasingly co-ordinating its overseas policies through the Community’s
political co-operation mechanism (see p 71). As a member of the Commonwealth,
Britain is a part of a representative cross-section of the international community,
which has evolved from the British Empire (since 1945 Britain has progressively,
and largely peacefully, dismantled its Empire and prepared some 40 countries
for independence) and whose 45 members share a common language, common
technical standards, similar systems of law and close professional, academic, and
commercial links.
Britain has strong ties, also, with the United States, including a common
language and many common political and cultural traditions.
A long involvement in world affairs has given Britain both a vital interest and a
firm belief in the maintenance of international order governed by respect for a
generally accepted system of law. As a permanent member of the United Nations
Security Council it makes support for the United Nations a central feature of its
foreign policy.
The responsibilities of many government departments have a significant overseas
dimension, but the general conduct of overseas relations is the responsibility of the
Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Aflairs acting through the
Foreign and Commonwealth Office and British diplomatic posts overseas. The
latter comprise embassies and high commissions in nearly 130 countries, together
with subordinate consulates general and consulates, and missions at eight
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
6?
The British
Council
multilateral organisations. These posts, like the Foreign and Commonwealth
Office, are staffed by members of the Diplomatic Service and locally engaged staff.
Excluding supporting administrative and communications services, about a
quarter of the staff are employed on political and economic work, nearly a third on
export promotion and other commercial matters, a quarter on consular and
immigration work, and the remainder on aid administration and information and
cultural work. Other departments which have a primary concern with overseas
relations include the Ministry of Defence, the Department of Trade, the Treasury
and the Overseas Development Administration which is part of the Foreign and
Commonwealth Office; but the involvement of most has increased in recent years
with the growing dependence of domestic economic policy on international
decisions and with Britain’s membership of the European Community.
Where questions of overseas policy involve matters within the responsibility of
other departments, the Foreign and Commonwealth Office formulates policy in
consultation with the departments concerned. The balance of responsibilities is a
matter of constant adjustment, and the department with the predominant
functional interest, even though it may be primarily domestic, takes the lead. This
is particularly so in policy concerning the European Community and international
monetary matters. In the case of policy towards the Community, the Foreign and
Commonwealth Office exercises its co-ordinating role at official level through the
machinery of the Cabinet Office.
Other bodies whose work has an overseas dimension include the British
Overseas Trade Board and the Export Credits Guarantee Department which
provide export services for industry; the Crown Agents for Oversea Governments
and Administrations which helps to arrange purchases from British aid funds and
appointments under technical co-operation programmes; and the British Council.
The British Council was founded in 1934 to promote a wider knowledge of
Britain and the English language abroad and to develop closer cultural relations
between Britain and other countries. (For Britain’s international scientific
relations, see pp 341—2.) The activities of the Council, which has staff in over 80
countries, include the teaching of English and the recruitment of British teachers
for posts overseas, administering the Government’s educational assistance and
technical co-operation training programmes; fostering personal contacts overseas
and in Britain between British and overseas people, especially in the educational,
professional and scientific areas; running, or helping to maintain, libraries of
British books and periodicals overseas and providing information through touring
exhibitions and bibliographical services; and presenting overseas the best of British
arts. In Britain, the Council is concerned mainly with arranging programmes for
professional visitors and with the placing, administration and welfare of overseas
students. A basic principle is that the Council’s work should be of benefit both to
Britain and to the receiving country.
About 79 per cent of the Council’s budget, which totalled some £118 million in
1981-82, is provided by the Foreign and Commonwealth Office (including funds
from the Overseas Development Administration) and on its behalf the Council is
responsible for the implementation of more than 30 cultural agreements with
other countries. Overseas it acts as education adviser to Britain’s diplomatic
missions and is responsible for educational assistance in developing countries
in which it is represented. Increasingly, the Council is undertaking education
projects paid for by overseas clients and is providing English classes abroad; these
activities are expected to produce about 21 per cent (some £25 million) of its
income in 1981—82.
68
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Britain’s
Accession
Community
Institutions
Membership of the European Community
Britain joined the European Community on 1 January 1973 and its membership
was endorsed in a national referendum in 1975. The other members are Belgium,
France, the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, Luxembourg and the
Netherlands, the original six members; Denmark and the Irish Republic which
joined with Britain in 1973 ; and Greece which became a member in 1981. With its
partners, Britain seeks to develop the Community in the interests of all its
members. It supports the membership applications of Portugal and Spain, seeing
enlargement as a means of strengthening democracy in Europe.
The European Community consists of three communities set up by separate
treaties—the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC), the European
Economic Community (EEC) and the European Atomic Energy Community
(Euratom). The Community is the world’s largest trading block, accounting for
about a third of world trade. Designed to lay the foundations for a closer union
between the peoples of Europe and to promote economic expansion by means of a
common market and the gradual approximation of member states’ economic
policies, the Community has moved towards these objectives by abolishing
internal tariffs and certain other trade barriers, establishing a common customs
tariff, and making provision for the free movement of labour, capital and services.
Over 40 per cent of British exports go to the other member states. There is also a
common policy for agriculture. Overseas countries having special links with
Community member states are accorded preferential treatment in aid and the
development of trade.
A common market for coal and steel is designed to ensure an orderly supply of
these commodities to member states. The Coal and Steel Community’s funds are
raised by a levy on production, and investment grants are given to encourage the
modernisation of the industries for research, and for social measures to help to re¬
deploy coal and steel workers. Loans are also raised which promote workers’
housing and aid capital investment.
One of the Community’s aims is to co-ordinate member states’ nuclear energy
industries and their other peaceful nuclear activities. Since 1959 there has been a
common market for all nuclear materials and a common control system prevents
their diversion to purposes other than those declared. There is also a co-ordinated
research programme in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
By the Treaty of Accession, signed in January 1972, Britain became a party to the
two treaties of Rome establishing the EEC and Euratom. Accession to the ECSC
was effected by a decision of the Council of Ministers. The European Communities
Act 1972 made the legislative changes necessary for Britain to comply with the
obligations entailed by membership of the Community and to exercise the rights
of membership.
In 1977, following a transitional period during which tariffs on trade in
industrial products between Britain and the original six members were
progressively reduced, the internal tariffs were abolished and the phased
introduction of the common customs tariff on British imports from countries
neither members of the Community, nor having any special arrangements with it,
was completed. Britain also adopted, progressively, the Community system of
agricultural support under the Common Agricultural Policy. The period of
adjustment for payments to the Community budget ended in 1979.
The separate institutions established by the treaties for each of the three
communities were merged in 1967. Each state has one representative on the
(1978 figures)
I * Estimate
£
Q)
\
£
£$o*
#
Irish
Republic
"1
Norway
Denmark
Netherlands
The European Community
Members
Greenland, part of
Denmark, is not shown
] Applicant members
Greece
Primary
Energy-
Production
million
TO#1
(1) PPS = Purchasing Power Standard, a common unit
(9S TOP = tnnnA nf nil onniwalAn»
an identical volume of goods and services tor ■
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Council of Ministers; in the other institutions Britain’s representation is in line
with that of the other large member states (France, the Federal Republic of
Germany, and Italy). English is one of the Community’s official languages.
The Council of Ministers is the principal decision-making body for all major
community questions, member states being represented on it by foreign or other
ministers as appropriate to the subject under discussion. The presidency of the
Council changes at six-monthly intervals. Most Council decisions are taken on the
basis of a proposal by the Commission (see below). Some issues may be decided by
majority, or qualified majority, with votes weighted according to provisions in the
Treaty of Accession. Where very important interests of member states are
involved, however, the Council’s practice is to proceed only on the basis of
unanimity. The Committee of Permanent Representatives (COREPER),
composed of member states’ ambassadors to the Community, assists the Council
by preparing its meetings and co-ordinating the work of other subordinate bodies
and groups.
The Commission formulates detailed policy proposals for submission to the
Council of Ministers, promotes the Community interest, attempts to reconcile
national viewpoints and implements the provisions of the treaties and Community
measures. Limited powers of decision relating mainly to the detailed
administration of agriculture are delegated to it. It is composed of 14
commissioners nominated by member governments; two are from Britain. The
President of the Commission is its representative and is responsible for its general
administration. Each of the other commissioners is responsible for one or more of
the main Community activities. The Commission is pledged to act independently
of national or sectional interests and to formulate its proposals and administer
policy in the interests of the Community as a whole. Its proposals are made only
after extensive consultation with officials of the national governments and with
producers, trade unions, employers’ associations and many others.
The Court ofjustice interprets and adjudicates on the meaning of the treaties and
of any measures taken by the Council of Ministers and Commission under them,
hears complaints and appeals brought by or against Community institutions,
member states or individuals and gives preliminary rulings on questions referred to
it by courts in the member states. As a court of final appeal, its procedure in such
cases is broadly similar to that of the highest courts in member states; its rulings are
binding on member countries, Community institutions and individuals. The
Court consists of 11 judges assisted by five advocates-general who make reasoned
submissions concerning cases brought before the Court to help it in its
interpretation and application of Community law.
The European Parliament is composed of 434 members, 81 elected from Britain,
who sit according to party affiliation and not nationality. Direct elections to the
Parliament, originally a nominated body, were first held in June 1979, and in
future will be held every five years. The Parliament is consulted on and debates all
major policy issues of the Community. Members may question the Council of
Ministers and Commission, and have the power on a two-thirds majority to
dismiss the Commission. The Parliament can also reject in its entirety the draft
annual budget as presented by the Commission and approved by the Council. A
formal conciliation procedure has been adopted for use in the event of
disagreement between the Parliament and the Council of Ministers on matters
with major budgetary or financial implications.
The European Court of Auditors examines all Community revenue and
expenditure to see that it has been legally received and spent, and to ensure
sound financial management. It draws up an annual report, and may also submit
observations on specific questions at the request of the Community institutions.
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
71
Community
Policies1
External Relations
The Economic and Social Committee is a consultative body representing a
cross-section of economic interests. Its members (representing employers’
organisations, trade unions and other interests) are consulted by the Council of
Ministers and the Commission during the formulation of policy. Britain is entitled
to send 24 members out of a total of 156.
In addition to, and separately from, the institutions operating within the
Community framework established by treaty, the member states have set up
political co-operation machinery. Britain attaches considerable importance to this
and has made proposals to improve its effectiveness.
The Community’s heads of State or of Government meet at least three times a
year as the European Council which operates outside the treaty framework and
considers both Community matters and those arising in the context of political co¬
operation. It discusses issues unresolved in the Council of Ministers as well as
general Community problems and lays down guidelines and political direction for
future work.
Community policies are implemented by regulations, which are legally binding
and directly applicable in all membei countries; directives, which are binding, as to
the result to be achieved, on member states to which they are addressed but allow
national authorities to decide on means of implementation; decisions, which are
binding on those to whom they are addressed (for example, member states, firms,
or individuals); and recommendations and opinions, which have no binding force.
The Council can also indicate a general policy direction through resolutions.
The member Governments discuss a wide range of foreign policy issues and, where
possible, reach common positions. At the United Nations their policies are closely
co-ordinated, and they have voted together on a large number of issues. They
adopted a common strategy at the 1975 Helsinki Conference on Security and Co¬
operation in Europe and have continued to work closely at both the Belgrade
(1977-78) and Madrid (1980-81) review conferences. Following the European
Council’s Venice Declaration in June 1980, which set out the Community’s views
on the principles on which a comprehensive settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict
should be based, two Presidents of the Council of Ministers have visited the area
to discuss Community ideas with the parties concerned. The Community has
adopted a code of conduct on employment practices for member states’ companies
operating in South Africa, and supported efforts to promote an internationally
acceptable solution to the problem of Namibia. Following the British initiative,
the Community has proposed an international conference, to meet in two stages,
with a view to ending Soviet intervention in Afghanistan and restoring that
country’s independence and non-aligned status.
On international trade matters the Community adopted a common negotiating
position in the latest round of the multilateral trade negotiations under the General
Agreements on Tariffs and Trade (see p 328) which were concluded in 1979 and are
being implemented over an eight-year period. Commercial co-operation
agreements have been concluded with a number of countries in the Mediterranean
area, the South Asian sub-continent, Latin America and other areas and with the
Association of South East Asian Nations. Discussions covering trade and other
matters have taken place with regional groupings of Latin American, Arab and
South-East Asian countries.
The Community has also improved progressively its generalised scheme of
preferences, which covers manufactures and semi-manufactures exported by
1 Some details of Community policies as they affect British domestic affairs will be found in the
appropriate chapters.
72
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Internal Policies
developing countries, with the aim in particular of benefiting the poorest of them
(see p 328). A new scheme started in January 1981 and will run for ten years.
The second Lome Convention, which governs aid, trade and co-operation be¬
tween the Community and over 60 developing countries in Africa, the Caribbean
and the Pacific (ACP), came into operation in 1981. This provides for increased aid
and European Investment Bank lending of about £2,500 million, industrial and
agricultural co-operation, an extension of the scheme designed to stabilise the
commodity export earnings of the ACP countries, assistance for ACP mineral
producers whose production and income suffer from temporary disruptions
beyond their control, and duty-free access to the Community for ACP countries’
exports of all industrial and most agricultural goods, including improved access for
exports such as rum and beef. All British dependent territories (with the exception
of Bermuda, Gibraltar and Hong Kong), together with the overseas territories of
other Community members, are formally linked with the Community as a whole
under conditions parallel to those in the Lome Convention and have similar aid
and trade benefits.
Britain has played a leading part in urging the Community to adopt a new aid
and development policy based on the criterion of need and applicable on a world¬
wide basis, thereby encompassing those developing countries (many of which are
among the world’s poorest) not covered by the Lome Convention or having any
other special relationship with the Community. Although it is still small, the aid
programme for these non-associated states has grown steadily since 1976. The
Community also has a large food aid programme, worth over £200 million in
1981. (See also North-South Dialogue at the end of this chapter.)
All member countries contribute to a common budget which provides funds for
specific Community policies. This is largely financed by an ‘own resources’ system
of levies on agricultural imports, customs duties and a proportion, not exceeding 1
per cent, of the proceeds of the value added tax collected on an agreed range of
goods and services.
In the late 1970s Britain’s budgetary contributions were out of balance, resulting
in its being one of the largest net contributors despite its relatively low gross
domestic product per head. This problem was foreseen during the accession
negotiations, and Britain was given an assurance that, if unacceptable situations
arose, the very survival of the Community would demand that the institutions find
equitable solutions. In May 1980 the Community agreed on proposals providing
for more equitable net budgetary contributions by Britain for the years 1980 and
1981. It also agreed to review by 1982 the development of Community policies
and to make structural changes with a view to preventing the recurrence of such
‘unacceptable situations’ to any Community member. If this is not achieved by
1982, there will be similar arrangements for reducing Britain’s 1982 contribution
as provided for in 1980 and 1981. In Britain’s view, the Common Agricultural
Policy (see Chapter 14) absorbs too large a share of the budget in comparison with
other sectors such as industrial, regional, social and urban policies. (Expenditure on
the Policy accounts for nearly 70 per cent of the total budget, while regional policy
takes 8 • 5 per cent, social policy 5 -6 per cent, aid to developing countries 4-6 per cent
and projects concerned with research, energy, industry and transport 2-5 per cent.)
This situation, Britain believes, is detrimental to the fundamental Community
objective of strengthening the economies of the member states and, by reducing
regional differences, ensuring their harmonious development.
The European Monetary System (see p 180) was established in 1979 to promote
monetary stability in Europe. Britain does not participate in the exchange rate
mechanism of the scheme, but it is taking part in other aspects such as the
OVERSEAS RELATIONS * 73
development of the new European currency unit1 and of the European Monetary
Co-operation Fund.
The European Social Fund finances schemes for training and retraining young
people, migrant workers, workers in textile and clothing industries, the
handicapped and workers leaving agriculture. The European Regional
Development Fund (see p 196) provides grants for industrial and infrastructure
projects in the less developed or industrially declining regions of the Community
with the aim of reducing existing imbalances or preventing the creation of new
ones. Britain has received substantial grants from the two Funds, together with
grants and loans from the European Coal and Steel Community, the European
Investment Bank (see p 196) and the guidance section of the European Agricultural
Guidance and Guarantee Fund (see p 257).
Community industrial policy includes measures designed to deal with the
collapse of demand for steel; temporary mandatory production quotas have been
introduced in ordet to cut back production to the level of demand, thereby
allowing economic price levels to be obtained. Efforts are also being made to
restructure and modernise the industry so that it can become profitable without
governmental aid.
Other areas of action include energy, environment and transport policies.
The Commonwealth
The Commonwealth is a voluntary association of 45 independent states with a
combined population of over 1,000 million, about a quarter of the world total.
Britain participates fully in all its activities and values it as a means of consulting and
co-operating with peoples of widely differing cultures, thereby contributing to the
promotion of international understanding and peace.
Commonwealth members are a representative cross-section of mankind in all
stages of political and economic development. Their peoples are drawn from
practically all the world’s main races and from all continents. As some of its
members are very rich and others very poor, the Commonwealth acts as a bridge
between rich and poor nations.
The members are Australia, the Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize,
Botswana, Britain, Canada, Cyprus, Dominica, Fiji, The Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guyana, India, Jamaica, Kenya, Kiribati, Lesotho, Malawi, Malaysia,
Malta, Mauritius, Nauru, New Zealand, Nigeria, Papua New Guinea, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Sri Lanka, Swaziland, Tanzania, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tuvalu,
Uganda, Vanuatu, Western Samoa, Zambia and Zimbabwe. Nauru, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, and Tuvalu are special members entitled to take part
in all functional Commonwealth meetings and activities but not meetings of heads
of Government. The Queen is recognised as head of the Commonwealth; she is
also head of State in 16 countries2 (see p 30).
The origin of the Commonwealth lies in the gradual granting of self-
government to the older-established British colonies (later known as the
Dominions) in Australia, Canada, New Zealand and South Africa3 where
European settlement had occurred on a large scale. Their fully independent status
in relation to Britain was legally formulated in the Statute of Westminster of 1931.
1 The European currency unit (ecu) is defined as a ‘basket’ of all Community currencies and is used
within the Community for budgetary and other purposes.
2 On becoming independent on 1 November 1981 (with the Queen as head of State), Antigua and
Barbuda (see p 76) will apply to become the Commonwealth’s forty-sixth member.
3 South Africa ceased to be a member of the Commonwealth in 1961.
74
BRITAIN I982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Consultation
The
Common¬
wealth
Secretariat
The main expansion in Commonwealth membership, however, took place after
the second world war following Britain’s decision to guide its dependent
territories towards self-government and independence. This process began in 1947
with the independence of India and Pakistan,1 and in 1957 Ghana became the first
African dependency to become independent. By the end of the 1960s nearly all the
British dependencies in Africa had gained their independence as had many in the
Caribbean and in Asia.
As a member of the Commonwealth, Britain participates in a system of mutual
consultation and co-operation. The Commonwealth does not formulate central
policies on, say, economic or foreign affairs. Nevertheless the considerable
consultation and co-operation is of benefit to member countries and contributes to
international understanding. It led, for instance, to the Commonwealth playing a
significant role in the events leading to Zimbabwe’s independence in April 1980,
and in Commonwealth involvement, via an observer team, in the elections in
Uganda later that year.
Consultation takes place through diplomatic representatives known as High
Commissioners, meetings of heads of Government, specialised conferences of
other ministers and officials, expert groups, and discussions at international
conferences and the United Nations. Trade and cultural exhibitions and
conferences of professional and unofficial medical, cultural, educational and
economic organisations are other ways in which frequent contacts are made.
Heads of Government usually meet every two years, most recently in
Melbourne in 1981. Proceedings are normally in private which facilitates a frank
and informal exchange of views. On international affairs no formal decisions are
taken and no attempt is made to formulate specifically Commonwealth policies,
although, on occasion, common views on matters of major international concern
are formulated and reflected in the communiques issued at the end of the meetings.
One of the most important Commonwealth activities is consultation and co¬
operation in economic affairs, and finance ministers meet annually to discuss world
economic problems. In recent years, they have paid particular attention to the
problems of development and the establishment of a fairer international economic
order. Other ministerial meetings include those of education, health and law
ministers which take place every two or three years.
The Commonwealth Secretariat provides the central organisation for consultation
and co-operation among member states. Established in London in 1965, headed
by a Secretary-General appointed by the heads of Government, and financed
by member Governments, the Secretariat is responsible to Commonwealth
Governments collectively.
As the main agency for multilateral communication between Governments, the
Secretariat promotes consultation, disseminates information on matters of
common concern, and organises meetings and conferences, including those of
heads of Government and of ministers. It co-ordinates many Commonwealth
activities, its main areas of operation being international affairs, economic affairs,
education, information, legal matters, medical and scientific affairs, youth
activities, and applied studies in government. It also administers the
Commonwealth Fund for Technical Co-operation.
Because of its neutral position the Secretariat has been able to make its good
offices available in cases of dispute, and has carried out, on request, special
assignments requiring demonstrable impartiality.
1 Pakistan left the Commonwealth in 1972.
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
75
Common¬
wealth Fund
for Technical
Co-operation
Other
Technical
Co-operation
Other
Organisations
Britain plays an active part in the work of the Commonwealth Fund for Technical
Co-operation established within the Commonwealth Secretariat to provide
technical co-operation for economic and social development in Commonwealth
developing countries. The Fund is financed by contributions from both developed
and developing states, Britain contributing about a third of its expenditure.
The Fund provides experts to undertake advisory assignments or fill specific
posts and uses consultancy firms to make studies for governments. Its education
and training programme is of particular help in raising levels of technical and
vocational skill, and makes wide use of training facilities within developing
member countries for the benefit of other developing countries. It has a special
programme to help countries develop their exports, another on food production
and rural development and a small technical assistance group to give advice in key
areas. An industrial development unit, the main executive agency of the
Commonwealth Action Programme of Industrial Co-operation established in
1979, investigates the feasibility of establishing new industries in developing
countries and helps to prepare agreed projects.
Expenditure by Britain on technical co-operation with Commonwealth
developing countries in 1980 was nearly ^ :4 million, the greater part being spent
on financing staff for service for Commonwealth Governments and in financing
training places in Britain for people from Commonwealth countries; volunteers
are also sent from Britain to serve overseas. Other help includes consultancy
services, the supply of training and research equipment, and the provision of advice
by British scientific and technical institutions.
Britain is a major contributor to the Commonwealth Scholarship and
Fellowship Plan, a system of awards for people of high intellectual promise to
study in Commonwealth countries other than their own, and provides 650 awards
annually out of a total of over 1,000 within the scheme. Under the Aid for the
Commonwealth Teaching of Science Scheme, Britain sends out experts to serve in
curriculum development units, institutes of education and the inspectorates of
ministries of education.
Financial disbursement of official development assistance to Commonwealth
developing countries totalled some ^325 million in 1980. In addition some
received investment finance from the Commonwealth Development Corporation.
A large number of organisations are concerned with the Commonwealth. The
Commonwealth Institute, financed largely by the British Government, promotes
knowledge about the Commonwealth through films, library services, lecture
tours by members of the staff and study conferences for students; its headquarters
in London has a permanent public exhibition depicting the life of member states,
each country financing its own stand. The Commonwealth Foundation, financed
by member Governments, administers a fund for increasing co-operation between
professional organisations; it has assisted in the creation of 20 Commonwealth¬
wide professional associations, helped in the creation and growth of many national
ones, and has created 16 multi-disciplinary professional centres. The Royal
Commonwealth Society, which is over 100 years old, is a centre for study and
discussion, its library in London having one of the largest collections on the
Commonwealth. The Society has branches, affiliated organisations and
representatives in many countries.
In keeping with the fact that the Commonwealth is an association of peoples as
well as Governments, many unofficial organisations, professional bodies and
voluntary societies provide machinery for co-operation. Professional bodies
include associations of architects, doctors, engineers, lawyers, librarians.
DEPEN¬
DENCIES AND
ASSOCIATED
STATES
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
magistrates, museum curators, nurses, pharmacists, planners, surveyors and veter¬
inary surgeons. Other organisations include the Commonwealth Parliamentary
Association which organises an annual conference of parliamentarians, the
Commonwealth Press Union, the Commonwealth Broadcasting Association,
the Commonwealth Youth Exchange Council, the Commonwealth Games
Federation and the Commonwealth Arts Association.
There are 13 remaining British dependent territories: Anguilla, Bermuda,
British Antarctic Territory, British Indian Ocean Territory, British Virgin Islands,
Cayman Islands, Falkland Islands and Dependencies, Gibraltar, Hong Kong,
Montserrat, Pitcairn Island, St Helena and Dependencies and the Turks and Caicos
Islands.
The population of the dependencies is about 5-2 million, of which some 5
million live in Hong Kong. Few of the dependencies are rich in natural resources,
and some are scattered groups of islands. There are no permanent inhabitants in the
British Antarctic Territory or British Indian Ocean Territory.
Most dependencies have considerable self-government with their own
legislature and civil service. Britain is generally responsible, through a Governor,
for defence, internal security and foreign affairs.
British policy is to give independence to those dependencies that want it, and not
to force it on those which do not. Belize, for instance, which has been internally
self-governing since 1964, became independent in September 1981. The Falkland
Islands and Gibraltar are the subject of territorial claims by Argentina and Spain
respectively. In both cases the inhabitants wish to retain the link with Britain,
which refuses to accept that British sovereignty is in doubt. The Government
is therefore pledged not to support any transfer of sovereignty against their
wishes.
Two territories in the Caribbean—St Kitts-Nevis and Antigua, which have a
combined population of some 123,000—are known as Associated States, a status
providing for complete control of internal affairs with Britain retaining
responsibility for external relations and defence. This status is entirely voluntary
and can be terminated at any time by either party. Unlike dependencies,
Associated States can proceed to independence without the consent or assistance of
the British Government. Legislation to this effect has to be approved by a two-
thirds majority in the territory’s legislature and by a two-thirds majority in a
referendum. Alternatively the British Government can end the associated status
through an Order in Council. This procedure was followed at the request of all
those which have become independent, and is also being followed by Antigua
which is to become the independent state of Antigua and Barbuda on 1 November
1981 (see p 73, footnote 2). Britain considers it right to take such action at an
Associated State’s request provided that it is satisfied that the majority of the people
want independence and that the proposed independence constitution makes
proper provision for the preservation of fundamental rights and freedoms.
International Peace and Security
One of Britain’s primary concerns is to protect its territorial integrity and political
independence, as well as the interests of its dependencies and of its allies. These
objectives are pursued through a national security policy in which defence is
coupled with strenuous efforts towards both removing or alleviating the causes of
international tension and achieving balanced and verifiable national arms control
agreements.
British defence policy (see Chapter 4) is based on the North Atlantic Treaty
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
77
Detente
Organisation (NATO)1 which member countries regard as their guarantor
of security, freedom and well-being, and as an important contribution to
international peace and stability. Britain devotes to NATO by far the greatest
proportion of its defence effort, concentrating this in areas where it can best
support NATO’s security objectives.
NATO’s twin aims are defence and the reduction of East-West tension. It
pursues a strategy of deterrence, designed to convince any potential aggressor that
the use of force, or the threat of it, carries risks far outweighing any likely
advantage. This is complemented by efforts to negotiate arms control agreements
with a view to maintaining or enhancing security at a lower level of risk and
expense. In late 1979 NATO put forward new proposals on arms control and
disarmament designed to improve security and increase confidence and stability in
Europe.
The Soviet Union’s invasion of Afghanistan has seriously damaged detente, but
NATO has reaffirmed its willingness to work for the improvement of East-West
relations. At the same time it has reminded the Soviet Union that detente cannot be
pursued in one region of the world regardless of developments in another and
called on it to take positive action, including withdrawal from Afghanistan, to live
up to the peaceful intentions it professes, and thereby restore the mutual confidence
necessary for a co-operative East-West relationship.
Outside Europe, Britain is committed to joint consultation with Australia, New
Zealand, Malaysia and Singapore under the Five Power Defence arrangement. It is
also responsible for the security of its overseas dependencies, the Associated States,
and Brunei, with which it has a special treaty relationship, and supports the UN
peace-keeping efforts.
Britain seeks genuine improvements in East-West relations based on undiminished
security. It takes an active part in arms control and disarmament negotiations and
in the process initiated by the 1975 Helsinki Conference on Security and Co¬
operation in Europe. It attaches great importance to the full and balanced
implementation by all participants of the provisions of the Conference’s Final Act
for increased stability in Europe and improved co-operation between the 35
European and North American signatory states. (The Final Act is a charter and
code of conduct of behaviour. While it is not a legally binding document, it
contains obligations which, the participants hope, will lead in time to a more
normal and open relationship between both Governments and peoples in East and
West. It includes undertakings about security, human rights, and co-operation in
economic, humanitarian and other matters.) At the 1977—78 Belgrade and the
1980—81 Madrid follow-up meetings Britain has participated fully in the thorough
exchanges of views on the implementation of the Final Act. It has also supported
France’s proposal at Madrid for a meeting to negotiate new confidence-building
measures (for example, notification of major troop movements and military
manoeuvres and the presence of observers at the latter) applicable from the
Atlantic to the Urals that would enhance security in Europe.
Together with France, the United States and the Soviet Union, Britain is a
signatory to the Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin which came into force in
1972. The Agreement reaffirms the four countries’ rights and responsibilities in
Berlin, and provides for greatly improved travel and communications facilities
between Berlin and both the Federal Republic of Germany and the German
1 NATO’s 15 member countries are Belgium, Britain, Canada, Denmark, France, the Federal Republic
of Germany, Greece, Iceland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands',' Norway, Portugal, Turkey and the
United States. France does not participate fully in NATO’s integrated military structure.
78
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Arms Control
and Disarma¬
ment
Democratic Republic, and for the maintenance and development of the ties
between West Berlin and the Federal Republic.
Britain has played a prominent part in all the major multilateral disarmament
negotiations and is a party to all, and a depository government for most, of the
treaties concluded as a result. It participates in the Committee on Disarmament and
in the arms control and disarmament work of the United Nations. At the UN
Special Session on Disarmament in 1978, Britain reaffirmed its commitment to
seek multilateral, balanced and verifiable agreements in this area. It is also playing
an active part in the preparations for the second session in 1982. This, it hopes, will
give particular attention to the neglected question of conventional arms races and
to arms control measures designed to meet the specific security concerns of parties
within regions where the existence of excessive armaments threatens to disrupt
peace and stability.
A nuclear-weapon state, Britain is committed to negotiating in good faith to
halt the nuclear arms race and to move towards nuclear disarmament. It is engaged
in negotiations with the Soviet Union and the United States for a comprehensive
test ban treaty, which, in the British view, would curb the development of new
types of nuclear weapons. Britain regards the widest international adherence to the
treaty as an important non-proliferation objective.
Britain has supported the United States in strategic arms limitation talks with
the Soviet Union, and favours their continuation with a view to reaching further
agreement on limiting nuclear weapons. Britain has also welcomed the start of
talks between the United States and the Soviet Union on the limitation of medium-
range theatre nuclear forces, the next session of which is due to take place in
November 1981, and is playing a full part in NATO consultations on the subject.
Britain believes it is possible to improve international access to the benefits of the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy while minimising the risk of the spread of nuclear
weapons technology, and has played a leading part in strengthening the regime of
non-proliferation through the International Atomic Energy Agency and other
organisations. A party to the 1968 Non-Proliferation Treaty, which is designed to
curb the nuclear arms race and provide an assurance, through international
safeguards, that civil nuclear activities of non-nuclear-weapon states will not be
diverted to making such weapons, Britain reaffirmed its full support for the Treaty
at a review conference in 1980. Britain has undertaken not to use nuclear weapons
against non-nuclear-weapon states which have internationally binding
commitments not to manufacture or acquire nuclear explosive devices (except in
the case of an attack on British interests by such a state in association with a nuclear-
weapon state).
The establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones in different parts of the world
can contribute to non-proliferation and regional security, and Britain supports
proposals for such zones where security is not founded on deterrence. It was the
first nuclear-weapon state to ratify the protocols to the 1967 Treaty for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (the Treaty of Tlatelolco).
As a result of a British initiative, another category of weapons of mass
destruction, biological weapons, is the subject of the 1972 Convention on
Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological
(Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on their Destruction. Britain took an active
part in a conference in 1980 which reviewed the operation of the Convention.
Britain has also encouraged efforts to agree on a ban on chemical weapons, and in
1976 put forward a draft convention on the prohibition of their development,
production and stock-piling; this has served as a focus of discussion in the
Committee on Disarmament.
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
79
Keeping the
Peace
Conventional weapons are by far the largest component of national armouries,
and Britain has argued for international discussions on ways to halt the world-wide
build-up. In particular it believes in the value of regional agreements as a means of
facilitating this. In the talks on Mutual and Balanced Force Reductions, Britain,
together with its NATO allies, is working for an agreement with the Warsaw Pact
participants which would contribute to a more stable relationship and strengthen
peace and security in Europe. This requires an approximate parity between
NATO and Warsaw Pact forces in central Europe where the Warsaw Pact
currently outnumbers NATO by about 2-5 to 1 in tanks and some 140,000 troops.
The Western participants have also proposed associated confidence-building
measures designed to facilitate verification of an agreement.
Britain played a key role in securing agreement in 1980 on a UN Convention
establishing a legal framework for prohibitions and restrictions on the use of
particularly inhumane and injurious weapons in armed conflicts, together with
protocols restricting the use of mines, booby traps and incendiary weapons and
prohibiting the use of weapons which cause injury by fragments not detectable by
X-ray. Britain was among the first to sign the Convention when it opened for
signature in April 1981.
Concerned about the rising scale of military expenditure in the world, Britain
has supported proposals at the United Nations for a multilateral, balanced and
verifiable reduction of military budgets, and called for a standard method of
reporting military expenditure to be adopted. British experts have taken part in
United Nations studies on the relationship between disarmament and
development and on disarmament institutions, both of which are expected to be
important topics at the second special session on disarmament.
Britain and the United Nations
Support for the United Nations (UN) and the purposes and principles of its
Charter has been a cornerstone of British policy since 1945. In particular, Britain is
concerned that the United Nations should be able to act effectively as an agency for
crisis anticipation, peace-keeping and peace-making; as a forum for the discussion
of major world issues; and as an instrument for development and for providing a
wide variety of specialised and technical services. Britain also sees a strong and
effective United Nations as the best framework for pursuing and achieving many
of its foreign policy objectives—the resolution of disputes, disarmament and arms
control, the protection of human rights, the promotion of the rule of law—
designed to contribute both to its own wellbeing and security and to the
development of a more harmonious international community.
The United Nations has in recent years had a growing role as the central
institution for the discussion of world issues. In addition to those of peace and war,
these include arms control and disarmament, disaster relief, the sea-bed, terrorism,
the world environment, energy, development and world resources. While in some
cases there are specialised institutions, usually UN agencies, for dealing with these
issues, in many others, including most of those referred to above, discussion takes
place mainly in the United Nations itself. Britain plays an active and positive role
in these debates.
The maintenance of international peace and security, was the primary purpose
envisaged for the United Natians at the time of its establishment. Britain believes
that it is appropriate for the United Nations, as the only forum in which the whole
international community is represented, to be involved in disputes which threaten
peace and stability whether on a regional or world scale. With other members, it
8o
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Human Rights
Economic and
Social Affairs
has worked to strengthen and make more effective the machinery of the Security
Council, the organ with primary responsibility for security matters, for preventing
and settling disputes. As a permanent member of the Security Council, Britain has
a particular interest in and responsibility for questions of international peace and
security, and plays an active role in the Council’s work.
Another British concern is that the United Nations should have an effective
peace-keeping capacity. It supplies the largest national contingent to the UN Force
in Cyprus, together with logistic support for the force, and provides some logistic
support for the UN Interim Force in Lebanon.
Britain has supported the UN’s Universal Declaration of Human Rights since its
adoption by the General Assembly in 1948. While not legally binding, the
Declaration has inspired many other international instruments designed to secure
the observance of its provisions. These include the two international covenants
adopted by the General Assembly in 1966 which do impose legal obligations on
those who ratify them—the Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
and the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Both came into force, and were
ratified by Britain, in 1976. Under the latter Britain recognises the competence of
the UN Human Rights Committee (set up to supervise the Covenant’s
implementation) to receive and consider state-to-state complaints.
Britain is also a party to conventions aimed at implementing particular rights
contained in the Universal Declaration, including those on the elimination of racial
discrimination, on the rights of women, the status of refugees and stateless persons
and on slavery.
The adoption of conventions and covenants in itself is insufficient to secure the
protection of human rights, and Britain believes it is necessary to develop effective
procedures to ensure the implementation of standards which such arrangements
contain. It also believes that UN members, through voluntary acceptance of the
Universal Declaration and the international covenants, have accepted that human
rights are a legitimate object of international concern.
The Economic and Social Council has general responsibility within the United
Nations for human rights activities. The bodies directly concerned are the
Commission on Human Rights, its Sub-Commission on Prevention of
Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, and the Commission on the Status of
Women. Britain is represented on all these bodies and is active in their work.
The Charter states that ‘the promotion of the economic and social advancement of
all peoples’ is one of the principal aims of the United Nations, and an estimated
90 per cent of the organisation’s efforts, in terms of resources and personnel, is
now employed to this end. With the growing concern for the problems of
development, the main emphasis has become increasingly the provision of direct
assistance for member states. The UN system is now the largest single source of
technical assistance for developing countries, as well as providing considerable
emergency and relief aid and assistance for refugees. (The provision of capital
assistance has been generally confined to the World Bank group and regional
development banks whose operations are generally considered separately from
those of the rest of the UN system.)
Successive British governments have affirmed their support for the functional
and developmental work of the United Nations. Britain is the sixth largest
contributor to the UN’s regular budget, providing some ^jio-2 million, 4 5 per
cent of the total, in 1980. In addition, it contributed about ^4 million to the World
Health Organisation, ^2‘3 million to the International Labour Organisation, £3'3
million to the Food and Agriculture Organisation and million to the UN
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
8l
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation. Britain provides a considerably
larger proportion of the UN’s voluntary funds, donating some £44 million in
1980, including ^15 million for the UN Development Programme, ^4 8 million
for the UN Relief and Works Agency for Palestinian Refugees, million for
the UN Children’s Fund, ^2 million for the UN Fund for Population Activities,
about £8 million for the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, and ^4 3 million
for the World Food Programme.
In the deliberations of the governing bodies of the various agencies and
programmes, Britain encourages the deployment of resources towards the poorest
countries and the poorest communities in the developing world. It also seeks to
promote the most efficient use of UN development resources and improvements
in the co-ordination, control and effectiveness of the system, in order to avoid
unnecessary duplication by the various agencies.
The United Nations is central to the North—South dialogue (see later this
chapter), not only through the involvement of its agencies in development and
other international economic problems, but also as the forum within which the
dialogue is reviewed. In the General Assembly’s Committee of the Whole, set up
in 1978 to monitor developments in the dialogue, and at its special session on global
economic issues in 1980, Britain played an active role in the discussions which led
to the adoption of a new international development strategy for the 1980s.
Other International Organisations
Britain is a member of many other international organisations, including those
concerned with the management of the world economy. It is a founder member of
the International Monetary Fund, established in 1944 (along with the World
Bank—see p 85) as the principal administrator of the international financial system
and as a source of credit for states facing balance of payments problems, and has
welcomed the creation by the Fund of facilities to provide special assistance to
developing countries experiencing financial or trading difficulties. It is a strong
supporter of efforts under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade to liberalise
further and promote the growth of world trade, and to improve the developing
countries’ participation in it (see pp 71 and 328).
Britain is also a member of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD). An instrument for inter-governmental co-operation
among 24 industrialised countries, the OECD’s aims are to promote policies
designed to achieve the highest sustainable economic growth and employment,
and a rising living standard, in member countries while maintaining financial
stability, and thus to contribute to the development of the world economy; to
contribute to sound economic expansion in member as well as non-member
countries in economic development; and to contribute to the expansion of world
trade on a multilateral, non-discriminatory basis in accordance with international
obligations.
Other organisations to which Britain belongs or extends support are more
restricted in their operations and include the regional development banks in Africa,
the Americas and Asia and specialist technical, agricultural and medical
institutions.
With 20 other nations Britain is a member of the Council of Europe which aims
to provide the widest possible European forum for the discussion of political,
economic, social and scientific issues with a view to achieving a greater unity
between its members. Membership is open to any European parliamentary
democracy which accepts the principles of the rule of law and the protection of
82
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Official and
Other Flows
human rights. The Council was responsible for the adoption in 1950 of the
European Convention on Human Rights, to which Britain is a party.
Development Co-operation
The basic objective of Britain’s aid programme is to help developing countries’
efforts to raise their living standards, the emphasis being on assisting the poorest
countries and the poorest communities within them. It is these countries which
find it most difficult to generate investment funds domestically or attract external
private flows. Britain’s ability to support development overseas is dependent on
the state of its own economy, and alongside development objectives, due weight is
given to political, commercial and industrial considerations in the deployment of
aid resources. Increasingly, the aid programme is being used in ways which will
benefit both the developing countries and Britain.
Official aid is only one aspect of Britain’s support for overseas development.
Private investment, which is encouraged by the provision of government
insurance to private investors by the Export Credits Guarantee Department, is a
much larger component and one which has benefited from the abolition of
exchange controls in 1979. Similarly, trade is important, developing countries
providing 20 per cent of Britain’s imports in 1980. These were worth some ^9,956
million. Aid is also provided by private voluntary societies; these concentrate their
activities in the poorest countries.
Since 1945 total official aid disbursements have amounted to about £9,000
million. In 1980 official aid flows amounted to some £1,147 million, of which
£866 million represented official development assistance1 and £281 million other
official flows. Of the total, bilateral aid accounted for £640 million including
technical co-operation funds of £223 million; some £227 million was provided
through multilateral agencies. Repayments of capital and payments of interest on
loans came to £50 million and £22 million respectively; another £51 million of
capital repayments and £17 million of interest were cancelled.
Aid performance is commonly measured as a proportion of gross national
product (GNP), particularly with reference to the two United Nations targets for
resource transfers to developing countries; that net official development assistance
equal 0-7 per cent of GNP by 1985; and that combined private and official flows
equal 1 per cent of GNP. Britain accepts in principle the first of these but is not
committed to a timetable for reaching it. Successive Governments have made it
clear that progress must depend on Britain’s economic conditions and upon other
calls on its resources.
In 1980 net official development assistance (see table 4) amounted to £766
million, 0 34 per cent of GNP. The fall from the high level recorded in 1979
(£992 million, 0 52 per cent of GNP) was largely due to technical factors. In
particular, no promissory note2 was deposited during 1980 in respect of the Sixth
Replenishment of the International Development Association (to which Britain is
committed to contributing £555 million) because the replenishment agreement
was not fully ratified. Another factor was that drawings of bilateral aid by certain
countries against funds available were slower in 1980 than in 1979. The 1 per cent
target has never achieved the prominence accorded to the 0-7 per cent target. For
1 Official development assistance, the international basis for reporting on aid performances, is defined as
official flows for development purposes with a grant (concessional) element of 25 per cent or more.
2 Contributions to certain international financial institutions are counted as aid flows when promissory
notes respecting the contributions are deposited with them rather than when they are cashed.
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
83
Bilateral Aid
many years, however, Britain has far exceeded it, and in 1980 total net financial
flows from Britain to developing countries amounted to £5,502 million, some
2 46 per cent of GNP.
Britain’s aid programme began as part of the discharge of its responsibilities
towards dependent territories, and the main emphasis remains on the Common¬
wealth which includes among its members some of the world’s poorest countries.
In 1980, £439 million (69 per cent) of bilateral official development assistance
went to Commonwealth countries. Of this, £19 million went to Britain’s
remaining dependencies, which are a first charge on the aid programme. The
regional disbursement pattern is shown in the diagram.
Regional Distribution of Bilateral Aid 1980
Total £640 million
Africa
total 234
o'
Americas and
Caribbean
total 35
million
Oceania
total 32
million
Europe
total 14
million
Unspecified
total 64
million
84
Financial Aid
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
TABLE 4. Official Development Assistance to Developing Countries igyy—80
£ million
1977
1978
1979
1980
Bilateral
Commonwealth countries (including
dependent territories)
Grants
Technical co-operation (grants)
Loans
Other countries
Grants
Technical co-operation (grants)
Loans
Contributions to multilateral
agencies
Total
Total net of amortisation (as used for
calculation of the 0-7 per cent target)
Interest receipts
371-5 492-9 6190 639-8
248-0
131-2
6o-i
36- 7
123-5
jo-i
66-3
27-0
322-7
6940
6325
37- 6
363-6
2J5-7
74-9
33-0
129-3
3vg
78-3
190
318-9
419-2
266-2
9i-3
61-7
199-8
794
94-2
26-2
444 4
8n-8 1,063-4
7634 991-9
36-5
359
439-1
278-2
113-6
47'3
200-7
64-3
109-2
27-0
226-5
866-4
765-6
38-5
Source: British Aid Statistics and Overseas Development Administration.
Differences between totals and the sums of their constituent parts are due to rounding.
The country receiving the largest amount was India with £86 million. Other
major recipients included Bangladesh, Zimbabwe, Sri Lanka, Tanzania, Pakistan,
Sudan and Kenya.
In line with the policy of concentrating aid on the poorest countries, £282
million (59 per cent) of net bilateral aid went to countries with a 1978 per capita
income of $320 or less.
Bilateral financial aid in 1980 totalled £417 million; over 82 per cent was in grants
and the rest in concessionary loans. Budgetary aid, over £10 million in 1980, is
provided in the form of grants. Most development aid, and all provided to the
poorest countries (which include India, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and many African
countries) is in grant form only. In 1980 loan commitments, excluding investments
by the Commonwealth Development Corporation (see below) totalled £53
million. Where loans bear interest it is at fixed concessionary rates ranging from 2
per cent to 6 per cent, and nearly all loans carry from three to seven years’ grace
periods for repayments of capital. The average maturity of loans is 25 years. Britain
has more than fulfilled the 1972 and 1978 recommendations of the OECD’s
Development Assistance Committee on easing the terms of financial aid. In 1978
Britain announced its intention of removing the burden of past aid loans
(retrospective terms adjustment) worth £900 million to 17 of the poorest
countries.
Loans and grants are normally tied to the purchase of goods, equipment and
services from Britain, although there may be an element for local costs and a
foreign content in contracts financed from tied aid in appropriate cases. New loan
commitments can be untied, if the recipient agrees, to the extent that goods can be
purchased either from the poorest developing countries or from Britain.
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
85
Technical
Co-operation
Multilateral
Aid
An important role in development assistance is played by Britain’s Common¬
wealth Development Corporation which invests in development projects in most
Commonwealth countries, and, with British Government approval, in some other
countries. By the end of 1980 some £3 51 million had been invested out of a total
commitment of £516 million. Of the latter £93 million was in East Asia, ^46
million in the Pacific, £63 million in the Caribbean and virtually all of the
remainder in Africa. Commitments approved in 1980 totalled over ^81 million,
80 per cent going to the poorest countries.
Technical co-operation, the transfer of specialised knowledge and skills from
country to country, complements financial aid, expertise often being essential to
the success of a programme of financial aid or investment. Expenditure on it has
increased in recent years and was X223 rnillion, 35 per cent of bilateral aid, in 1980.
Of this, £81 million was for the provision of expert personnel, including
volunteers, ^49 million for students and trainees in Britain and overseas, £14
million for research services and projects, £23 million for consultancy services,
and ^56 million in support of various British institutions, including the British
Council, and for the provision of equipment and supplies.
During 1980, there were 6,511 people financed by Britain (other than
volunteers) working in developing countries, of whom some 3,501 were engaged
in the field of education, 1,026 in agriculture and allied fields, and 497 in health
services. In addition, under the British Volunteer Programme there were 1,103
volunteers, mainly graduates or otherwise qualified, working in developing
countries, the majority of them teaching. Recruitment, training and placing
overseas is undertaken by four voluntary bodies: Catholic Institute for Inter¬
national Relations, International Voluntary Service, United Nations Association
International Service and Voluntary Service Overseas; 90 per cent of the
organisations’ costs are met by the British Government.
Britain receives large numbers of students and trainees from developing
countries. Over 14,000 were financed in Britain in 1980 under regional
programmes of technical co-operation, by awards under the Commonwealth
Scholarships and Fellowship Plan, and under British Council schemes.
To support development overseas, the Government maintains four specialist
scientific organisations (the Directorate of Overseas Surveys, the Land Resources
Development Centre, the Tropical Products Institute and the Centre for Overseas
Pest Research) and provides support for many others. The latter includes overseas
units/divisions of the government financed Transport and Road Research
Laboratory, the Building Research Establishment, the Hydraulics Research
Station and the Institute of Geological Sciences. These organisations provide
specialist information and advice and experts for service overseas, and undertake
field and laboratory research investigations.
Britain is the second largest subscriber to the World Bank group of institutions—
the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International
Development Association (IDA) and the International Finance Corporation. The
British commitment to the IDA’s Fifth Replenishment (for 1977 to 1980) was
£474 million, and its proposed commitment to the Sixth Replenishment (for 1980
to 1983) is ^555 million. Britain has contributed or has agreed to contribute to the
Asian Development Bank, the Inter-American Development Bank, the Caribbean
Development Bank and the African Development Bank. Its contribution to the
United Nations Development Programme for 1980 was £15 million, and it is the
largest source for expertise and fellowships provided under the Programme. There
is also a major British contribution to other UN agencies and programmes (see
86
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Voluntary
Agencies
THE NORTH-
SOUTH
DIALOGUE
p 81) and an increasing proportion of British aid is now channelled through the
European Community’s aid programme.
Voluntary agencies provided an estimated £45 million for work in developing
countries in 1980, mainly on agriculture, health and nutrition, and education
projects and on emergency relief operations.
There are about 200 agencies in all, including church and missionary societies;
among the best known are OXFAM, Christian Aid, War on Want, the Save the
Children Fund, the British Red Cross Society and the Catholic Fund for Overseas
Development. The funds are raised largely through appeals in the media, both on a
regular basis and in response to specific emergencies; the latter, in particular, meet
with a good response. The Government co-operates with the agencies in various
ways, especially in immediate post-disaster relief and rehabilitation operations and
through its Joint Funding Scheme. Under this it meets half the cost of selected
development projects undertaken by the agencies and aimed at helping the
poorest. Such projects include community health, non-formal education, the
improvement of food supplies, agricultural training, water supply and irrigation.
Expenditure on the Scheme in 1980 was over XI-5 million.
Voluntary agencies’ work on behalf of refugees overseas also receives official
support. The Government finances about half the budget of the United Kingdom
Standing Conference on Refugees, a consultative body for agencies engaged in
assisting refugees, and in 1977 introduced a scheme for financing voluntary
projects for refugees overseas. Some £83,000 was spent under the scheme in 1980,
the projects being concerned mainly with improving health and general well¬
being of the refugees.
The North-South dialogue, which embraces questions of development, transfer of
resources, raw materials, trade and international monetary issues, is being
conducted between the industrialised nations and the developing countries with a
view to evolving a more equitable balance in the world’s economy. Britain
attaches importance to securing progress in the dialogue, and, in its approach to the
discussions involved, works in close association with its partners in the European
Community. Along with other industrialised countries, Britain welcomed the
1980 Report of the Independent Commission on International Development
Issues (the Brandt Report), which demonstrated that the interests of developing
and developed countries were mutual and that all had a share in tackling the
world’s problems, and will play its part in the special North-South summit, the
International Meeting for Co-operation and Development, to be held in Mexico
in October 1981.
At a ministerial meeting of the Trade and Development Board of the UN
Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) in 1978, major donor
countries undertook to adjust the terms of past bilateral aid to bring them into line
with prevailing more relaxed terms—known as retrospective or retroactive terms
adjustment—or to take equivalent measures. Following this Britain decided to
relieve 17 of the poorest countries of debt repayments worth some £900 million to
the end of the century, thus placing past aid to these countries on the same grant-
only basis as present assistance programmes (see p 85).
Britain also supports the important role of the International Monetary Fund in
providing financial assistance, the level of which has recently been substantially
increased, to help developing countries to carry out adjustment measures to
overcome balance of payments difficulties.
In the commodities field, Britain took the initiative at the Commonwealth
Heads of Government Meeting in 1975 in giving impetus to the establishment of
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
8?
price stabilisation arrangements on a commodity-by-commodity basis. This took
shape in the programme of work on individual international commodity
agreements initiated by the Resolution on the Integrated Programme for
Commodities (IPC) adopted by UNCTAD in 1976; the Resolution also called for
a Common Fund to help finance the agreements. In the subsequent negotiations on
the Common Fund and on individual commodities, Britain has played an active
part within the European Community and consumer countries generally in the
search for appropriate solutions. The first agreement concluded under the IPC
was the International Natural Rubber Agreement in 1979. A final agreement for
the establishment of the Common Fund was concluded in 1980, and Britain has
agreed to contribute to the voluntary as well as the obligatory part of its work.
In 1964 Britain was the first major developed country to support the idea of
extending tariff preferences to all developing countries on a non-reciprocal and
non-discriminatory basis. It therefore strongly supported the objectives of the
latest round of multilateral trade negotiations. Set out in the 1973 Tokyo
Declaration, these were the further liberalisation of world trade through the
progressive dismantling of tariff and non-tariff barriers, and within this, the
provision of special and more favourable treatment for the developing countries
where possible.
Since its entry into the European Community, Britain has adopted Community
trade arrangements, among the most liberal applied by industrial nations, and has
played a significant role in determining their nature. It took a major part in the
negotiations for the first Lome Convention, both to safeguard the trading interests
of Commonwealth developing countries and to ensure that reciprocal preferences
would not be demanded from the developing countries, as had been the case with
previous Community arrangements. Britain also contributed to the successful
conclusion of the second Lome Convention. In addition, Britain has supported
improvements to the Community’s Generalised System of Preferences scheme,
especially with regard to more liberal access into the Community for imports of
manufactured and processed agricultural products and in its application to the
poorest developed countries, particularly those in South Asia. Before entering the
Community, Britain secured a commitment to expand and reinforce Community
trade relations with the Commonwealth countries of Asia, and this has led to
the conclusion of commercial co-operation agreements with India, Sri Lanka and
Bangladesh.
4 Defence
NATO’s
Strategy
Britain’s defence policy is based on the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation
(NATO—see also pp 76—78) whose collective defence provides each of its
members with far greater security than any could achieve alone. Britain is fully
committed to NATO and its strategy of deterrence and, in assigning the greater
part of its military forces to it, makes a major contribution to the full range of the
North Atlantic Alliance’s deterrent capabilities, the only European nation to do
so.1 It also plays a full part in the Alliance’s efforts, complementary to its defence
preparations, to negotiate balanced and verifiable arms control agreements and to
reduce tension so as to achieve a more just and lasting peaceful order in Europe (see
PP 77-79)-
Despite its economic difficulties, Britain is determined to play its full part in
meeting NATO’s requirements, and, using the most economical means available,
is increasing its defence efforts to the level required to provide the best possible
guarantee of safety. This was reaffirmed in 1981 in the defence review,2 which
emphasised the need for a better balance between all elements of the nation’s
defences that would lead to an improvement in the combat endurance and
offensive power of the front-line forces. Britain is also firmly committed to the
NATO target of securing real increases in defence spending in the region of 3 per
cent annually, and achieved this in 1979—80 and in 1980—81. The defence budget
for 1981-82, an estimated £12,274 million, represents an increase of 8 per cent
over the last three years. Further increases of 3 per cent are planned for each of the
four years to 1985—86, implementing in full the NATO target. In 1980 Britain
contributed 5-2 per cent of its gross domestic product to defence spending, second
in NATO only to the United States, while the average for NATO’s European
members was 3 7 per cent. Britain has consistently spent a higher proportion of its
defence budget on new equipment than any other NATO member.
In 1981, the Government carried out an appraisal of Britain’s defence
programme in order to establish how best to exploit the substantial increase
planned in the defence budget, and to ensure that these resources will be spent most
effectively in pursuit of its commitment to the North Atlantic Alliance and to
Western security.
NATO’s strategy is based on the principle that peace and stability can be
maintained only if a potential aggressor is convinced that it would lose far more
than it could ever hope to gain by the use of force. NATO neither needs nor
intends to match the Warsaw Pact weapon for weapon, but seeks to deter
aggression by having enough forces to respond effectively to an attack at any level
and, if necessary, to raise the level of conflict to make clear the Alliance’s ability and
determination to go on resisting. For this it needs a wide range of forces, both
conventional and nuclear, which are sufficiently closely linked to provide a chain
of options from which to choose the appropriate method of countering aggression.
1 France, which also has nuclear forces, does not participate fully in NATO’s integrated military
structure.
2 The United Kingdom Defence Programme: The Way Forward. Cmnd 8288, HMSO.
DEFENCE
Britain’s
NATO
Contribution
89
This concept of flexible response is complemented by that of forward defence, the
stationing of members’ forces well forward in Europe to emphasise their collective
determination and commitment to defend the whole of NATO territory.
It is to maintain the Alliance’s defence and deterrent capacity in the face of the
build-up in Warsaw Pact military strength that NATO members are co-operating
in the Long Term Defence Programme (adopted in 1978 and designed to effect
improvements in key areas and to make the most effective use of Alliance
resources), and have agreed to aim to secure real increases in defence expenditure in
the region of 3 per cent annually. NATO’s long-range theatre nuclear forces are
also being modernised. Britain is actively involved in these measures, and is also
updating its own strategic nuclear capability. In addition, in the Eurogroup,
Britain and 10 other European members are working to improve the effectiveness
of their contribution to the Alliance and to achieve better co-ordination, thereby
making the best possible use of the available resources.
NATO is concerned to deter Soviet exploitation of instability outside Europe,
and to demonstrate its resolve to defend essential interests, but, at the same time, to
recognise the rights and views of regional countries and their primary
responsibility for their own defence. In Britain’s view these requirements can be
best reconciled through the provision of military aid, including the sale of arms,
the periodic deployment of NATO forces in strategically important areas, and the
maintenance of a capability to intervene militarily where necessary. With these
measures in mind, Britain has welcomed the United States plans for a rapid
deployment force, and has promised to support them where possible.
Britain’s contribution to NATO is concentrated in areas where it can best help to
maintain Alliance security, principally NATO’s strategic nuclear deterrent and the
defence of the Central Region of Europe, the Eastern Atlantic and English
Channel, and the British ‘home’ base and its immediate approaches.
Britain’s Polaris strategic force (to be replaced by a Trident force in the 1990s—
see p 91) represents a unique European contribution to NATO’s nuclear deterrent,
providing a second and independent centre of decision-making within the
Alliance. At a time of strategic parity, this provides an important assurance against
any Soviet misconception that the United States would not be prepared to use its
nuclear forces in Europe’s defence. Britain’s theatre nuclear systems are also
committed to NATO, and it has agreed to provide bases for 160 of the 464 ground-
launched cruise missiles which, with 108 Pershing II missiles, the United States is to
deploy in Europe to modernise NATO’s long-range theatre nuclear forces.
Britain’s decision in 1980 to update its strategic deterrent has led to increased
calls from some groups within the country for unilateral nuclear disarmament,
both on the grounds of cost and as an example to others. While the Government
understands the widespread concern regarding nuclear war, it believes such
apprehensions to be misplaced so long as the policy of nuclear deterrence and
efforts to relax East-West tensions, including the pursuit of arms control, which
have helped to maintain the peace for over 30 years, are maintained. It also believes
that unilateral disarmament by Britain would not significantly alter the views of
other states which maintain, or may think of acquiring, nuclear weapons, and that
such action would weaken NATO’s ability to deter aggression in the face of the
continuing nuclear and conventional threat.
Virtually all of the Royal Navy, the largest NATO navy in Western Europe, is
earmarked for assignment to the Alliance and permanent contributions are made
to its two standing naval forces, in the Atlantic and the Channel, and to its
Mediterranean force when activated. The British Army of the Rhine (BAOR)
and Royal Air Force (RAF) Germany are stationed in the Federal Republic of
90
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Non-NATO
Responsibilities
Northern
Ireland
THE ARMED
FORCES
Personnel
Germany. (Britain’s Field Force in Berlin is not committed to NATO.) BAOR’s
combat element comprises four armoured divisions (of two brigades each), an
artillery division and an infantry formation; the armoured force is to be
reorganised into three stronger divisions each of three brigades, with one of the
brigades held in reserve in Britain. BAOR’s peacetime strength of around 55,000
would be more than doubled on mobilisation by reinforcements from Britain and
up to 70 per cent of the Army would be in Central Europe in wartime. Nearly all
the RAF’s combat and support aircraft are assigned to NATO. RAF Germany’s 12
squadrons (to be increased to 13 in 1982, including two of helicopters) are equipped
for strike/attack, reconnaissance, close support and air defence roles, while RAF
Strike Command, based in Britain, provides forces for these and for the maritime
patrol, anti-submarine warfare and transport roles.
Britain also provides important elements to NATO’s specialist reinforcement
forces, including ground and air units for the United Kingdom Mobile Force and
for its contribution to the Allied Command Europe Mobile Force, four squadrons
for NATO’s Strategic Air Reserve, and naval and marine units for a
British-Netherlands amphibious force.
Forces from all three Services are stationed at Gibraltar, which, positioned at the
western entry to the Mediterranean, is an important base for NATO.
In support of other defence commitments, and with a view to playing its part in
collective Western responses to threats to its world-wide interests, Britain is
improving its ability to operate outside the NATO area without diminishing its
central commitment to the Alliance. It also provides military aid to friendly
countries and deploys its forces on visits and exercises in important areas.
In Cyprus British forces provide for the security of Britain’s Sovereign Bases
Areas and contribute the largest component for the United Nations force there. All
three Services contribute to the garrison in Hong Kong, while that in Belize is
provided by the Army and the RAF with the Royal Navy deploying a warship in
the Caribbean as a guardship. A Gurkha battalion is stationed in Brunei and a
Royal Marines detachment in the Falkland Islands.
The armed services assist the civil authorities in Northern Ireland in maintaining
law and order and in countering terrorism (see p 15).
The total strength of the armed forces, all volunteers, was about 333,500 on 1 April
1981: 74,000 in the Royal Navy and the Royal Marines, 166,000 in the Army and
93,000 in the Royal Air Force. To improve force strengths and overcome
shortages of skilled personnel, service conditions are being improved and pay has
been restored to comparability with civilian levels. An average of 228,000 civilians
are expected to be employed by the Ministry of Defence during 1981—82.
The three women’s Services, with a combined strength of 16,900 are integral
parts of the armed forces, and servicewomen serve alongside servicemen in Britain
and overseas, mainly in support roles. Their importance is increasing, however,
and some are trained to bear arms for defensive purposes.
Engagements for non-commissioned ranks range from 3 to 22 years, with a
wide freedom of choice on the length and terms of service. Subject to a minimum
period of service (varying from three to nine years, excluding training), entrants
may leave at any time, at 18 months’ notice. Discharge may also be granted on
compassionate grounds, by purchase, or on grounds of conscience. Commissions,
either by promotion from the ranks or by direct entry based on educational and
other qualifications, are granted for short, medium and long terms. All three
Services have schemes for school and university/college sponsorships.
DEFENCE
91
Reserve Forces
COMBAT
FORCES
Strategic
Nuclear Forces
Royal Navy
General
Purpose
Combat Forces
Non-commissioned personnel receive basic training supplemented by further
and specialist training throughout their careers. Study for educational
qualifications is encouraged and Service trade and technical training, highly valued
by industry, leads to nationally recognised qualifications for large numbers of
Service personnel.
Commissioned ranks receive initial training at the Britannia Royal Naval
College, Dartmouth, the Royal Military Academy, Sandhurst, or the Royal Air
Force College, Cranwell. This is followed by specialist training, often including
degree courses at university or Service establishments. Higher or advanced training
for officers is provided by the Royal Naval College, Greenwich, the Army Staff
College at Camberley, and the Royal Air Force Staff College at Bracknell.
Selected senior officers and civilian officials from Britain and other countries attend
the Royal College of Defence Studies, London, which provides the wider
background necessary for those destined to fill higher appointments.
Operational training includesjoint-Service and inter-allied exercises. Training is
provided for the armed forces of allied, Commonwealth and other countries.
Reserve and auxiliary forces are an integral part of the armed forces. In addition to
supplementing the regular forces in time of war or emergency with trained
personnel able immediately to take their places either as formed units or as
individual reinforcements, they form an important link between the Services and
the civil community. Some have a reserve liability following a period of regular
service (regular reserve); others are volunteers who train in their spare time. The
latter include the Territorial Army whose role is to reinforce the ground forces
committed to NATO and help to maintain a secure home base in the United
Kingdom; its strength is being increased to 86,000, and a new reserve division
drawn mainly from it is to be formed for reinforcement of BAOR. Other
volunteer forces include the Royal Naval Reserve, the Royal Marines Reserve,
the Royal Auxiliary Air Force Regiment and the Royal Air Force Volunteer
Reserve. There is also the Ulster Defence Regiment which is a locally recruited
and largely part-time force which supports the police and the Army in Northern
Ireland. On 1 January 1981 regular reserves totalled 193,000, and volunteer
reserves and auxiliary forces 80,500. Cadet forces, which make a significant
contribution to recruitment to the regular forces, totalled 143,300.
The Royal Navy’s Polaris force comprises four nuclear submarines, each of which
can remain on underwater patrol for long periods and is equipped with 16 nuclear¬
armed Polaris missiles. Improved (‘Chevaline’) Polaris missiles, designed to
maintain the force’s effectiveness until its replacement in the 1990s by a Trident
nuclear submarine force, are planned to enter service soon. The Trident
development programme is expected to cost some ^5,000 million (at July 1980
prices) which, over 15 years, will average some 3 per cent of total defence
expenditure, reaching perhaps 5 per cent at its peak.
Britain’s naval forces, while capable of operating throughout the world when
required, are concentrated in the Eastern Atlantic and English Channel where they
constitute the majority of forces immediately available to NATO. In coming
years, this contribution to NATO’s maritime defence will be based increasingly on
an enhanced anti-submarine warfare element made up principally of nuclear-
powered attack submarines, newly designed frigates, and Nimrod patrol aircraft.
At present Britain’s contribution includes: two anti-submarine warfare carriers
equipped with the Sea King anti-submarine helicopter and the Sea Harrier
maritime vertical short-take-off and landing (V/STOL) aircraft for air defence and
92
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Army Combat
Forces
Royal Air
Force General
Purpose Forces
anti-surface ship operations—one of the carriers, Invincible, is the first of a new
class, carries the Sea Dart area defence missile and can also be used for amphibious
operations; more than 25 submarines, including 12 of the nuclear-powered fleet
type; and 59 destroyers and frigates (to be reduced to 50), almost all equipped with
weapon-carrying helicopters (the Wasp or Lynx) and guided missile systems
(including the Exocet surface-to-surface, the Sea Dart, Sea Wolf, Seaslug and
Seacat surface-to-air, and the Ikara anti-submarine). Other ships include over 30
mine counter-measures vessels and a new class of offshore patrol vessels for
protecting fishing interests and offshore oil and gas installations. There is also an
amphibious capability comprising two assault ships, Fearless and Intrepid, and the
Royal Marines Commando Forces, while the anti-submarine warfare carrier
Hermes (to be phased out as the second new carrier enters service) retains a
secondary role as a commando ship.
Ships entering service or planned to do so by the mid-1980s include the second
of the new carriers (though in the longer term only two of the three ships in this
class will be kept in service), three of the Trafalgar class of nuclear-powered attack
submarines (a type which the Royal Navy is the only Western European navy to
commit to NATO), seven Type 42 destroyers and the seventh Type 22 frigate,
both classes of which are armed with advanced missile systems, and more of the
Hunt class of mine counter-measures vessels. Also proposed is the acceleration into
service of a new class of anti-submarine warfare frigate, the Type 23.
Most of the Army’s combat forces, consisting of BAOR and the forces stationed in
Britain, have primary roles in support of NATO. Others are stationed overseas in
support of treaty commitments.
Armoured regiments are equipped with the Chieftain main battle tank;
Challenger, a new main battle tank fitted with Chobham armour, which provides
greater protection than conventional steel or aluminium armour, will enter service
in the mid-1980s. Tracked combat reconnaissance vehicles include Scorpion and
Scimitar, mounting respectively a 76-mm and a 30-mm gun, Striker, carrying the
Swingfire anti-tank missile, and Sultan, a command vehicle. The primary tracked
armoured personnel carrier is the FV 432, which is to be replaced by the MCV 80
from the mid-1980s. The crew-portable Milan medium-range anti-tank guided
weapon system has been issued to all BAOR’s mechanised infantry units, and
entering service is the TOW long-range anti-tank guided weapon fitted to the
Lynx helicopter. Artillery units are equipped with the 105-mm gun, 155-mm and
175-mm self-propelled or towed guns supported by Field Artillery Computer
Equipment (FACE), while tactical nuclear support is provided by the Lance missile
and the 8-inch self-propelled howitzer. Air defence is provided by the Rapier low-
level surface-to-air missile (including a tracked version) and the Blowpipe man-
portable very-low-level missile.
The Royal Air Force general purpose forces consist of aircraft equipped for all
modern operational roles, together with the RAF Regiment field squadrons for
anti-aircraft and ground defence.
Phantom and Lightning aircraft, together with Rapier and Bloodhound
surface-to-air missiles, are employed in air defence. Radar warning is provided by
Shackleton airborne early warning aircraft (to be replaced in the 1980s by specially
equipped Nimrods as part of NATO’s integrated airborne early warning force)
and by th^ ground radars and control and reporting centres of the United
Kingdom Air Defence Ground Environment system. Jaguars, Buccaneers and
Vulcans operate in the strike/attack role; Jaguars, Canberras and Vulcans are
employed for reconnaissance; Jaguars and the Harrier V/STOL aircraft (to be
DEFENCE
93
Research and
Development
replaced in the Federal Republic of Germany by an improved Harrier version, the
AV8B) provide ground support (with the Harrier also having a tactical
reconnaissance capability); and Nimrods are used for long-range maritime patrol
and anti-submarine warfare and for off-shore surveillance and fishery protection
duties. The Tornado multi-role combat aircraft will replace the Vulcan, Canberra,
Lightning and some Buccaneer and Phantom aircraft in their respective roles
during the 1980s, the first version, the GRi, being due to enter service in the
strike/attack role from 1981 onwards. (Training at the Tri-National Tornado
Training Establishment at RAF Cottesmore began in August 1980.) These forces
will be equipped with advanced weapons such as the Sky Flash and Sidewinder air-
to-air missiles.
Britain’s defence capabilities are also to be improved, at home, by the
deployment of more Hawk advanced trainer aircraft (to be equipped with
Sidewinder missiles), by the retention of two squadrons of Phantoms, and by the
switching of 20 Tornados to air defence; at sea, by the addition of more Nimrod
aircraft to the maritime patrol fleet, and by the retention of the Buccaneer, planned
to be equipped with the Sea Eagle missile system for surface attack.
The VC10 provides strategic transport and the Hercules (which also has a
strategic capability) is used for tactical transport over medium ranges. The Wessex
and Puma helicopters undertake short-range tasks. Victor tankers are used for in¬
flight refuelling. A number of modified VCios is to be added to this force, thus
prolonging the flight time and range of the fighter force.
Civil Defence
Civil defence arrangements are based on the extended and adapted use of the
peacetime resources of government departments, local authorities, the emergency
services and nationalised industries, supplemented by the efforts of voluntary
organisations and individual volunteers.
Following a review of existing arrangements by the Home Office in 1980, an
additional ^45 million is being spent on civil defence in the years to 1983-84,
when annual expenditure will total £45 million. This is being used to improve the
quality and readiness of central and local government planning; increase training
opportunities arranged by the Home Office on staff college lines at the Home
Defence College, Easingwold; help local authorities to plan for better community
involvement in civil defence; and improve the emergency system for decentralised
government control and communications. Improvements are also being made in
the communications, equipment and administrative facilities of the United
Kingdom Warning and Monitoring Organisation. This includes the civilian
Royal Observer Corps, which is organised to provide public warning of an attack,
of the location and strength of nuclear explosions, and of the distribution and level
of radioactive fall-out.
Defence Procurement
Responsibility for the planning of research, development and production of
defence equipment lies with the Ministry of Defence’s Procurement Executive.
The Executive works with the Service users and industry to achieve cost-
effectiveness in equipment procurement.
Most research is undertaken by the Ministry’s research and development
establishments, which have a very wide technological capability, but the Ministry
also sponsors a substantial amount of research by industry and the universities. The
94
Production
Defence Sales
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
establishments monitor contractors’ progress during the development stages and
help with testing programmes and solving technical problems.
The development of modern defence equipment requires a high initial
investment; the cost of British equipment research and development in 1981—82 is
estimated at over ^1,683 million. The search for a more efficient use of resources
has encouraged Allied collaboration, one of the principal aims of the NATO
Conference of National Armaments Directors in which Britain plays a full part.
Nevertheless, the importance of maintaining a sound national industrial base for
defence procurement is recognised, however, and there is close consultation
between government and industry both in the National Defence Industries
Council and through other specialised bodies.
Collaboration between Britain and its European allies is encouraged through the
work of the European Programme Group which, consisting of all NATO’s
European members except Iceland, promotes co-operation in defence equipment
projects. Successful projects involving European countries include the Anglo-
French Jaguar aircraft, Martel air-to-surface missile, and the Lynx, Puma and
Gazelle helicopters, and the Anglo-Belgian family of armoured combat
reconnaissance vehicles. With the Federal Republic of Germany and Italy, Britain
is co-operating in the production and development of the Tornado multi-role
combat aircraft and of medium artillery equipment, the FH70 and SP70. Britain
also favours increased transatlantic co-operation, and, with other European
countries, is collaborating with the United States in the procurement of a multiple
launch rocket system and the possible joint development of a new generation of
air-to-air missiles.
National projects in all the main categories of equipment are under
development. They include an air defence variant of the Tornado; a light man-
portable anti-armour weapon to replace the Martel; and a lightweight torpedo
(Sting Ray) equipped with advanced homing devices for anti-submarine warfare.
An airborne early warning (AEW) version of the Nimrod is being developed with
an advanced AEW radar.
Equipment is manufactured by private industry or by the Royal Ordnance
Factories and Royal Dockyards. Alternatively, procurement may be undertaken
on a collaborative basis.
Sales of British defence equipment enable allies and friendly governments to take
advantage of Britain’s extensive research and development programmes to
improve their own defensive capabilities. The Defence Sales Organisation of the
Ministry of Defence provides advice and assistance on equipment procurement
and defence infrastructure. It also formulates assistance packages containing
equipment, construction work, training, support and other services and involving
contributions from government and from industry. These are often handled by
International Military Services Ltd, the Organisation’s commercial arm.
5 Justice and the Law
The Law
Although the United Kingdom is a unitary State, England and Wales, Scotland
and Northern Ireland each have their own legal systems and law courts. There is
substantial similarity on many points, but considerable differences remain in law,
organisation and practice. In Northern Ireland procedure closely resembles that of
England and Wales but there are often differences in enacted law. However, a large
volume of modern legislation applies throughout the United Kingdom. The legal
systems of the United Kingdom all distinguish between criminal and civil law. The
criminal law is concerned with wrongful acts harmful to the community, civil law
with individuals’ rights, duties and obligations towards one another.
The main sources of law are legislation, common law and European
Community law. Legislation consists of Acts of Parliament, orders (rules and
regulations made by ministers under the authority of an Act of Parliament) and by¬
laws made by local government or other authorities exercising powers conferred
by Parliament. Common law, the ancient law of the land deduced from custom
and interpreted in court cases by the judges, has never been precisely defined or
codified but forms the basis of the law except when superseded by legislation.
European Community law is confined mainly to economic and social matters;
in certain circumstances it takes precedence over domestic law. It is normally
applied by the domestic courts, but the most authoritative rulings are given by the
European Court of Justice (see p 70).
Criminal Justice
Four distinct stages are involved in British criminal justice: making laws which
define prohibited acts and provide for the treatment of offenders; preventing
crime and enforcing the law—largely matters for the police; determining in the
courts the guilt or innocence of people accused of crimes, and sentencing the
guilty; and dealing with convicted offenders.
The Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure, which reported in 1981, made
recommendations for placing on a consistent and statutory footing the powers of
the police in England and Wales, the rights of suspects and the arrangements for
prosecuting offenders, which are being considered by the Government. A similar
review in Scotland led to recommendations which have been largely implemented
by recent legislation.
In spite of plans to reduce public expenditure generally over the period ending
1983-84, expenditure on the programme for law and order will increase to reflect
the priority given by the Government to these services.
The Criminal
Law
The criminal law, like the law generally, undergoes constant reform in the courts
but substantial changes are matters for Parliament. In practice most legislation
affecting criminal law is government-sponsored, but there is usually consultation
between government departments and the legal profession, the police, the
probation and prison services, and voluntary bodies.
96
Crime Statistics
Criminological
Research
Criminal
Injuries
Compensation
Scheme
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Chief constables in England and Wales must supply statistics relating to offences,
offenders, criminal proceedings and the state of crime in their areas. Crime statistics
are published annually by the Home Office and further information about crime
trends (as well as about police matters) is contained in the annual reports of Her
Majesty’s Chief Inspector of Constabulary and (for London) the Commissioner of
Police of the Metropolis. Similar arrangements operate in Scotland and Northern
Ireland.
The differences in the legal systems of the United Kingdom make it impractical
to analyse in detail trends in crime for the country as a whole. In considering these
it has to be remembered that the number of offences recorded by the police does
not cover all those committed since some go undiscovered and others are not
reported. Nevertheless it is clear that, as in western Europe generally, there has
been an upsurge in crime since the early 1950s.
Table 5 shows the rate of serious offences recorded by the police in 1980 in
England and Wales.
TABLE 5 : Serious Offences Recorded by the Police, per 100,000 Population (England
and Wales) 1980
Offence Group 1980
Homicide 1
Violence against the person (excluding homicide) 196
Sexual offences 43
Burglary 1,264
Robbery 30
Theft and handling stolen goods 2,972
Fraud and forgery 214
Criminal damage 730
Other offences 8
TOTAL 5,458
Source: Home Office
The number of serious offences recorded by the police in England and Wales in
1980 was 2,688,000, close to the previous peak recorded in 1977. The number of
serious offences cleared up in 1980 was 996,000, nearly 40 per cent of the total
number of such offences recorded by the police.
A wide range of research into criminal and social policies is carried out by the
Home Office and the Scottish Home and Health Department. Research is also
carried out in university departments, much of it financed by the Government.
The principal university criminological research establishment is the Institute of
Criminology at Cambridge.
The Criminal Injuries Compensation Scheme provides ex gratia compensation to
victims of violent crimes including violence within the family and to people hurt
in attempting to arrest offenders and prevent offences. Compensation, assessed on
the basis of common law damages and usually taking the form of a lump sum
payment, has totalled over £79 million since the Scheme began in 1964.
In Northern Ireland there is separate, statutory provision in certain
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
97
Measures to
Combat
Terrorism
THE POLICE
SERVICE
Forces
Police
Authorities and
Chief
Constables
circumstances for compensation from public funds for criminal injuries, and for
malicious damage to property including losses of profits arising from the damage.
Various temporary measures to deal with terrorism in Northern Ireland have
affected some aspects of the British criminal justice system. Wide-ranging
emergency powers include: the right to search, arrest and detain suspected
terrorists; the proscription of organisations engaged in terrorism connected with
Northern Ireland affairs and occurring in the United Kingdom; and the exclusion
from Great Britain and Northern Ireland of people involved in terrorism. There
are also controls at ports on passengers travelling between Great Britain and
Ireland.
Trials in Northern Ireland criminal courts of terrorist offences are heard by a
judge without a jury to obviate the danger of intimidation of jurors.
The emergency laws are temporary and must be reviewed regularly; they have
also been subject to independent examination. Although conferring special powers
on ministers, they have been used sparingly. No one can be imprisoned for political
beliefs; all prisoners except those awaiting trial have been found guilty in court of
criminal offences.
The security forces in Northern Ireland are subject to the law and can be
prosecuted for criminal offences. Procedures for handling complaints against the
police involve two independent elements: the Director of Public Prosecutions
where allegations of criminal conduct are made; and the Police Complaints Board
for Northern Ireland where complaints relate only to disciplinary offences.
The Criminal Jurisdiction Act 1975 makes it possible to try in the Province a
person accused of certain offences committed in the Irish Republic. It also enables
evidence to be obtained in Northern Ireland for the trial of offences in the Irish
Republic. Reciprocal legislation is in force in the Irish Republic.
British police action in enforcing the law rests mainly upon common consent, for
there are only a small number of officers in relation to the population (roughly one
officer to 413 people). Officers do not normally carry firearms (their only weapon
is a truncheon) and there are strict limitations on police powers.
Each of Britain’s 52 police forces is responsible for law enforcement in its area, but
there is constant co-operation among them.
Outside London most counties (regions or islands in Scotland) have their own
police forces, though in the interests of efficiency several have combined forces.
The policing of London is in the hands of the Metropolitan Police Force, with
headquarters at New Scotland Yard, and the City of London force. The strength of
the regular police force in Great Britain is almost 130,000 (including nearly 11,200
policewomen); in Northern Ireland the strength is about 7,000. The size of
individual police forces depends on the area and population served. The strength of
the Metropolitan Police Force is over 24,000.
Each regular police force is maintained by a police authority, a committee of local
councillors and, in England and Wales, magistrates. The police authority for the
Metropolitan Police Force is the Home Secretary. In Northern Ireland the police
authority is appointed by the Secretary of State.
The police authority’s primary duty is to provide an efficient police force for its
area. Its functions, some subject to ministerial approval, include appointing the
chief constable, deputy chief constable and assistant chief constables; fixing the
maximum permitted strength of the force; and providing buildings and
equipment. In the Metropolitan Police area the commissioner of police and his
immediate subordinates are appointed on the recommendation of the Home
Secretary. The police authorities are financed by central and local government.
98
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Central
Authorities
Status and
Duties
Common
Services
Chief constables are responsible for the direction and control of police forces and
for the appointment, promotion and discipline of all ranks below assistant chief
constable. They are generally answerable to the police authorities on matters of
efficiency, and must submit a written report every year.
The Home Secretary, and the Secretaries of State for Scotland and Northern
Ireland are concerned with the organisation, administration and operation of the
police service. They approve the appointment of chief constables, and may require
a police authority to retire a chief constable in the interests of efficiency, call for a
report from a chief constable on matters relating to local policing or institute a local
inquiry. They can make regulations covering such matters as police ranks;
qualifications for appointment, promotion and retirement; discipline; hours of
duty, leave, pay and allowances; and uniform. Some of these regulations are first
negotiable on the Police Negotiating Board, which has an independent chairman
and representatives of the police authorities, police staff associations and the home
departments. Matters of a non-negotiable kind and general questions are discussed
by the Police Advisory Boards.
All police forces (except the Metropolitan Police for which the Home Secretary
is responsible) are subject to inspection by inspectors of constabulary reporting to
the Home Secretary, the Secretary of State for Scotland or the Secretary of State
for Northern Ireland. Annual reports are published. Inspectors also maintain close
touch with forces under their responsibility, and have advisory functions.
A British police officer is an agent of the law of the land, not of the police authority
nor of the Government, and may be sued or prosecuted for any wrongful act
committed in carrying out duties. Strict procedures, normally including an
independent element, govern the way in which complaints are handled.
Members of the police service may not belong to a trade union nor may they
withdraw their labour in furtherance of a trade dispute. All ranks, however, have
their own staff associations to represent their interests.
Police work ranges from the protection of people and property, road or street
patrolling (the trend in many places is away from the car patrol and back to
‘community’ policing on foot) and traffic control to crime prevention, criminal
investigation and arresting offenders. In urban areas, particularly, police officers
have to deal with social problems and may bring in other social agencies and expert
help. In England and Wales (but not in Scotland) they also prosecute accused
people and may decide whether to grant bail before the court proceedings (see
p 99). The main departments in all forces are the uniform department, criminal
investigation department, traffic department and specialised departments,
including river or marine police, mounted police, and dog handlers.
In order to release as many uniformed police officers as possible for operational
duties, police authorities employ over 37,800 civilians on administrative and
technical duties in England and Wales.
Traffic wardens (of whom there are 4,400) carry out specified duties normally
undertaken by the police. These duties are entirely concerned with traffic and
parking. Wardens are under the control of the chief constable.
Each force has an attachment of special constables who volunteer to perform
police duties in their spare time, without pay. In England and Wales they act as
auxiliaries to the regular force. In Scotland they are used only in emergencies. In
Northern Ireland there is a part-time and full-time paid reserve.
A number of common services are provided by central government departments
and by arrangements between forces. The most important are: training services; a
Forensic Science Service in England and Wales (the Metropolitan Police maintains
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
99
Powers of
Arrest
its own laboratory); telecommunications services which provide police radio
equipment; and central and provincial criminal records available to all forces.
Regional crime squad teams of detectives from several forces investigate major
crimes involving inquiries in more than one police area. The Scottish Crime Squad
assists forces in the investigation and prevention of crime.
Certain special services such as liaison with the International Criminal Police
Organisation (Interpol) are provided for other British forces by the Metropolitan
Police Force. Their services are available, on request, to help any other police force
in England and Wales in criminal investigation, as are the services of the Fraud
Squad, which is run jointly by the Metropolitan Police and the City of London
Police for investigating company frauds.
In all areas of police work the use of scientific aids is widespread. A national
police computer helps to rationalise records and speed up the dissemination of
information.
In England and Wales arrest may be made with or without a warrant issued by a
magistrate. An arrested person is entitled to ask the police to notify a named
person, such as a relative or a solicitor, about the arrest. The police may delay
notification in the interests of the investigation, prevention of crime or
apprehension of offenders and may question an arrested person in custody, so long
as he or she has not been charged with the offence or informed that he or she may
be prosecuted for it. Answers to such questions are admissible as evidence in any
subsequent proceedings, provided that they have been given voluntarily.
Guidance on the questioning of arrested persons is contained in the Judges’
Rules and Administrative Directions to the Police; although these do not have the
force of law, the police are required to comply with them.
The Judges’ Rules also require the police to caution an arrested person before
charging him or her. Once a person has been charged with an offence, the police
may not ask further questions, except in exceptional circumstances, to prevent or
minimise harm or loss to some other person or to the public or to clear up an
ambiguity in a previous answer or statement.
If the police decide not to charge the arrested person (for example, because of
insufficient evidence) he or she may be released immediately. Alternatively, the
police may decide to release the person and proceed by way of summons, or to
issue a caution (reprimand). If the police need to make further inquiries they may
release the arrested person on bail to return to the police station, where he or she
may be charged on re-appearance.
Anyone arrested without a warrant must be released by the police on bail if he or
she cannot be brought before a magistrates’ court within 24 hours, unless the
alleged offence is serious. If detained in custody, the defendant must be brought
before a magistrates’ court as soon as practicable. On appearance before a
magistrates’ court, a defendant charged with an imprisonable offence may be
refused bail in certain specified circumstances only, the most important being
substantial grounds for believing that he or she might abscond, commit further
offences or otherwise interfere with the course of justice. If bail is refused, the
defendant can apply to a judge of the High Court and, if committed to the Crown
Court, may apply for bail to that court. The majority of people remanded by
magistrates are given bail.
A person who thinks that the grounds for detention are unlawful1 may apply to
1 Detention is lawful in pursuance of criminal justice, for contempt of court or of either House of
Parliament and when expressly authorised by Parliament. It is also sometimes lawful in the case of the
mentally disordered.
100
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
CRIMINAL
COURTS
Prosecution
England and
Wales
Scotland
the High Court for a writ of habeas corpus against the person who detained him or
her, requiring the person to appear before the court to justify the detention. An
application for this writ is normally made by the person detained or by someone
acting on his or her behalf. Similar procedures apply in Northern Ireland.
In Scotland police have powers of arrest similar to those in England and Wales
but an arrest must be accompanied by a criminal charge. Once a person has been
charged there is little scope for questioning and only voluntary statements will
normally be allowed in evidence at the trial. The court will reject statements unless
satisfied that they have been fairly obtained. The Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act
1980 introduced a new pre-arrest power of detention which enables the police to
detain and question a suspected person for a period of up to six hours. Thereafter
the person must either be released or charged. Anyone arrested must be brought
before a court with the least possible delay. Where a prosecution on indictment is
intended, the accused is brought before a judge for judicial examination and may
then be committed for trial or for further examination. Eight days may elapse
between commitment for further examination and commitment for trial.
People in custody in Scotland may be freed on bail; even in a case of murder or
treason, bail may be granted by the Lord Advocate or the High Court ofjusticiary.
There is a right of appeal to the High Court by the accused person against the
refusal of bail, by the prosecutor against the granting of bail, or by either party
against the amount fixed. The writ of habeas corpus does not apply in Scotland,
but the High Court ofjusticiary has power to release anyone unlawfully detained
and trials must be brought to a conclusion within no days of committal to
custody.
The decision to prosecute normally rests, in England and Wales, with the police
and in Scotland with public prosecutors. In Northern Ireland there is a Director of
Public Prosecutions (see p 101). In England and Wales (and exceptionally in
Scotland) a private person may institute criminal proceedings. Police may issue
cautions (warnings in Scotland) instead of prosecuting.
In England and Wales some offences can be prosecuted only with the consent of the
Attorney General, others only with his consent or by, or with the consent of, the
Director of Public Prosecutions, who acts under his superintendence. Such crimes
as bribery and corruption of officials, and the use and possession of explosives, are
offences requiring the Attorney General’s consent; in the case of incest, for
example, the Director’s consent is sufficient. The Director always prosecutes
crimes such as treason and murder. The police must report to the Director’s office a
further list of offences, including serious offences against the person, sedition,
criminal offences by police officers, and offences relating to obscene or indecent
publications. The Director does not necessarily prosecute all such cases but may do
so in any that appear to be important or where intervention is thought necessary;
otherwise proceedings are conducted by solicitors employed by the police. The
Director also considers whether proceedings should be taken in cases reported by
government departments, and advises the police and others concerned with
administration of the criminal law.
When cases go for trial, barristers in private practice appear on the Director’s
behalf; at the Central Criminal Court in London, these are drawn from a panel of
‘Treasury Counsel’ appointed by the Attorney General.
The prosecution process in Scotland is different from that in the rest of the United
Kingdom. The Lord Advocate (see p 114) is responsible for the prosecution of all
crimes but delegates most of the work to the Solicitor General (see p 114), to ten
advocates depute and to procurators fiscal. The permanent adviser to the Lord
101
Northern Ireland
Courts in
England and
Wales
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
Advocate on prosecution matters is the Crown Agent who is head of the
procurator fiscal service and is assisted by a staff of civil servants known as the
Crown Office. Prosecutions in the High Court of Justiciary are prepared by the
Crown Office while crimes tried before the sheriff and district courts are
prosecuted by the procurators fiscal who are lawyers and full-time civil servants.
The police investigate offences and report to the procurator fiscal who decides
whether to prosecute, subject to the discretion and control of the Crown Office.
The Director of Public Prosecutions for Northern Ireland, who is responsible to
the Attorney General, prosecutes all offences tried on indictment, and may do so in
summary cases of a serious nature. Other summary offences are prosecuted by the
police.
Magistrates’ courts deal with nearly all criminal cases in England and Wales, and
conduct preliminary investigations into more serious offences. The Crown Court,
situated in a number of towns and cities, takes all criminal work above the level of
magistrates’ courts and trials are held before a jury.
Magistrates’ courts hear charges against people accused of‘summary offences’,
those that can be legally disposed of by magistrates sitting without a jury. There are
some 700 courts and some 23,000 magistrates (justices of the peace’, JPs) who are
advised on points of law and procedure by a clerk to the justices (or an assistant)
who is normally legally qualified and is also in charge of the court’s administrative
arrangements. Each court normally consists of three unpaid lay magistrates who
ascertain the facts of a case and apply the law to them. Magistrates are appointed by
the Lord Chancellor. In inner London and other large urban areas where work is
heavy, professional ‘stipendiary’ magistrates, full-time, salaried and legally
qualified, usually preside alone.
Magistrates must as a rule sit in open court, but when they make preliminary
inquiries into a serious case to see whether here is evidence to justify committal for
trial in the Crown Court the proceedings must not be reported in the press at the
time except at the defendant’s request, unless the person is discharged. Magistrates
cannot usually impose a sentence of more than six months’ imprisonment or a fine
exceeding .£1,000. If an offence carries a higher maximum penalty, they may
commit the offender for sentence at the Crown Court if they consider their own
power inadequate.
Cases involving people under 17 are heard in juvenile courts, specially
constituted magistrates’ courts which sit apart from other courts, or at a different
time; only limited publicity is allowed. If a young person under 17 is charged
jointly with someone of 17 or over, the case is heard in the ordinary magistrates’
court. If the young person is found guilty, the court may transfer the case to a
juvenile court, unless it wishes to pass sentence itself.
The Crown Court deals with trials of the more serious cases, the sentencing of
offenders committed for sentence by magistrates’ courts, and appeals from
magistrates’ courts. It has about 90 centres and is presided over by High Court
judges, full-time ‘circuit judges’ and part-time recorders. All contested trials take
place before a jury. A High Court judge sits alone for the most serious cases. A
circuit judge or recorder sits with between two and four magistrates for appeals
and committals for sentence from magistrates’ courts and may sit with magistrates
to try the less important cases.
The Crown Court may impose a fine of any amount on a convicted offender
and, within the maximum penalty determined for the offence by Parliament, any
other custodial or non-custodial penalty.
Appeals
102
Scotland
Children’s
Hearings
Northern
Ireland
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the sentence and, if contesting a finding of guilt, against the conviction itself.
Where the appeal is on a point of law, either the prosecutor or the defendant may
appeal from the magistrates’ court to the High Court, which sits in London and
some regional centres (see pp 110-11). Appeals from the Crown Court, either
against conviction or against sentence, are usually made to the Court of Appeal
(Criminal Division). A further appeal from the Court of Appeal to the House of
Lords can be brought if the court certifies that a point of law of general public
importance is involved and it appears to the court or the Lords that the point is one
that ought to be considered by the House. A prosecutor or defendant may appeal
to the Lords from a decision of the High Court in a criminal case.
The Attorney General may seek the opinion of the Court of Appeal on a point
of law which has arisen in a case where a person tried on indictment is acquitted;
the court has power to refer the point to the House of Lords if necessary. The
acquittal in the original case is not affected, nor is the identity of the acquitted
person revealed without his or her consent.
In Scotland the High Court of Justiciary tries such crimes as murder, treason and
rape; the sheriff court is concerned with less serious offences and the district court
with minor offences.
Criminal cases are heard either under solemn procedure, when proceedings are
taken on indictment and the judge sits with a jury of 15 members, or under
summary procedure, when the judge sits without a jury. All cases in the High
Court and the more serious ones in sheriff courts are tried by a judge and jury.
Summary procedure is used in the less serious cases in the sheriff courts, and in all
cases in the district courts.
District courts are the administrative responsibility of the district and islands
local government authorities. The judges are lay justices of the peace including up
to one-quarter of the elected members of the authorities appointed as ex-officio
justices. In Glasgow there are three stipendiary magistrates who are full-time
salaried lawyers.
Scotland’s six sheriffdoms are further divided into sheriff court districts, each of
which has a sheriff or sheriffs, who are the judges of the court.
The High Court ofjusticiary, Scotland’s supreme criminal court, is both a trial
and an appeal court. Any of the following judges is entitled to try cases in the High
Court: the Lord Justice General (the head of-the court), the Lord Justice Clerk (the
judge next in seniority) or one of the Lord Commissioners ofjusticiary. The main
seat of the court is in Edinburgh, although the High Court on circuit also tries cases
in other towns.
All appeals are dealt with by the High Court in Edinburgh. In both solemn and
summary procedure, an appeal may be brought against conviction, or sentence, or
both. The Court may authorise a retrial if it sets aside a conviction. There is no
further appeal to the House of Lords.
Children under 16 (and in some cases young people between 16 and 18) who have
committed an offence or are considered to need compulsory care may be brought
before an informal children’s hearing comprising three members of the local
community (see p 108).
The structure of Northern Ireland courts is broadly similar to that of England and
Wales. Day-to-day work of dealing summarily with minor local cases is carried
out by magistrates’ courts presided over by a full-time, legally qualified resident
magistrate. Young offenders under 17 and young people under 17 who need care,
protection and control are dealt with by juvenile courts consisting of the resident
103
Trial
The Jury
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
magistrate and two lay members (at least one of whom must be a woman) specially
qualified to deal with juveniles. Appeals from magistrates’ courts are heard by the
county court.
The Crown Court deals with criminal trials on indictment. It is served by High
Court and county court judges. Proceedings are heard before a single judge, and all
contested cases, other than those involving offences specified under emergency
legislation, take place before a jury.
Appeals from the Crown Court against conviction or sentence are heard by the
Northern Ireland Court of Appeal. Procedures for a further appeal to the House of
Lords are similar to those in England and Wales.
Criminal trials in the United Kingdom take the form of a contest between the
prosecution and the defence. Since the law presumes the innocence of an accused
person until guilt has been proved, the prosecution is not granted any advantage,
apparent or real, over the defence. A defendant has the right to employ a legal
adviser and may be granted legal aid from public funds. If remanded in custody,
the person may be visited by a legal adviser to ensure a properly prepared defence.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland during the preparation of the case, the
prosecution usually tells the defence of relevant documents which it is not
proposed to put in evidence and discloses them if asked to do so. The prosecution
should also inform the defence of witnesses whose evidence may help the accused
and whom the prosecution does not propose to call. The defence or prosecution
may suggest that the defendant’s mental state renders him or her unfit to be tried. If
the jury decides that this is so, the defendant is admitted to a specified hospital.
Criminal trials are normally in open court and rules of evidence (concerned with
the proof of facts) are rigorously applied. If evidence is illegally admitted, a
conviction can be quashed on appeal. During the trial the defendant has the right to
hear and cross-examine witnesses for the prosecution, normally through a lawyer;
to call his or her own witnesses who, if they will not attend voluntarily may be
legally compelled to attend; and to address the court in person or through a
lawyer, the defence having the right to the last speech at the trial. The defendant
cannot be questioned without consenting to be sworn as a witness in his or her own
defence. When he or she does testify, cross-examination about character or other
conduct may be made only in exceptional circumstances and generally the
prosecution may not introduce evidence of such matters. Confessions made in the
course of previous judicial proceedings are admissible as evidence only if they have
been made on oath.
Injury trials the judge decides questions of law, sums up the evidence for the jury,
and discharges the accused or passes sentence. Only the jury decides whether the
defendant is guilty or not guilty. If the jury cannot reach a unanimous verdict, the
judge may direct it to bring in a majority verdict provided that, in the normal jury
of 12 people, there are not more than two dissentients. If the jury returns a verdict
of‘not guilty’, the prosecution has no right of appeal and the defendant cannot be
tried again for the same offence. If‘guilty’ the defendant has a right of appeal to the
appropriate court. A jury is completely independent of the judiciary. Once
members are sworn in, they are protected from all interference. Both the
prosecution and the defence can object to particular jurors. In England, Wales and
Northern Ireland people whose names appear on the electoral register are liable for
jury service and their names are chosen at random; in Scotland, where the
minimum age for jurors is 21, not all those on the register are eligible to serve as the
minimum voting age is 18.
At summary trials in Scotland accused people are asked to plead to the charge at the
Scotland
Coroners’
Courts
TREATMENT
OF
OFFENDERS
Sentencing
Non-Custodial
Treatment
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
first calling of the case and, if they plead guilty, the court may dispose of the case.
Where the plea is ‘not guilty’, the court proceeds to trial at once or, more usually,
appoints a later date.
In trials on indictment, the ‘pleading’ proceedings take place in the sheriff court,
where the accused person is called upon to plead guilty or not guilty. If the plea is
not guilty, the case is continued to the ‘trial’ proceedings in the appropriate court.
If the plea is guilty, and the case is to be dealt with in the sheriff court, the sheriff
may dispose of it at once. If it is a High Court case, it is continued to the ‘trial’
proceedings in the High Court of Justiciary.
The trial proceedings are held at least nine days after the pleading proceedings,
either before the sheriff or the High Court, with a jury of 15. Evidence is presented
without opening speeches, and there are closing speeches for the prosecution and
for the defence, followed by the judge’s charge to the jury. The jury may return a
verdict of‘not guilty’ or ‘not proven’, both of which result in acquittal, or it may
find the accused ‘guilty’, in which case the court delivers sentence. The verdict may
be reached by a simple majority. With a few minor exceptions, no person may be
convicted without the evidence of at least two witnesses, or corroboration of one
witness by facts and circumstances which clearly implicate the accused.
Coroners’ courts investigate violent and unnatural deaths or sudden deaths where
the cause is unknown. Cases may be brought before the local coroner (a senior
lawyer or doctor) by doctors, the police, various public authorities or members of
the public, and it is the coroner’s duty to hold an inquiry into how, when and
where the deceased died. If the death is sudden and the cause unknown, the coroner
need not hold an inquest in court, but may order a post-mortem examination to
determine cause of death. ^J^here there is reason to believe that the deceased died a
violent or unnatural death or died in prison or in other specified circumstances the
coroner must hold an inquest.
In Scotland the office of coroner does not exist. The local procurator fiscal
inquires privately into all sudden and suspicious deaths in his district and may
report the findings to the Crown Agent.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland a person who has not previously served a
custodial sentence of a particular kind may not be sentenced to custodial treatment
of that kind unless he or she is legally represented or has chosen not to be, and unless
the court is satisfied that no other sentence will suffice. In England and Wales,
extended sentences longer than the normal maximum term may be imposed on
persistent offenders. In the case of murder there is a mandatory penalty of life
imprisonment. This is the maximum penalty for a number of serious offences such
as robbery, rape, arson and manslaughter. Although the death penalty may still, in
theory, be imposed for certain offences, such as treason, it is no longer used.
In Scotland, unless the sentence is limited by statute, the maximum penalty is
determined by the status of the court trying the accused. In trials on indictment, the
High Court may impose a sentence of imprisonment for any term up to life, and
the sheriff court any term up to two years. In summary cases, the sheriff may
impose up to six months’ imprisonment.
Non-custodial treatment includes fines; probation; absolute or (in England, Wales
and Northern Ireland) conditional discharge when the court considers there is no
need to impose punishment; and ‘binding over where the offender pledges
money, with or without sureties, to keep the peace and be of good behaviour.
In England and Wales, offenders aged 17 or over convicted of imprisonable
offences can, with their consent, be given community service orders. The court
may order between 40 and 240 hours’ unpaid service to be completed within 12
105
Probation
Prisons
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
months. Examples of work done include decorating the houses of old or disabled
people and building adventure playgrounds for children. Community service
schemes also operate in Scotland and Northern Ireland.
The sentence imposed on an offender in England, Wales and Northern Ireland
may also, with his or her consent, be deferred for up to six months to enable a court
to take into account conduct after some expected change in circumstances.
The courts may order an offender to pay compensation for personal injury, loss
or damage resulting from an offence. Where the loss amounts to ^15,000 or more
they may make a criminal bankruptcy order against an offender.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland a judge is free to pass a suspended
sentence of not more than two years. The sentence is not served unless the offender
is convicted of a further offence punishable with imprisonment; in that event the
suspended sentence normally takes effect and another sentence may be imposed for
the new offence. An offender receiving a suspended sentence of more than six
months may be placed under the supervision of a probation officer for all or part of
the period. Courts in England and Wales have the power, when passing a sentence
of between six months’ and two years’ imprisonment, to order that part should be
served and the rest held in suspense. This provision has not yet, however, been
brought into force.
In certain circumstances courts may order forfeiture of property involved in the
commission of crime. An offender convicted of a serious crime may be disqualified
from driving if a motor vehicle was used in its commission.
In most circumstances, after a rehabilitation period of from six months to ten
years depending on the nature of the sentence imposed, a person convicted of a
criminal offence need not disclose it, and the offence will not be held against him or
her. This does not apply to those with a prison sentence of more than 2^ years.
Probation is designed to rehabilitate an offender, who continues to live an ordinary
life with the supervision, advice and assistance of a probation officer. Before
making a probation order (which lasts between six months and three years), the
court must explain its effects and make sure that the probationer understands that
failure to comply with it will make him or her liable to be dealt with again for the
original offence. An order can be made only if the offender is aged 17 years or over
and has given consent, and usually requires the probationer to keep in regular
touch with the probation officer, and to be of good behaviour. In Northern Ireland
an order can be made for anyone over the age of criminal responsibility (10 years),
but consent is required where the offender is aged 14 or over. It may require the
offender to live in a specified place (such as an approved hostel), or receive
psychiatric treatment.
In England and Wales the probation service is administered locally by probation
and after-care committees of local magistrates and co-opted members with legal
and specialist interests. In Northern Ireland it is administered by the Northern
Ireland Office. Probation officers are usually members of small teams, although
each has much independence in undertaking casework.
Probation and after-care committees may provide and maintain day training
centres, bail hostels, probation hostels and other rehabilitation centres. The service
also administers the community service scheme.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland, the services of probation and after¬
care officers are available to every criminal court. In Scotland, offenders subject to
probation or after-care are supervised by local authority social workers.
Although the courts have made less use of prison as a penalty for criminal activity,
there has been an increase in the prison population as a result of the rise in crime. In
io6
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Remission of
Sentence and
Parole
Prison Industries
and Education
1980 the number of people in prisons, borstals, and detention centres rose to over
44,500 in England and Wales and 4,300 in Scotland; there are 125 prison service
establishments and the size of the prison service in 1980 was 24,000. Policies
announced in 1980 include the continuation of efforts to reduce the prison
population and plans to increase the building programme, and the reorganisation
of prison service administration.
Prisons to which offenders may be committed directly by a court are known as
‘local prisons’; all are closed. Other prisons, open or closed, receive prisoners on
transfer from local prisons (open prisons do not have physical barriers to prevent
escape). Sentenced prisoners are classified into groups for security purposes. There
are separate prisons for women.
People awaiting trial are entitled to privileges not granted to convicted prisoners
and, as far as practicable, are separated from convicted prisoners. Prisoners under
21 are separated from older prisoners.
Many British prisons were built during the nineteenth century and are now
unsatisfactory and overcrowded. A number of new prisons have been built and
existing establishments are being redeveloped and modernised.
All prisoners in Great Britain serving a sentence of more than one month, except
those sentenced to life imprisonment, are allowed remission of one-third of their
sentence provided it does not reduce the sentence to less than 31 days (in Scotland,
30 days). Remission may be forfeited for serious misconduct. Prisoners serving
fixed sentences of more than 18 months become eligible for release on parole after
one-third of their sentence or 12 months, whichever expires later.
The parole licence remains in force until the date on which the prisoner would
have been released but for the parole. It prescribes the conditions with which the
offender must comply. About 8-7 per cent of prisoners granted parole in England
and Wales in 1980 were recalled to prison.
Prisoners serving life sentences are also eligible for release on licence, after
consideration by the Home Secretary or the Secretary of State for Scotland who
consults the judiciary, and on the recommendation of the Parole Board. Those
released remain on licence for the rest of their lives subject to recall at any time
should the circumstances warrant.
In Northern Ireland, where there is no parole scheme, prisoners receive one-half
remission on determinate sentences, provided remission does not reduce the
sentence to below 31 days. For those serving over a year, a court can order all or
part of the outstanding balance of the remitted period to be served in the event of
reconviction in the remitted period for an imprisonable offence, in addition to any
penalty imposed for a further offence.
Prison industries aim to give inmates work experience which will assist them when
released and to secure a return which will reduce the cost of the prison system. The
main industries are clothing and textile manufacture, engineering, woodwork,
laundering, electro-mechanical production, farming and horticulture. Most
production caters for internal needs and for other public services but much of it is
for the commercial market. A few prisoners are employed outside prison. Small
payments are made for work; in some prisons, incentive schemes provide an
opportunity for higher earnings on the basis of output and skill.
Education for those in custody is financed by the prison service and provided by
local education authorities. Every establishment in England and Wales has an
education officer assisted by a team of teachers. Education is compulsory, full-time,
for young offenders below school leaving age and part-time for those between 16
and 21. For older offenders it is voluntary. Some prisoners study for public
examinations (including those of the Open University). Within the resources
loy
Medical and
Psychological
Services
Privileges and
Discipline
Welfare
Discharge and
After-care
Children in
Trouble
England and
Wales
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
available there is teaching in recreational and leisure pursuits. Vocational training is
provided directly by the prison service. Similar opportunities for education and
vocational training are available in Northern Ireland prisons. Physical education is
voluntary but offenders under 21 have to attend a certain number of classes. Many
establishments lack the proper facilities, although there have been recent
improvements.
The prison medical service has a general responsibility for the physical and mental
health of all those in custody. Each establishment has accommodation for sick
people and patients can also be transferred to National Health Service hospitals.
Psychiatric care is available.
The work of psychologists in prisons includes evaluating treatment
programmes, studying management practices, contributing to the management
and treatment programmes of individuals and groups, taking part in advisory and
training work with staff and making assessments for treatment or allocation
purposes.
Prisoners are entitled to write and receive letters and to be visited by relatives.
Privileges include a personal radio, books, periodicals and newspapers, and the
right to make purchases from the canteen with money earned in prison.
Depending on facilities prisoners may be granted the further privileges of dining
and recreation in association and watching television.
Breaches of discipline are dealt with by the prison governor, or by the board of
visitors (visiting committee in Scotland), who have power to order forfeiture of
remission and forfeiture of privileges. Boards of visitors (and visiting committees)
consist of lay people, two of whom must be magistrates.
The welfare of prisoners is the concern of all prison staff. Much of this work is the
responsibility of probation officers (in Scotland social workers) stationed in prisons
who help prisoners in their relations with individuals and agencies outside and
make plans for after-care on release. Prisoners may also receive visits from specially
appointed prison visitors whose work is voluntary.
Chaplains give spiritual help and advice to inmates and are increasingly involved
in management decisions affecting their needs and quality of life.
All prisons in England and Wales arrange pre-release preparations. Prisoners
serving four years or more are considered for outside employment before release.
For those selected, work is found outside the prison for about the last six months of
sentence; during the period prisoners may live in a separate part of the prison or in
a hostel outside. Normal wages are paid so that they can resume support for their
families. (In Scotland pre-release arrangements differ from these in some respects.)
Periods of home leave may be granted in the last nine months of sentence to those
serving two years or more to assist resettlement.
The aim of after-care, run by the probation and after-care service, is to assist
offenders on return to society. Compulsory supervision by probation officers is
given to most offenders under 21 when released, adult offenders released on parole,
and those released on licence from a life sentence. A voluntary system is offered to
others. After-care is also provided by voluntary societies, most of which are
members of the National Association for the Care and Resettlement of Offenders.
Hostels and accommodation are provided, often with government financial help.
In England and Wales no child under ten years can be held guilty of an offence. A
child aged ten to 16 years who is alleged to have committed an offence may be the
subject of criminal proceedings or of‘care’ proceedings, both of which normally
take place in juvenile courts. In care proceedings the fact that a child is found guilty
of an offence is not in itself sufficient justification for making an order; the court
io8
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Scotland
must also consider the child to need care or control which he or she is unlikely to
receive unless an order is made. In criminal proceedings a court may make a care
order without having to consider whether the child needs care or control; this
applies to a child found guilty of an offence (other than homicide) punishable in the
case of an adult by imprisonment.
A number of orders are available to courts in both care and criminal
proceedings. A care order commits the child to the care of the local authority,
which becomes responsible for deciding where the child should be accommodated,
whether, for example, with foster parents or in a community home (see p 126).
The Government intends to give courts the powers to make a residential care order
when a child, who is already under a care order as a result of an offence, commits a
further offence (for which an adult could be punished by imprisonment). The local
authority would be required to remove the child from home for a specified period
of up to six months. The authority must review each care order every six months
and consider whether an application should be made to the court to end it; the
order normally expires when the child reaches 18 or 19. For children too severely
disturbed or disruptive to be treated in other child care homes, there are two special
Youth Treatment Centres administered directly by the Department of Health and
Social Security.
Under a supervision order (usually valid for three years or less) a child normally
remains at home under the supervision of a social worker or a probation officer,
but may have to live with a specified person or to comply with directions of his or
her supervisor. The child may have to undergo ‘intermediate treatment’, a
compromise between measures involving complete removal from home and those
which do not, and consisting of participation, under a supervisor, in a variety of
constructive and remedial activities through a short residential course or, more
usually, attendance at a day or evening centre. An intermediate treatment fund,
administered by the Rainer Foundation with the help of government finance, has
been set up to aid individuals, groups or organisations willing to provide
intermediate treatment facilities.
A court may also make an order requiring a parent or guardian to take proper
care of the child and to exercise proper control; the order may be made only with
the consent of the parent or guardian. In care proceedings, the court may order a
stay in hospital in accordance with the mental health legislation.
The courts may also order payments of compensation, or impose fines or grant a
conditional or absolute discharge. Offenders, both male and female, may be
ordered to spend a total of up to 24 hours of their spare time on Saturdays at an
attendance centre (up to three hours on any one occasion). The centres which
provide physical training and instruction in practical subjects are for those found
guilty of offences for which older people could be sent to prison. Boys aged 14 to
16 may be sent to a junior detention centre, where the regime is similar to that in
senior detention centres (see p 109). Boys and girls aged 15 or 16 may be sentenced
to borstal training. In the case of a very serious crime, detention in a place approved
by the Home Secretary may be ordered.
In Scotland the age of criminal responsibility is eight years but prosecution of
children in the criminal courts is rare and can take place only on the instructions of
the Lord Advocate; court proceedings usually apply only to very serious offences.
Instead children under 16 who have committed an offence or need care and
protection may be brought before an informal children’s hearing which
determines appropriate care and treatment (see p 126). An official reporter
decides whether a child should come before a hearing. If the grounds for referral
are not accepted by the child and parents, the case goes to the sheriff court for
109
Northern Ireland
Young Adult
Offenders
The Civil Law
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
proof. It can then come back to the hearing. The sheriff also decides appeals against
a decision of a children’s hearing.
The age of criminal responsibility in Northern Ireland is ten. Children aged 16 and
under charged with committing a criminal offence may be brought before a
juvenile court. If the child is found guilty of an offence punishable by
imprisonment if committed by an adult, he or she may be sent to a training school,
placed in the care of a ’fit person’, possibly the area Health and Social Services
Board, or put under supervision. Alternatively the court can order a period at an
attendance centre or a remand home, or impose a fine or compensation. A
conditional or absolute discharge is also possible. Whatever other order it makes, a
juvenile court can also make an order requiring parents to ensure the child’s good
behaviour. Children brought before the courts in need of care and protection may
be placed in care locally.
Offenders aged 17 to 20 years (16 to 21 years in Scotland) are recognised as a
category distinct from child and adult offenders. The main non-custodial measures
are generally the same as those for adults. In England and Wales the custodial
sentences available are: detention in a detention centre (males only), borstal
training or imprisonment. The senior detention centres are for young male
offenders (age 17—21) for whom a long period of residential training away from
home does not seem necessary or justified, but who need to be taught respect for
the law through some form of custody. Detention is normally for three months
but there is power to award up to six months. Life in a centre demands high
standards of discipline. Training comprises a working week of 40 hours, including
an hour a day of physical training, with considerable attention paid to education.
After discharge, offenders are supervised for up to a year.
Borstal training is remedial and educational, based on personal training by
selected staff. Vocational training in skilled trades is emphasised, there is much
freedom of movement and many borstals are open. Offenders are placed as near
their homes as possible to maintain ties with the local community. Borstals are
available for offenders aged 15 to 20. Courts rarely order borstal training unless
they have already tried fines, probation or detention centre training, perhaps all
three. The training period, usually from six months to two years, is followed by
supervision.
A person under 17 cannot be sent to prison in England and Wales, and no court
may pass a sentence of imprisonment on an offender aged 17 to 20 unless satisfied
that no other penalty is appropriate. A court cannot impose a sentence of between
six months and three years unless the offender has already served a term of borstal
training or at least six months’ imprisonment. Sentences of up to two years may be
ordered by a court to be suspended. ‘Young prisoners’ under 21 at the time of
sentence generally serve their sentences separately from older prisoners. In
Scotland no offender under 21 may be sent to prison. A single sentence of detention
is available for young offenders to be served in a detention centre or in a young
offenders’ institute. Remission of part of the sentence for good conduct, release on
parole, and supervision after release are available. In Northern Ireland, no offender
under 21 sentenced to three years or less may be sent to prison. Such offenders
would serve their sentences in a young offenders’ centre.
Civil Justice
The main sub-divisions of the civil law of England, Wales and Northern Ireland
are: family law, the law of property, the law of contract and the law of torts
I 10
CIVIL
COURTS
England and
Wales
Appeals
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
(covering injuries suffered by one person at the hands of another irrespective of any
contract between them and including concepts such as negligence, defamation and
trespass). Other branches of the civil law include constitutional and administrative
(particularly concerned with the use of executive power), industrial, maritime and
ecclesiastical law. Scottish civil law has its own, often analogous, branches.
The limited civil jurisdiction of magistrates’ courts extends to matrimonial
proceedings for custody and maintenance orders, adoption orders and affiliation
and guardianship orders. The courts also have jurisdiction concerning nuisances
under the Public Health Acts and the recovery of rates. Committees of magistrates
license public houses, betting shops and clubs.
The jurisdiction of the 300 or so county courts covers actions founded upon
contract and tort (with minor exceptions); trust and mortgage cases; and actions
for the recovery of land. Cases involving claims exceeding set limits may be tried in
the county court by consent of the parties, or in certain circumstances on transfer
from the High Court.
Other matters dealt with by the county courts include hire purchase, the Rent
Acts, landlord and tenant and adoption cases. Undefended divorce cases are
determined in those courts designated as divorce county courts (defended cases are
transferred to the High Court) and outside London bankruptcies are dealt with in
certain county courts. The courts also deal with complaints of race and sex
discrimination. Where small claims are concerned (especially those involving
consumers), there are special arbitration facilities and simplified procedures.
All judges of the Supreme Court (comprising the Court of Appeal, the Crown
Court and the High Court) and all circuit judges and recorders have power to sit in
the county courts, but each court has one or more circuit judges assigned to it by
the Lord Chancellor, and the regular sittings of the court are mostly taken by them.
The judge normally sits alone, although on request the court may, exceptionally,
order a trial with a jury.
The High Court ofjustice is divided into the Chancery Division, the Queen’s
Bench Division and the Family Division. Its jurisdiction is both original and
appellate and covers all civil and some criminal cases. In general, particular types of
work are assigned to a particular division. The Family Division, for instance, is
concerned with all jurisdiction affecting the family, including that relating to
adoption and guardianship. The Chancery Division deals with the interpretation
of wills and the administration of estates. Maritime and commercial law is the
responsibility of admiralty and commercial courts of the Queen’s Bench Division.
Each of the 80 or so judges of the High Court is attached to one division on
appointment but may be transferred to any other division while in office. The Lord
Chancellor is president of the Chancery Division, administered by the senior judge
known as the Vice-Chancellor. The Queen’s Bench Division is presided over by
the Lord Chief Justice of England, who ranks next to the Lord Chancellor in the
legal hierarchy, and the Family Division is headed by the President. Outside
London (where the High Court sits at the Royal Courts ofjustice) sittings are held
at 23 Crown Court centres. For the hearing of cases at first instance, High Court
judges sit alone. Appeals in civil matters from lower courts are heard by courts of
two (or sometimes three) judges, or by single judges of the appropriate division,
nominated by the Lord Chancellor.
Appeals in matrimonial, adoption and guardianship proceedings heard by
magistrates’ courts go to a divisional court of the Family Division of the High
Court. Affiliation appeals are heard by the Crown Court, as are appeals from
decisions of the licensing committees of magistrates. Appeals from the High Court
111
Scotland
The Scottish Land
Court
Northern
Ireland
Civil
Proceedings
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
and county courts are heard in the Court of Appeal (Civil Division) and may go on
to the House of Lords, the final court of appeal in civil cases.
The ex officio members of the Court of Appeal are the Lord Chancellor, the Lord
Chiefjustice, the President of the Family Division and the Master of the Rolls; the
ordinary members are 18 Lords Justices of Appeal.
The judges in the House of Lords are the nine Lords of Appeal in Ordinary, who
must have a quorum of three, but usually sit as a group of five, and sometimes even
of seven. Lay peers do not attend the hearing of appeals (which normally take place
in a committee room and not in the legislative chamber), but peers who hold or
have held high judicial office may also sit. The president of the House in its judicial
capacity is the Lord Chancellor.
The main civil courts are the sheriff courts and the Court of Session. The civil
jurisdiction of the sheriff court extends to most kinds of action and is normally
unlimited by the value of the case. Much of the work is done by the sheriff, against
whose decisions an appeal may be made to the sheriff-principal or directly to the
Court of Session.
The Court of Session sits only in Edinburgh, and in general has jurisdiction to
deal with all kinds of action. The main exception is an action exclusive to the sheriff
court, where the value claimed is less than a set amount. The Court has sole
jurisdiction in divorce and certain other actions. It is divided into two parts: the
Outer House, a court of first instance, and the Inner House, mainly an appeal court.
The Inner House is divided into two divisions of equal status, each consisting of
four judges—the first division being presided over by the Lord President and the
second division by the Lord Justice Clerk. Appeals to the Inner House may be
made from the Outer House and from the sheriff court. From the Inner House an
appeal may go to the House of Lords. The judges of the Court of Session are the
same as those of the High Court of Justiciary. The Lord President of the Court
holds the office of Lord Justice General in the High Court (see p 102).
The Scottish Land Court, a special court with jurisdiction relating to agricultural
tenancies and similar matters, consists of a judge and four lay specialists in
agriculture.
Minor civil cases in Northern Ireland are dealt with in county courts, though
magistrates’ courts also deal with certain classes of civil case. The superior civil law
court is the High Court ofjustice from which an appeal may be made to the Court
of Appeal. These two courts, together with the Crown Court, comprise the
Supreme Court ofjudicature of Northern Ireland and their practice and procedure
are similar to those in England. The House of Lords is the final civil appeal court.
In England and Wales civil proceedings are instituted by the aggrieved person; no
preliminary inquiry on the authenticity of the grievance is required. An action in a
magistrates’ court is begun by a complaint on which the court may serve the
defendant with a summons. This contains details of the complaint and the date on
which it will be heard. Parties and witnesses give their evidence at the court
hearing. Domestic proceedings are heard by not more than three lay justices
including, where practicable, a woman; members of the public are not allowed to
be present. The court may order provision for the custody and supervision of
children, as well as maintenance payments for spouses and children. Actions in the
High Court are usually begun by a writ of summons served on the defendant by
the plaintiff, stating the nature of the claim. A defendant intending to contest the
claim informs the court. Documents setting out the precise question in dispute (the
112
Restrictive
Practices Court
Administrative
Tribunals
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
pleadings) are then delivered to the court. County court proceedings are initiated
by a ‘request’ served on the defendant by the court; subsequent procedure is
simpler than in the High Court.
A decree of divorce must be pronounced in open court, but a procedure for most
undefended cases dispenses with the need to give evidence in court and permits
written evidence to be considered by the registrar.
Civil proceedings, because they are a private matter, can usually be abandoned
or ended by compromise at any time without the court’s permission, the parties to
a dispute being able to settle their differences through their solicitors before the
actual trial is reached. Actions brought to court are usually tried by a judge without
a jury, except in defamation, false imprisonment, or malicious prosecution cases,
when either party may, except in certain special circumstances, insist on trial by
jury, or a fraud case, when the defendant may claim this right. The jury decides
questions of fact and damages awarded to the injured party; majority verdicts may
be accepted.
Judgments in civil cases are enforceable through the authority of the court. Most
are for sums of money and may be enforced, in cases of default, by seizure of the
debtor’s goods or by attachment of earnings (a court order requiring an employer
to make periodic payments to the court by deduction from the debtor s wages), j
Other judgments can take the form of an injunction restraining someone from
performing an illegal act. Refusal to obey a judgment ordering the defendant to do
something or to refrain from doing something may result in imprisonment for
contempt of court. Arrest under an order of committal may be effected only on a
warrant of the court.
The general rule is that the costs of the action (lawyers’ charges, court fees and
other payments) are within the discretion of the court. Normally, the court orders
them to be paid by the party losing the action, but in the case of family law
maintenance proceedings a magistrates’ court can order either party to pay the
whole or part of the other’s costs.
In Scotland proceedings in the Court of Session or ordinary actions in the sheriff
court are initiated by serving the defender with a summons (an initial writ in the
sheriff court). In Court of Session actions the next step is the publication of the
action in the court lists. A defender who intends to contest the action must inform
the court; if he or she does not appear, the court grants a decree in absence in favour
of the pursuer. In ordinary actions in the sheriff court the defender is simply
required to enter appearance within a certain number of days after service of the
initial writ, and this is followed by a formal appearance in court by the parties to
the dispute or their solicitors.
In summary causes (involving small sums) in the sheriff court the procedure is
less formal. The statement of claim is incorporated in the summons. The procedure
is designed to enable most actions to be carried through without the parties
involved having to appear in court. Normally they (or their representatives) need
appear only when an action is defended.
Proceedings in Northern Ireland are similar to those in England and Wales.
The Restrictive Practices Court is a specialised United Kingdom court which deals
with monopolies and restrictive trade practices. It comprises five judges and up to
ten other people with expertise in industry, commerce or public life.
Administrative tribunals consist of persons or bodies exercising judicial functions
outside the ordinary hierarchy of the courts. As a rule, they are set up under
statutory powers which also govern their constitution, functions and procedure.
Their composition and procedures vary greatly. Compared with the courts, they
GOVERNMENT
RESPONSI¬
BILITIES
England and
Wales
JUSTICE AND THE LAW JI3
tend to be less expensive, less formal and more accessible; they also have expert
knowledge of their particular subjects. The expansion of the tribunal system is
comparatively recent, most tribunals having been set up since 1945- Independently
of the executive, tribunals decide the rights and obligations of private citizens
towards each other or towards a government department or other public
authority. A number of important tribunals (notably the rent and the industrial
tribunals) decide disputes between private citizens. Some (such as those concerned
with social security) resolve claims by private citizens against public authorities. A
further group (including tax tribunals) decide disputed claims by public authorities
against private citizens, and still others decide issues in dispute which do not
directly affect financial rights or liabilities, such as entitlements to licences or the
right to enter the United Kingdom. Tribunals usually consist of an uneven number
of people so that a majority decision can be reached; some consist of one person
sitting alone. Members are normally appointed by the minister concerned with the
subject but other authorities have the power of appointment in appropriate cases.
The Lord Chancellor (or the Lord President of the Court of Session in Scotland)
makes appointments in most cases where a lawyer chairman or member is
required.
Appeals on a point of law from all the more important tribunals may be made in
England and Wales to the High Court, in Scotland to the Court of Session and in
Northern Ireland to the Court of Appeal. An appeal may also be made to a
specially constituted appeal tribunal, to a government minister or to an
independent referee. The Employment Appeal Tribunal, which hears appeals on
questions of law from decisions of industrial tribunals (see p 298), has High Court
and Court of Session status. The Council on Tribunals (appointed jointly by the
Lord Chancellor and the Lord Advocate) exercises general supervision over
tribunals, advising on draft rules of procedure, monitoring their activities and
reporting on particular matters; those peculiar to Scotland are dealt with by the
Scottish Committee of the Council.
Administration of the Law
The United Kingdom judiciary is entirely independent of the Government and is
not subject to ministerial direction or control. There is no minister of justice.
Responsibility for the administration ofjustice rests with the Lord Chancellor, the
Home Secretary and the Secretaries of State for Scotland and Northern Ireland.
Also concerned is the Prime Minister who recommends the highest judicial
appointments to the Crown.
The Lord Chancellor is the head of the judiciary (and sometimes sits as a judge in
the House of Lords); he is concerned with court procedure, is responsible for the
administration of all courts other than magistrates’ courts, appoints magistrates,
and has general responsibility for the legal aid and advice scheme. He is also
responsible for the administration of civil law reform.
The Home Secretary is concerned with the criminal law (including law reform),
the police service, prisons and the probation and after-care service; and has general
supervision over magistrates’ courts, together with some specific responsibilities
(such as approving the appointment of justices’ clerks). On matters relating to
crime prevention and the treatment of offenders, the Home Secretary is advised by
the Advisory Council on the Penal System. Prison policy and the administration of
custodial centres are functions of the Home Office Prison Department, and the
Home Secretary appoints to each centre a board of visitors representing the
local community to investigate and advise on the state of prison premises,
Scotland
Northern
Ireland
THE
PERSONNEL
OF THE LAW
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
administration and treatment of inmates. The boards have disciplinary powers in
relation to serious breaches of discipline and hear applications or complaints from
inmates. The Home Secretary is advised by a special Parole Board on the release of
prisoners on licence.
Responsibility for the treatment of offenders under 17 is shared between the
Home Office and the Department of Health and Social Security. The Home
Secretary is also responsible for advising the Queen on the exercise of the royal
prerogative of mercy to pardon a person convicted of a crime or to cancel all or
part of a penalty imposed by a court.
The Secretary of State for the Environment is responsible for providing
accommodation for all the superior courts in England and Wales, except the
Central Criminal Court, which is the responsibility of the City of London.
The Attorney General and the Solicitor General (the Law Officers of the Crown
for England and Wales) are the Government’s principal advisers on English law,
and represent the Crown in appropriate domestic and international cases. They are
senior barristers, elected members of the House of Commons and hold ministerial
posts. The Attorney General is also Attorney General for Northern Ireland.
As well as exercising various civil law functions, the Attorney General has final
responsibility for enforcing the criminal law; the Director of Public Prosecutions is
subject to the Attorney General’s superintendence. The Attorney General is
concerned with instituting and prosecuting certain types of criminal proceedings,
but must exercise an independent discretion, and must not be influenced by
government colleagues. The Solicitor General is, in effect, the deputy of the
Attorney General.
The Secretary of State for Scotland recommends the appointment of all judges
other than the most senior ones, appoints the staff of the High Court of Justiciary
and the Court of Session and is responsible for the composition, staffing and
organisation of the sheriff courts. District courts are staffed and administered by the
district and islands local authorities. The Secretary of State is also responsible for
crime prevention, and the police and the penal system, and is advised on parole
matters by the Parole Board for Scotland.
The Lord Advocate and the Solicitor General for Scotland are the chief legal
advisers to the Government on Scottish questions and the principal representatives
of the Crown for the purposes of litigation in Scotland. The Lord Advocate is
closely concerned with questions of legal policy and administration and is also
responsible for the Scottish parliamentary draftsmen, and for the public
prosecution of all major crimes.
In Northern Ireland the judiciary is appointed by the Queen on the advice of the
Lord Chancellor. The administration of all courts is the responsibility of the Lord
Chancellor, while the Northern Ireland Office, under the Secretary of State, deals
with the police and the penal system.
The courts of the United Kingdom are the Queen’s Courts since the Crown is the
historic source of all judicial power. The Queen, acting on the advice of ministers,
is responsible for all appointments to the judiciary.
Full-time judges do not engage in politics, except for the Lord Chancellor, who is
head of the judiciary, speaker of the House of Lords and a Cabinet minister. With
the exception of lay magistrates, judges are normally appointed from practising
barristers, advocates (in Scotland) or solicitors (see p 115). The judiciary is not a
career service as in many other countries. Lay magistrates in England and Wales
Judges
The Legal
Profession
LEGAL AID,
ADVICE AND
ASSISTANCE
Advice and
Assistance
Law Centres
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
need no legal qualifications but on appointment undergo basic training to give
them sufficient knowledge of the law, including the rules of evidence, and to
enable them to understand the nature and purpose of sentencing. The Scottish
district court justices of the peace likewise need no legal qualifications. In Northern
Ireland lay magistrates serving on juvenile courts undertake training courses,
resident magistrates are drawn from practising solicitors or barristers. In certain
circumstances (for instance, in cases of misconduct or proven incapacity) judges of
the inferior courts may be removed from their positions but, in order to safeguard
the independence of the judiciary from the executive, superior judges in England
and Wales and Northern Ireland (other than the Lord Chancellor who changes
with the Government) are subject to removal only by the Queen on an address
presented by both Houses of Parliament; in Scotland there is no statutory
provision for removing judges of the Court of Session or High Court of Justiciary
from office and special legislation would probably be needed to secure a dismissal.
The legal profession is divided into two branches: barristers (advocates in
Scotland) and solicitors. Barristers are known collectively as the ‘Bar’, and
collectively and individually as ‘counsel’. Solicitors undertake legal business for lay
clients, while barristers advise on legal problems submitted through solicitors and
present cases in the higher courts; certain functions are common to both. Although
people are free to conduct their own cases, most people prefer to be legally
represented in the more serious court cases.
The professional organisations for barristers are: the Senate of the Inns of Court
and the Bar (in England and Wales),1 the Faculty of Advocates (in Scotland) and
the General Council of the Bar of Northern Ireland. The equivalent organisations
for solicitors are: the Law Society, the Law Society of Scotland and the
Incorporated Law Society of Northern Ireland.
A person in need may obtain help from public funds to meet the costs of legal
advice and legal representation in court. The State is entitled to be reimbursed
from contributions which assisted people may have to pay according to their
means, and from costs and money or property recovered or preserved in the legal
proceedings.
People with moderate means may obtain help from a solicitor on any legal matter
concerning British law, either free or subject to a contribution. The solicitor’s help
includes giving advice, writing letters, drafting wills, obtaining opinions from a
barrister and, where specifically authorised by the legal aid authorities,
representing the client in certain civil proceedings in magistrates’ courts. A
solicitor may act for a client until costs and expenses reach a total of (£55 fc>r
divorce or judicial separation cases) after which the agreement of the legal aid
authorities must be obtained. A person seeking help must give details about
income and savings.
In a number of deprived urban areas law centres provide free advice to people of
limited means. All law centres, which are voluntary organisations financed from
various sources, including government grants, have at least one full-time salaried
lawyer and many employ community workers. Most centres devote a large
proportion of their time to tenant-landlord disputes and other housing problems.
1 In England and Wales every barrister and every student wishing to become a barrister must be a
member of one of the four Inns of Court in London (Lincoln’s Inn, Inner Temple, Middle Temple and
Gray’s Inn).
116
Aid in Civil
Proceedings
Aid in Criminal
Proceedings
LAW REFORM
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Free legal advice is also available in Citizens Advice Bureaux, consumer and
housing advice centres and in specialist advice centres run by various voluntary
organisations.
Legal aid for civil proceedings is available to people whose disposable incomes and
capital fall below certain prescribed amounts, but a contribution is payable
according to the level of the applicant’s income; if that is below a prescribed
amount, legal aid is given free.
An applicant for legal aid must also show reasonable grounds for taking or
defending the proceedings. If the application is successful the case is conducted in
the ordinary way, except that no money passes between the assisted person and the
solicitor—payments being made in and out of the legal aid fund. The costs of an
action which an assisted litigant loses against an unassisted opponent may also,
subject to certain conditions and if the court so orders, be met out of the fund. I
Solicitors and counsel must review the case at each stage to see that it is not being
pursued unreasonably at public expense. Legal aid is not generally available in cases
where redress is sought for alleged defamation or for representation in proceedings !
in most administrative tribunals.
The civil legal aid schemes are run by the Law Society, the Law Society of
Scotland and the Incorporated Law Society of Northern Ireland, under the general
guidance respectively of the Lord Chancellor, the Secretary of State for Scotland
and the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland.
In criminal proceedings in England and Wales a legal aid order may be made by the
court concerned if it appears to be in the interests of justice and if a defendant needs
financial help. An order must be made when a person is committed for trial on a
murder charge or where the prosecutor appeals or applies for leave to appeal from
the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) to the House of Lords. No person who is
unrepresented can be given a custodial sentence for the first time unless given the
opportunity to apply for legal aid.
Voluntary duty solicitor schemes at many magistrates’ courts provide ‘standby’
help for unrepresented defendants.
The criminal legal aid scheme in England and Wales is administered by the
courts, under the overall responsibility of the Lord Chancellor.
The arrangements for aid in criminal proceedings in Scotland and Northern
Ireland are broadly similar, but in Scotland there is a statutory duty solicitor
scheme for accused people in custody in sheriff, and district, court cases and the
‘interests of justice’ test applies only in summary cases.
The duty of keeping the law under review lies with the Law Reform Committee,
the Criminal Law Revision Committee and the Law Commission in England and
Wales, and with the Scottish Law Commission in Scotland. The Law Reform
Committee and the Criminal Law Revision Committee are committees ofjudges
and distinguished practising and academic lawyers, appointed respectively by the
Lord Chancellor and the Home Secretary, to examine aspects of the civil and
criminal law.
The Law Commission is a permanent body of five lawyers of high standing,
responsible for scrutinising the law with a view to its systematic development and
reform, and its simplification and modernisation. The Commission reports to the
Lord Chancellor. The Scottish Law Commission is similar, and reports to the Lord
Advocate.
Law reform in Northern Ireland is a matter for the Law Commission and the
Office of Law Reform.
6 Social Welfare
The British social welfare system comprises the National Health Service, the
personal social services and social security. The National Health Service provides a
comprehensive range of medical services which are available to all residents,
irrespective of means. The local authority personal social services and voluntary
organisations provide advice and help to elderly people, disabled people and
children in need of care. The social security system is designed to secure a basic
standard of living for people in financial need by providing income during periods
of inability to earn, help for families and compensation for disablement.
Central government is responsible directly for the National Health Service,
administered by health authorities and boards acting as its agents, and tor the social
security system. It has an indirect responsibility for the personal social services
administered by local government authorities. Joint finance and planning between
health and local authorities aims to prevent overlapping of services and to
encourage the development of community services.
Spending on social welfare in 1980 was: health £11,490 million (5-9 per cent ot
gross domestic product), personal social services £2,130 million (11 per cent), and
social security £22,210 million (11-4 Per cent). In spite of plans to reduce public
expenditure in the period to 1983-84, expenditure on the health service and social
security will increase; expenditure on the personal social services is determined by
local authorities within the reduced level of spending which they have been asked
to achieve. Social security is by far the largest public expenditure programme.
National Health Service
The National Health Service (NHS) is based upon the principle that there should
be a comprehensive range of publicly provided services designed to promote
improvement in the health of the people and in the prevention, diagnosis and
treatment of illness. All taxpayers, employers and employees contribute to its cost
so that those members of the community who do not require health care help to
pay for those who do. At the time of use there may be charges (as for prescriptions
and spectacles) from which, however, children and people with low incomes are
exempt, or treatment may be free (for example, hospital care). Some 60 per cent ot
health authority expenditure goes on children, the elderly, the disabled, and the
mentally ill and handicapped.
In considering the future use of resources, the Government has emphasised the
importance of preventive services, the responsibility of individuals for their own
health and the importance of the family in providing care and support; and of the
whole network of support available within the community and through the
voluntary services. It stresses the need for a partnership between the public and
private health sectors and for improving efficiency in order to secure the best value
for money at a time of economic difficulty.
ADMINIS- The health ministers (the Secretary of State for Social Services in England and the
TRATION Secretaries of State for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland) are responsible for
all aspects of the health services in their respective areas. The health departments
Il8 BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
(the Department of Health and Social Security in England, the Scottish Home and
Health Department, the Welsh Office and the Department of Health and Social
Services in Northern Ireland) are responsible for strategic planning. District health
authorities in England and Wales and health boards in Scotland are responsible for
planning and operational control of all health services in their area. In England,
because of its greater size and population, a tier of regional authorities is responsible
for regional planning and certain services best administered on a regional basis (for
example, research and major capital building work). The authorities and boards
co-operate closely with local authorities responsible for social work, environ¬
mental health, education and other services. Proposals for simplifying health
service administration in Scotland and Wales have been made.
In Northern Ireland the health and social services boards act as agents for the
Department of Health and Social Services, spanning both health and personal
social services.
Health Service There are three Health Service Commissioner posts (for England, Scotland and
Commissioners Wales) for dealing with complaints from members of the public about the health
service. All three posts are held by the Parliamentary Commissioner for Adminis¬
tration (see p 44). The jurisdiction of the Health Service Commissioner covers the
failure of a health authority to carry out its statutory duties, a failure in a service
provided, or maladministration causing injustice or hardship, but not actions taken
solely in the exercise of clinical judgement or the action of family practitioners.
The Commissioner reports annually to ministers who lay the reports before
Parliament.
In Northern Ireland the Commissioner for Complaints (see p 63) investigates
complaints concerning the health service, but not the actions of practitioners or the
professions supplementary to medicine.
Finance About 89 per cent of the cost of the health services is paid for through general
taxation; the rest is met from the National Health Service contribution paid with
the national insurance contribution and from the charges towards the cost of
certain items such as drugs prescribed by a family doctor, dental treatment,
dentures and spectacles. Health authorities may raise funds from voluntary sources.
The charges for medical prescriptions do not apply to children under 16 years,
expectant mothers and mothers with a child under the age of one, women aged 60
and over and men aged 65 and over, patients suffering from certain medical
conditions, war and Service disablement pensioners (for treatment of their
disability), and families with very low incomes. About two-thirds of prescription
items are supplied free of charge. Exemptions from charges for dental treatment
are made for examinations and denture repairs. Some groups of patients receive
free treatment, for example, women who are pregnant or who have had a baby in
the last year, anyone under the age of 18, or 19 if in full-time education, and people
receiving supplementary benefit (see p 131) or family income supplement (see
p 132). Children’s spectacles are free.
Provision is made at certain hospitals for patients to be treated as private patients
on payment of the whole cost of their accommodation and treatment.
Hospital medical staffs are salaried and can be employed full-time or part-time.
Hospital doctors can accept private patients. General medical practitioners are self-
employed, paid by a system of fees and allowances designed to reflect responsi¬
bilities, work load and practice expenses.
Dentists providing treatment in their own surgeries are paid on a prescribed
scale of fees. Pharmacists dispensing on their own premises are reimbursed for the
cost of the items supplied together with professional fees. Ophthalmic medical
SOCIAL WELFARE
PRIMARY
HEALTH
CARE
Family
Practitioner
Services
District
Nurses,
Midwives and
Health Visitors
Group Practices
and Health
Centres
HOSPITALS
AND
SPECIALIST
SERVICES
Hospitals
119
practitioners and ophthalmic opticians taking part in the general ophthalmic
service receive approved fees for each sight test made; opticians who dispense
spectacles are paid according to the number and type of pairs supplied.
Primary health care is in the hands of doctors, dentists, opticians and pharmacists
working within the Service as independent practitioners, and district nurses,
midwives and health visitors employed by the health authorities; a wide range of
other services is also available including the school health service, social services
and chiropody service.
The family practitioner services are those given to patients by doctors, dentists,
opticians and pharmacists of their own choice. Family doctors who are under
contract to the National Health Service have on average about 2,200 patients.
They provide the first diagnosis in the case of illness and either prescribe a suitable
course of treatment or refer a patient to the more specialised services and hospital
consultants. Ophthalmic medical practitioners and ophthalmic and dispensing
opticians test the sight and supply spectacles. Patients requiring treatment are dealt
with through the Hospital Eye Service.
District nurses give skilled nursing care to people at home or elsewhere outside
hospital; they also play an important role in preventive care and health education.
Although almost all babies are born in hospital, there is a domiciliary service for
mothers having their babies at home, with midwives and family doctors giving
both ante-natal and post-natal care. Midwives also assist births in hospital. Health
visitors are concerned with the health of the household as a whole and offer advice
and give support to families including those with young children and elderly
people; they undertake health teaching, assist in preventing ill-health, and work
closely with family doctors, district nurses and social workers.
About four-fifths of family doctors in Britain work in partnerships or group
practices, often as members of health care teams which may also include health
visitors, district nurses, midwives and social workers. About a fifth in Great Britain
and just over a halfin Northern Ireland work in modern and well-equipped health
centres where nursing services and child health services are provided as well as
facilities for health education, family planning, speech therapy, chiropody,
assessment of hearing, physiotherapy and remedial exercises. Dental, pharma¬
ceutical and ophthalmic services, hospital out-patient services and supporting
social work services may also be provided.
The hospital and specialist services include district general hospitals with treatment
and diagnostic facilities for in-patients, day-patients and out-patients, hospital
maternity departments, infectious disease units, psychiatric and geriatric facilities,
rehabilitation facilities, convalescent homes and all forms of specialised treatment.
A number of specialist hospitals for mentally ill, mentally handicapped and elderly
people are also provided.
A large proportion of the hospitals in the National Health Service were built in the
nineteenth century; some trace their origins to much earlier charitable
foundations, such as the famous St. Thomas’ and St. Bartholomew’s hospitals in
London. Much has been done to improve and extend existing buildings and many
new hospitals have been or are being opened. The most recent development in
hospital design is the ‘nucleus’ hospital of some 300 beds which makes a more
intensive use of space and facilities; it can be used either as the first stage of a new
120
Rehabilitation
Hospices
Drug
Dependence
Alcoholism
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
hospital or as an extension of an existing hospital. Recent policy has been to
concentrate ‘acute’ facilities (that is, for relatively short-term or urgent treatment)
in large district hospitals and to expand the role of the small hospital in the care of
the long-stay patient, particularly the elderly (although in Scotland more of the
smaller hospitals have been retained for acute medicine). The Government has
reviewed this policy which, it considers, involves the construction of excessively
large hospitals and the risk of hospital services becoming too remote from the local
communities. As a result, more emphasis is being placed on providing smaller
hospitals for local areas. National Health Service hospitals provide nearly half a
million beds and have over 400,000 nursing, midwifery and medical staff.
Rehabilitation is an important part of medical care, beginning at the onset of illness
or injury and aimed at helping people to live as normally as possible. It is especially
important for elderly, disabled and mentally-ill people who need such help to
become self-sufficient. Facilities are provided in most hospitals and at special
centres. The work is carried out by teams of doctors, nurses, physiotherapists,
remedial gymnasts, occupational therapists, speech therapists and social workers.
The hospital departments work closely writh the Disablement Resettlement
Service of the Manpower Services Commission (the Department of Manpower
Services in Northern Ireland).
Medical services may include the provision, free of charge, of artificial limbs and
eyes, hearing aids, surgical supports, wheelchairs, and other appliances. Very
severely physically handicapped patients may be provided with electrical control
equipment which enables them to operate devices such as alarm bells, radio and
television, a telephone, and heating. Nursing aids for the handicapped at home can
be borrowed.
Social workers, home helps and occupational therapists help hospital patients
who, due to their illness, have difficulties on returning to their homes.
Some 50 hospices provide care for the dying either directly in residential homes or
through the provision of nursing and other assistance in the patient’s own home.
Control of symptoms and psychological support for patients and their families
form the central features of the hospice movement, which originated in Britain
and is now worldwide. About ten of the hospices are administered entirely by the
National Health Service; the remainder, most of which receive support from
public funds, are run by independent charitable organisations.
Treatment for narcotic drug dependence is provided mostly on an out-patient
basis in the drug treatment units provided by the National Health Service,
although some addicts have a period of in-patient treatment when necessary. Only
doctors specially licensed are allowed to prescribe heroin and cocaine for the
treatment of drug addiction. All doctors must notify the authorities of any patient
they consider to be addicted to certain controlled drugs. A number of unofficial
agencies work with and complement the Health Service provision. Rehabilitation
facilities, for example, are mainly provided by voluntary organisations, some of
which receive financial help from local authorities. Social work help is given by the
probation service and local social services departments.
Treatment and rehabilitation for alcoholics, provided by the National Health
Service and social services, include in-patient and out-patient services in general
hospitals, psychiatric units and hospitals and in 34 specialised alcoholism treatment
units. Primary care teams (general practitioners, nurses and social workers) and
voluntary organisations, providing hostels, day centres, and counselling services,
also play an important part.
SOCIAL WELFARE
121
Parents and
Children
Family
Planning
Abortion
Blood
Transfusion
Ambulance
Services
HEALTH
EDUCATION
Special preventive health services, including free dental care, are available for
expectant and nursing mothers and young children. A feature of the services is the
education of parents before and after the birth by means of talks, discussion groups,
demonstrations and classes. Pre-school-age children receive regular medical
examinations and are tested for vision, hearing, speech and language deficiencies.
Family planning advice and help is provided at many clinics, and welfare foods
(dried milk and vitamins) are distributed from them.
The school health service, which is part of the National Health Service,
organises health surveillance of school children including medical inspection and
dental inspection and treatment where necessary.
Child guidance and child psychiatric services provide help and advice for
children with psychological or emotional problems.
Free family planning facilities are available to everyone through family planning
clinics, hospitals and a domiciliary service. Most family doctors provide a similar
service for women only.
The Abortion Act 1967 allows the termination of pregnancy if two registered
doctors think that its continuance would involve a greater risk to the life of the
pregnant woman (or injury to her physical or mental health or that of any existing
children in the family) than if the pregnancy were ended. Termination may also be
allowed if the two doctors think that there is a substantial risk of the child being
born with severe physical or mental abnormalities. Abortions are carried out in
National Health Service hospitals or in private premises officially approved for the
purpose. Just over half the 131,200 legal abortions to women resident in Great
Britain in 1980 were performed in private hospitals and clinics. The Act does not
apply in Northern Ireland.
The blood transfusion service has about 2 4 million voluntary unpaid donors. The
19 regional transfusion centres recruit donors and organise donor sessions in towns
and villages, factories and offices, and within the armed forces. Donors must be
between the ages of 18 and 65. The centres are also responsible for blood grouping
and testing, maintaining blood banks, providing a consultant service to hospitals,
teaching in medical schools, and instructing doctors, nurses and technicians. Four
laboratories prepare blood products and undertake research.
Where necessary on medical grounds, free transport by ambulance is provided by
the health authorities. The work of the ambulance service is emergency work
dealing with sudden illness, urgent maternity cases, and accidents of all kinds; and
non-urgent work providing transport for people needing out-patient treatment at
hospitals, clinics and day hospitals.
The London Ambulance Service is probably the largest of its kind in the world,
catering for 7 million residents and non-residents in an area of 1,580 sq km (610 sq
miles). It uses over 1,000 vehicles at 75 ambulance stations and has a staff of over
2,500. On an average day it receives 1,800 emergency calls (over one call every
minute) and carries out 8,000 non-urgent patient journeys.
In some areas the ambulance service for non-urgent cases is augmented by
volunteers using their own cars. In Scotland an air ambulance service is available in
the islands and in the remoter parts of the mainland.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland health education is promoted by the
government financed Health Education Council which assists in the development
of programmes of health education with the health authorities, professional
organisations, voluntary bodies and industry. Health education services in
122
SAFETY OF
MEDICINES
RESEARCH
THE HEALTH
PROFESSIONS
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Scotland are organised by the Scottish Health Education Group, which is part of
the Common Services Agency. Major themes of publicity campaigns are family
planning, health in pregnancy, correct diet and exercise, and the dangers of
cigarette smoking and excessive consumption of alcohol.
Under the Medicines Act 1968, the health and agriculture ministers are responsible
for licensing the manufacture, marketing and importation of medicines for human
and veterinary use. The Medicines Commission advises the ministers on policy
regarding medicines and a Committee on Safety of Medicines gives advice on the
safety, efficacy and quality of new medicines and monitors adverse drug reactions.
The Act also controls the advertising, labelling, packaging, distribution, sale and
supply of medicinal products.
In England and Wales in 1980-81 the Department of Health and Social Security
spent ^30-6 million on research and development, of which ,£13'7 million was on
biomedical research through the Medical Research Council. The Department s
Chief Scientist is supported by independent advisers covering a wide range of
scientific disciplines. The Department is also involved in international research and
development. In Scotland about £2 million was spent by the Home and Health
Department on medical research and development, and a further XT'9 million in
commissioning research from the Medical Research Council. Both health
departments participate in the European Community’s medical and public health
research programme.
Only people whose names are on the medical or dental registers may practise as
doctors or dentists in the National Health Service. University medical and dental
schools are responsible for teaching; the National Health Service provides hospital
clinical facilities for training. Registration as a doctor requires five or six years’
training in medical school and hospital, with an additional year s experience in a
hospital; for a dentist, four or more years’ training at a dental school is required.
The governing body of the medical profession is the General Medical Council and
that of the dentists is the General Dental Council. The main professional
associations are the British Medical Association and the British Dental Association.
The minimum period of hospital training required to qualify for registration as a
nurse is normally three years. Training may be in general, sick children s, mental or
mental subnormality nursing. An enrolled nurse takes a two-year course. The
examining bodies of the nursing profession in England and Wales and in Scotland
are the general nursing councils. Midwives must have the certificate of the
appropriate Midwives Board. The examining body for nurses and midwives in
Northern Ireland is the Northern Ireland Council of Nurses and Midwives.
Student midwives are usually registered general nurses or sick children s nurses,
and undergo 18 months midwifery training. The Royal College of Nursing and
the Royal College of Midwives are the professional bodies for nurses and
midwives. Health visitors are registered general nurses with midwifery or
approved obstetric experience who have undergone at least the first part of the
midwifery course or obstetric nursing and have completed a year s course in health
visiting, regulated by the Council for the Education and Training of Health
Visitors. District nurses are state registered nurses who hold a district nursing
certificate awarded by the Assessors for District Nurse Training. A United
Kingdom Central Council for Nursing, Midwifery and Health Visiting has been
established and will assume responsibility for regulating these professions, and new
national boards for each country will take over responsibility for promoting
training.
SOCIAL WELFARE
123
ARRANGE¬
MENTS
WITH OTHER
COUNTRIES
PRIVATE
MEDICAL
TREATMENT
ENVIRON¬
MENTAL
HEALTH
Pharmacists in general practice and in hospital must be registered by the
Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain; in Northern Ireland the register is
maintained by the Department of Health and Social Services on behalf of the
Pharmaceutical Society of Northern Ireland. A three-year degree course approved
by the Pharmaceutical Society followed by a year’s approved training are
necessary before registration. The majority of medicines can be sold or dispensed
only by, or under the supervision of, a registered pharmacist.
The General Optical Council regulates the professions of ophthalmic optician
and dispensing optician; only registered ophthalmic opticians (or registered
medical practitioners) may test sight. Training of ophthalmic opticians takes four
years including a year of practical experience under supervision. Dispensing
opticians take a two-year full-time course with a year’s practical experience or a
part-time day-release course while employed with an optician.
State registration may be obtained by chiropodists, dietitians, medical
laboratory scientific officers, occupational therapists, orthoptists, physiotherapists,
radiographers and remedial gymnasts. The governing bodies are eight boards,
corresponding to the eight professions, under the general supervision of the
Council for Professions Supplementary to Medicine. Professional training lasts
two or four years and only those who are state registered may be employed in the
National Health Service and some other public services.
Dental therapists (who have undergone a two-year training course) and dental
hygienists (who have undergone a training course of about a year) may carry out
some simple dental work under the direction of a registered dentist.
The member states of the European Community have special health arrangements
under which Community nationals are entitled to receive any necessary treatment
immediately, either free or at reduced cost, during visits to other Community
countries. There are also arrangements to cover people who go to work or live in
other Community countries. In addition there are reciprocal arrangements with
some other countries under which emergency medical treatment is available.
Otherwise with some exceptions visitors are expected to pay if the purpose of their
visit is to seek treatment, and also if they should fall ill while in the United
Kingdom.
It is the Government’s policy to encourage the private sector to meet a larger share
of the nation’s health needs in the belief that an expansion of private care will
benefit the NHS by relieving pressure on it. The scale of private practice in relation
to the NHS is, however, small. There are some 2,400 private pay beds in NHS
hospitals in England and some 4 per cent of acute hospital beds are in private
hospitals and nursing homes. It is estimated that about half of those receiving acute
treatment in NHS pay beds or private hospitals are covered by provident schemes
which make provision for private health care in return for annual subscriptions. In
1980 there were some 1-65 million subscribers to such schemes of whom 80 per
cent were involved in group schemes, some arranged by firms on behalf of
employees. Subscriptions often cover more than one person (for example,
members of a family) and a total of 3-6 million were covered. Private practice is
also undertaken by family doctors and dentists.
Environmental health officers employed by local authorities are responsible for the
control of air pollution, noise, food hygiene and quality, the inspection of offices,
the investigation of unfit housing, and in some instances for refuse collection.
Doctors who specialise in community medicine and are employed by the health
authorities advise local authorities on the medical aspects of environmental health.
124
Safety of Food
CONTROL OF
INFECTIOUS
DISEASES
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
They may also assist the authorities responsible for water supply and sewerage.
Environmental health officers at ports and airports carry out a range of duties
concerned with shipping, inspection of imported foods and disease control. In
Northern Ireland district councils are responsible for noise control, collection and
disposal of refuse, clean air, and food composition, labelling and hygiene.
It is illegal to sell for human consumption food which is injurious to health, unfit or
not of the nature, substance or quality demanded by the buyer. Premises where j
food or drink is prepared, handled, stored or sold must conform to certain
hygiene standards. Environmental health officers may take for analysis or
for bacteriological or other examination samples of any food on sale. Special
regulations control the safety of particular foods such as milk, meat and ice-cream, j
The Department of Health and Social Security, the Ministry of Agriculture, ]
Fisheries and Food, the Scottish Office and the ^^elsh Office are the central
departments responsible for giving advice and making regulations.
The health authorities have general responsibility for the prevention of disease and
co-operate with the local authority environmental health services. The area health
authorities and health boards carry out programmes of vaccination and
immunisation against diphtheria, measles, rubella (females only), poliomyelitis,
tetanus, tuberculosis and whooping cough. Although vaccination is voluntary, the
Government encourages parents to obtain protection for their children. :
Community physicians are responsible for the prevention and control of
infectious diseases and are supported by the Public Health Laboratory Service
which provides a network of bacteriological and virological laboratories
throughout England and ^Vales which conduct research and assist in the diagnosis,
prevention and control of epidemic diseases. Its largest establishment is the Central
Public Health Laboratory at Colindale, in north-west London, which includes the
National Collection of Type Cultures, the Food Hygiene Laboratory, and
reference laboratories specialising in the identification of infective micro¬
organisms. A surveillance centre investigates and monitors human communicable
diseases. In Scotland bacteriological work is done mainly in hospital laboratories.
In Northern Ireland a central public health laboratory shares the bacteriological
work with hospital laboratories.
Personal Social Services
Responsibility for personal social services rests with the social services authorities
(local authority social services departments in England and Wales, social work
departments in Scotland and health and social services boards in Northern Ireland).
Many of their services are directed towards the same groups of people needing
health services, for example, elderly or disabled people. Other groups helped
include young families with social problems, children deprived of a normal home
life, the mentally ill or handicapped and young offenders. Close co-operation is
maintained between local authority social services departments and health
authorities. In Scotland local authorities also undertake duties similar to those of
the separate probation and after-care service in England and Wales (see p 105).
Much of the care given to the elderly and disabled is provided in the community
itself, by their families, self-help groups and through the voluntary movement.
The statutory sector offers the special skilled care needed in particular services. The
Government recognises the importance of the contribution made by the voluntary
organisations, especially when economies are being made in public expenditure.
SOCIAL WELFARE
125
The
Handicapped
The Elderly
The Mentally
111 and the
Mentally
Handicapped
Help to
Families
Child Care
Social services authorities have a duty to provide social services for disabled people.
They are required to establish the number of disabled people in their area and to
publicise services. A wide range of facilities may be available including advice on
personal and social problems arising from disability, assistance in overcoming the
effects of disability, adaptations to people’s homes (such as fitting ramps, and
ground floor toilets) and various aids to daily living. In certain circumstances a
telephone or a television set may be installed. Other facilities include social and
occupational clubs, residential homes and the organisation of outings and holidays
and some authorities make arrangements for the teaching of handicrafts and other
occupations. Voluntary organisations also provide services for disabled people.
Help available from other sources includes social security, medical treatment,
special education, employment and training services and specially designed
housing and means of access to public buildings.
Services for elderly people are provided by statutory and voluntary bodies to help
them to live at home whenever possible. These may include the advice and help of
social workers, domestic help, delivery of cooked meals, sitters-in, night attendants
and laundry services as well as day centres, clubs and recreational workshops. In
many areas ‘good neighbour’ and friendly visiting services are arranged by the
local authority or a voluntary organisation. Social services authorities also provide
residential accommodation for the elderly and infirm and have powers to register
homes run by voluntary organisations or privately.
Local authorities, as part of their responsibility for public housing, build flats
specially designed for elderly people; some of these blocks have resident wardens.
Housing associations also build this type of accommodation.
Social services authorities must make arrangements for helping the mentally ill or
mentally handicapped in the community, and for prevention and after-care
services. Developments in the treatment of mental illness, which enable patients
either to be treated at home or to be discharged from hospital more quickly
provided support is available in the community, are adding to demands for these
services and particularly for social work support. Arrangements include training
centres for the mentally handicapped, day centres for the mentally ill, as well as
social centres and a variety of residential care for the mentally ill and mentally
handicapped of all ages. Social workers help patients and their families to deal with
social problems arising from mental illness or handicap and can arrange
compulsory admission (on a medical recommendation) of mentally disordered
people to hospital in certain circumstances.
Social services authorities, through their own social workers or a voluntary
organisation, make available help and advice to families facing special problems.
The home help service provides practical assistance at home for sick and disabled
people, elderly people and expectant mothers.
Some authorities make direct provision for the special needs of unmarried
mothers and their babies, but most contribute to the cost of work done by
voluntary organisations and other bodies.
Day care facilities for children under five are provided by local authorities,
voluntary agencies and privately. In allocating places in day nurseries and other
facilities they themselves provide, local authorities give priority to children with
special social or health needs for day care. They also register, and provide support
and advice services for, childminders, private day nurseries and play-groups
operating in their area.
126
BRITAIN 1982 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The authorities must offer advice, guidance and assistance to families in
difficulties to promote the welfare of children. The aim is to intervene early to
reduce the need to receive children into care or bring them before a court.
The recognition, prevention and management of cases of child abuse are the
concern of many authorities, agencies and professions, and area review committees
provide a forum for discussion and co-ordination and draw up policies and
procedures for handling these cases.
Authorities must receive into their care any child under the age of 17 who has no
parent or guardian or who has been abandoned or whose parents are unable to
provide for him or her, if they are satisfied that such intervention is in the interests
of the child. The child remains in care until the age of 18 unless discharged to the |
care of parents, other relatives or friends. In certain circumstances the local
authority assumes the rights and duties of one or both parents. The parents must be '
notified and if they object the matter must be decided in a court of law. When
taking a decision on a child in care, the authorities have to give first consideration
to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of the child. Where children are
in care, efforts are made to work with their families in order, where appropriate, to
enable the children to return home.
Children in England and Wales may be brought before a juvenile court if they
are neglected or ill-treated, exposed to moral danger, are beyond the control of
parents, not attending school or (if ten years or over) have committed an offence
other than homicide (see p 107). At the same time it must be shown that the
children need care or control which they are unlikely to receive unless a care or
other relevant order is made by the court. Local authorities are responsible for
undertaking inquiries through social workers, consultation with parents, schools
and the police. Children may be committed to the care of a local authority under a
care order if the court is satisfied that they need care or control. As an alternative
the court may order supervision by a social worker or a probation officer for up to
three years.
In Northern Ireland the court may send children to a training school (see p 109),
commit them to the care of a fit person (which includes a health and social services
board), or make a supervision order. The law relating to children has been
reviewed and the intention in future is to make a distinction between the young
offenders and children in need of care and protection.
In Scotland children in trouble (see p 108) or in need may be brought before a
children’s hearing which can impose a supervision requirement on a child if it
thinks that compulsory measures of care are appropriate. Under these require¬
ments most children are allowed to remain at home under the supervision of a
social worker but some may be sent to a residential establishment while under
supervision. Supervision requirements are reviewed at intervals of not more than
one year until terminated by a children’s hearing.
When practicable, children in care are boarded out with foster parents, who
receive an allowance to cover the cost of maintenance. If foster homes are not
considered appropriate or cannot be found, the children may be placed in
children’s homes, voluntary homes or other suitable residential accommodation.
Community homes for children in care in England and Wales comprise local
authority and some voluntary children’s homes and include community homes
with education on the premises which provide long-term care usually for the more
difficult children. In Scotland local authorities are responsible for placing children
in their care either in foster homes, in local authority or voluntary homes, or in
residential schools. In Northern Ireland there are residential homes for children in
the care of the health and social services boards; training schools and remand
homes are administered separately. Regulations concerning community homes
SOCIAL WELFARE
127
Voluntary
Organisations
Adoption
Social Workers
and registered voluntary homes and the boarding out of children in care are made
by central government.
Voluntary organisations play a major part in providing accommodation for
children both in the care of local authorities and voluntary organisations. Some
children’s homes run by voluntary organisations which are not within the
community homes system are registered with central government.
Voluntary bodies concerned with the welfare of children in their own homes
include local family casework agencies and the Family Service Units. The National
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children and its Scottish counterpart
investigate reported cruelty or neglect.
Adoption of children is strictly regulated by legislation and some 12,000 adoption
orders are made in Britain each year. The Registrars General keep confidential
registers of adopted children. Local authorities can act as adoption agencies and
eventually will be obliged to offer such a service. Adoption societies must be
approved by the Secretary of State for Social Services.
The effective operation of the social services largely depends on the availability of
professionally qualified social workers trained in the methods of social work.
Training courses in social work are provided by universities, polytechnics and
colleges of further education ; their length depends upon previous educational
qualifications and can extend from one to four years. The Central Council for
Education and Training in Social Work recognises social work courses and offers
advice to people considering entry to the profession.
Professional social workers (including those working in the National Health
Service) are employed by the social service departments of local authorities. Others
work in voluntary organisations or in the probation service (see p 105).
Social Security
National insurance, industrial injuries benefits, child benefit, family income
supplement and supplementary benefits constitute a comprehensive system of
social security. The payment of many benefits depends on prior payments to the
national insurance scheme, while others are available without contribution
conditions. The former are paid from the national insurance fund which consists of
contributions from employed people and their employers, self-employed people
and the Government. Non-contributory benefits are financed from general
taxation revenue. Appeals relating to claims for the various benefits are decided by
independent tribunals.
The social security programme accounts for over a fifth of all public
expenditure. It has grown, in real terms, by over £8,000 million since 1970 and
now costs the equivalent of about £1,000 a year for every household. Part of the
increase has been due to the rising numbers of the elderly, and part to the growth in
unemployment; much, however, has been due to real improvement in the level of
benefits, and new benefits and increased family support.
The Department of Health and Social Security administers the services in Great
Britain; in Northern Ireland they are administered by the Department of Health
and Social Services. Pensions and welfare services for war pensioners and their
dependants are the responsibility of the Department of Health and Social Security
throughout the United Kingdom. Advice on social security is given to the
Government by the Social Security Advisory Committee.
The Government is examining and changing a number of aspects of the social
security system, both to make it more comprehensible and to reduce the rate of
128
CONTRI¬
BUTIONS
BENEFITS
Retirement
Pension
Mothers and
Children
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
growth of its cost to public funds. It intends to take further steps to ensure that
social security payments go only to those for whom they are intended, and to make
employers responsible for sickness pay during the early weeks of sickness.
Entitlement to National Insurance benefits such as retirement pension, sickness and
invalidity benefit, unemployment benefit, widow’s benefit, maternity grant and
allowance, death grant and child’s special allowance is dependent upon the
payment of contributions (maternity grant will be non-contributory from July
1982). Industrial injuries benefits are non-contributory, but are also payable from
the National Insurance Fund. There are four classes of contributions. Class 1
contributions, which are related to earnings, are paid by employees and employers, j
The contribution is lower if the employer operates a ‘contracted out’ occupational
pension scheme (see below). Self-employed people pay a flat rate Class 2
contribution and a Class 4 contribution which is assessed as a percentage of profits
or gains within certain limits; they are not eligible for unemployment and
industrial injuries benefit. Voluntary Class 3 contributions are payable by people
wanting to safeguard rights to some benefits.
Employees who continue working after pensionable age (60 for women and 65
for men) do not pay contributions but the employer continues to be liable. People
earning less than the lower earnings limit are not liable for contributions; neither
are their employers. Self-employed people with earnings below a set annual
amount may apply for exemption and those over pensionable age are excused
payment of contributions.
For most benefits there are two contribution conditions. First, before benefit can
be paid at all, a certain number of contributions have to be paid; secondly, the full
rate of benefit cannot be paid unless contributions have been paid or credited up to
a specific level over a specified period. Benefits are increased each November, the
uprating being linked to increases in retail prices. The main benefits (payable
weekly) are summarised below. The rates shown in Tables 6-10 are those effective
from November 1981.
A state retirement pension is payable to women at the age of 60 and to men at the
age of 65. People still at work five years after the minimum pension age are eligible
to receive the pension even if they continue working. In 1978 the new state pension
scheme came into operation and will mature fully after 20 years of contributions;
the retirement pension will consist of the basic pension plus an additional
(earnings-related) pension.
Rights to basic pension are safeguarded for mothers who are away from work
looking after children or for people giving up work to care for severely disabled
relatives. Women contributors receive the same pension as men with the same
earnings.
Employers are free to ‘contract-out’ their employees from the state scheme for
additional pension and provide their own occupational pension in its place,
provided that the latter is at least as good as the state additional pension. The State
remains responsible for the basic pension.
A non-contributory retirement pension is payable to people over the age of 80
who have not qualified for a contributory pension or who qualified for one at a
lower rate than the non-contributory pension.
A maternity grant of ^25 is payable for each living child born and for a still-born
child if the pregnancy lasts for at least 28 weeks. Maternity allowance is payable
normally from 11 weeks before the expected week of confinement until the end of
the sixth week following the birth.
SOCIAL WELFARE
129
Widows
Sick and
Disabled
People
The non-contributory child benefit is the main social security benefit for
children. A sum in addition to the benefit is payable to certain people bringing up
children alone for the first or only child in the family. Tax free and normally paid
to the mother, it is payable for children up to the age of 16 and for those up to the
age of 19 if they continue in full-time education. Benefit is payable in addition to
the allowance for children paid to recipients of social security benefits. A weekly
contributory child’s special allowance is payable to a mother on the death of a
former husband if the marriage was dissolved or annulled and he was contributing
to the support of the children. A non-contributory guardian’s allowance for an
orphaned child is payable to a person who is entitled to child benefit for that child.
In certain circumstances it can be paid on the death of only one parent.
A widow’s allowance is payable for the first 26 weeks of widowhood with an
additional sum for each child. After this a widowed mother receives a widowed
mother’s allowance with an addition for each child. Widow s pension is payable to
a widow who is 40 years or over when her husband dies or when her entitlement to
widowed mother’s allowance ends. Payment continues until the widow remarries
or begins drawing retirement pension. There are also benefits for widows under
the industrial injuries scheme.
A man whose wife dies when both are over pension age inherits his wife’s
pension rights just as a widow inherits her husband’s rights.
Table 6: Benefit Rates
Category Weekly rate
Standard rate of retirement and widow’s pensions and widowed
mother’s allowance
Single person 29-60
Wife or other adult dependant I7’75
Non-contributory retirement pension for people over 80
Higher rate I7'75
Lower rate 10-65
Maternity allowance 22-50
Child benefit 5'25
One-parent benefit (for the first or only child) 3’3°
Guardian’s allowance, child’s special allowance 7’70
Widow’s allowance (first 26 weeks of widowhood) 4I‘4°
Rate of benefit for children of widows, invalidity, non¬
contributory invalidity and retirement pensioners, invalid care
beneficiaries; unemployment and sickness beneficiaries when
claimant is over pension age 7'7°
There is a large variety of benefits for people unable to work because of sickness or
disablement. Contributory sickness benefit is payable for up to 28 weeks. There are
allowances for a wife or other adult dependant and for each child in addition to
child benefit.
An invalidity pension plus allowances for a wife and children is payable when
sickness benefit ends if the beneficiary is still incapable of work. Invalidity
allowance is paid with the pension to those people who become sick more than five
years before retirement age.
130
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Various benefits are payable for injury or disablement caused by an accident at
work or a prescribed disease. Injury benefit is paid when a person is incapable of
work and payment can continue for a maximum of 26 weeks beginning on the
date of the accident or development of the disease. When injury benefit ends
disablement benefit may be paid if, as the result of the industrial accident or
prescribed disease, there is a loss of physical or mental faculty. The amount depends
Table 7: Sickness, Unemployment and Industrial Injuries Benefit Rates
Category Weekly rate
Standard rate of sickness and unemployment benefit
For beneficiary under pension age
Single person 22-50
Wife or other adult dependant
For beneficiary over pension age
Single person 28-35
Wife or other adult dependant 17-00
Standard rate of invalidity pension
Single person 28-3 5
Wife or other adult dependant 17-00
Invalidity allowance payable with retirement or invalidity pension
Higher rate 6-2°
Middle rate 4‘00
Lower rate 2'00
Injury benefit a 25'25
Disablement benefit (100 per cent assessment) 48-30
Unemployability supplement ^ 28-35
Special hardship allowance (maximum) I9’32
Constant attendance allowance
Normal maximum I9‘4°
Maximum in exceptionally severe cases _ 38-80
Exceptionally severe disablement allowance I9'4°
Industrial death benefit
Widow’s pension (first 26 weeks of widowhood) 41 '40
Widow’s pension (higher rate) 30-I5
Widow’s pension (lower rate) 8-88
Addition for each child 7‘70
Attendance allowance 23'^5
Higher rate 23'^5
Lower rate I5'75
Non-contributory invalidity pension, invalid care allowance I7'75
Mobility allowance 16-50
Increase of non-contributory invalidity pension and invalid care
allowance for a wife or other adult dependant 10-65
Rate of benefit for children of all other beneficiaries o-8o
■> Increases for adult dependants and children are the same as those payable with unemployment and
sickness benefits, where the claimant is under pension age.
^ Invalidity allowances and increases for adult dependants and children are the same as those payable
with invalidity pensions.
SOCIAL WELFARE
Other Benefits
Unemployment
Benefit
Death Grant
SUPPLEMEN¬
TARY
BENEFITS
131
on the extent of the disablement as assessed by a medical board but for disablement
of less than 20 per cent a gratuity is normally paid. In certain circumstances
disablement benefits may be supplemented by unemployability supplement;
constant attendance allowance; and an additional allowance payable in certain
cases of exceptionally severe disablement; a special hardship allowance for a person
who is unfit to return to his or her regular job or to do work of an equivalent
standard; and hospital treatment allowance which raises the disablement pension
or gratuity to the 100 per cent assessment rate during hospital treatment for the
industrial injury. Increases of disablement benefit for dependants may be payable
with unemployability supplement. There are benefits for widows and their
children (see p 129).
A non-contributory, tax-free attendance allowance may be payable to severely
disabled people at either a higher or a lower rate depending upon the amount of
care and attention they require. A non-contributory invalidity pension is payable
to people of working age unable to work and not qualifying for the national
insurance invalidity pension; it is also payable to disabled housewives incapable of
work and unable to perform their normal household tasks.
A weekly invalid care allowance may be payable to certain categories of people
(aged between 16 and pension age) who cannot go out to work because they are
caring for a severely disabled person receiving an attendance allowance.
Physically disabled people unable or virtually unable to walk may be entitled to
a mobility allowance to help to pay their transport costs. People aged between 5
and 65 are eligible for it.
An independent organisation called Motability assists those disabled drivers and
disabled passengers wanting to use their mobility allowance to obtain a vehicle.
Unemployment benefit at the same rate as sickness benefit is payable for up to a
year in any one spell of unemployment. Periods covered by unemployment or
sickness benefit, maternity allowance or some training allowances, which are eight
weeks or less apart, are linked to form one period of interruption of employment.
Generally anyone claiming unemployment benefit has to be registered for
employment.
A death grant is payable on the death of a contributor or a contributor’s near
relative. It is normally ^30 for an adult and a smaller sum for a child.
Supplementary benefits are payable to people of the age of 16 and over who are not
in full time work and whose financial resources fall below a certain level. The
amounts shown in the table are the weekly levels laid down for the requirements of
married couples, single householders and others. The benefit amounts to the
difference between resources and these levels. The long-term rates apply to
retirement pensioners and to those people below pensionable age who have
received supplementary benefit continuously for one year, provided that the
award has not been subject to the condition of registering for employment.
Families receiving the supplement (as with family income supplement) are
automatically entitled to a number of other benefits including free school meals,
milk and vitamins for expectant mothers and for children under school age,
exemption from prescription charges and National Health Service charges for
dental treatment and glasses.
The Department of Health and Social Security has a duty to try to help people
without a settled way of living to lead a more normal life. It provides temporary
accommodation in resettlement units, and, for men who have been unemployed
for long periods and who are receiving supplementary benefit, there are re-
32
FAMILY
INCOME
SUPPLEMENT
WAR
PENSIONS
AND
RELATED
SERVICES
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
establishment centres, several of which have residential accommodation, where
they are given help to fit them again for work. The Department may also give
grants to voluntary organisations which make similar provision to that found in
resettlement units.
Table 8: Supplementary Benefit r
Category Weekly rate
Ordinary rate
Husband and wife
Person living alone
Any other person aged
18 and over
16-17
11-15
Under 11 years
Long-term rate
Husband and wife
Person living alone
Any other person aged
18 and over
16-17 years
37-75
23-25
18-60
I4-30
11-90
7-90
47-35
29-60
23-65
18-15
Family income supplement is a cash benefit for families with small incomes where
the head of the family is in full-time work and where there is at least one dependent
child. It is payable when the gross weekly income of a family falls below a
prescribed amount, which varies according to the number of children in the
family, but is the same for single- and two-parent families. ‘Full-time’ work
means, for the purpose of the benefit, work of at least 30 hours a week by one
person in two-parent families or 24 hours a week for one-parent families. The
weekly rate of the supplement is half the difference between the family s income
and the prescribed amount up to a maximum figure depending on the number of
children in the family.
Table 9: Family Income Supplement £
Weekly level
Prescribed amount for family with one child (income below which
supplement is payable) 74 00
Increase in prescribed amount for each additional child 8 00
Maximum weekly amount for a one-child family 18 50
Increase in maximum amount for each additional child 1 50
The war pensions scheme is administered throughout the United Kingdom by the
Department of Health and Social Security. Pensions are payable to people disabled
as a result of service in the armed forces or from certain injuries received in the
merchant navy or civil defence during war-time, or to civilians injured by enemy
action. The amount varies according to the degree ol disablement and to a lesser
extent rank; allowances are paid for dependants.
SOCIAL WELFARE
133
TAXATION
OTHER
WELFARE
BENEFITS
EUROPEAN
COMMUNITY
There is a wide range of supplementary allowances, the main ones being
for unemployability, constant attendance, comforts, and lowered standard of
occupation. An age allowance is payable to disabled pensioners who are aged 65 or
over and whose assessment is 40 per cent or more. Pensions are also paid to war
widows and war orphans.
The Department of Health and Social Security maintains a welfare service for
war pensioners, war widows and war orphans. It works closely with many
voluntary and ex-Service organisations who give financial aid and personal help to
disabled ex-Service men and women and their families.
Table 10: War Pensions
Category
Weekly rate
Disablement pensions
For a private at 100 per cent rate
Unemployability allowances
Personal allowance
Wife or other adult dependant
Addition for each child
Comforts allowance
Allowance for lower standard of occupation (maximum)
Constant attendance allowance
Age allowance depending on degree of disability
Exceptionally severe disablement allowance
Severe disablement occupational allowance
Clothing allowance (per year)
Death benefits
Widow’s pension (private’s widow)
Childless widow under 40
Rent allowance (maximum)
Age allowance for elderly widows
Ages 63-69
Aged 70 and over
Adult orphans
48-30
3I-40
17-75
7-70
4-20 or 8-40
19-32
9-70 to 38-80
3-35 to 10-50
19-40
9-70
41-00 or 65-00
38-45
8-88
14-65
3-75
7-50
29-60
Social security benefits, other than child, maternity, sickness, invalidity, injury or
disablement benefit, are included in the taxable income on which income tax is
assessed. On the other hand various income tax reliefs and exemptions are allowed
on account of age or liability for the support of dependants. Supplementary
benefit, family income supplement, attendance allowances and war disability
pensions including supplementary allowances, war widows’ pensions and
allowances are not taxable.
Other benefits for which people with low incomes may be eligible include legal
aid and assistance (see p 115), rent rebates and allowances (see p 156), rate rebates
(see p 62), exemption from health service charges (see p 118) and free school meals
(see p 141).
As part of the Community’s efforts to promote the free movement of labour, there
are regulations providing for equality of treatment and the protection of social
134
Voluntary
Organisations
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
security rights for employed people taking up a job in another member state. The
regulations also cover retirement pensioners and other beneficiaries who have been
employed, as well as dependants. Benefits affected include child benefit and those
for sickness and maternity, unemployment, retirement, invalidity, accidents at
work and occupational diseases.
Voluntary Services
There is a long tradition of voluntary service to the community and the
partnership between the voluntary and statutory agencies is encouraged. It has
been estimated that about 5 million people take part in some voluntary work
during the course of a year. Central and local government make grants to
voluntary agencies, and public authorities plan and carry out their duties taking
account of the work of voluntary organisations. Many services are provided for by
both local authorities and voluntary agencies, for example, residential care for
elderly, disabled, mentally ill and mentally handicapped people and for children.
Voluntary provision and community self-help, however, enable local authorities
to continue the trend towards community rather than institutional care for elderly,
mentally ill and mentally handicapped people. The Government is maintaining the
real value of its grants to national voluntary bodies which amount to around £85
million a year. Tax changes in the financial years 1980—81 and 1981—82 are
designed to help the voluntary movement to secure a larger flow of funds.
Co-ordination of government interests in voluntary social service throughout
Britain is the responsibility of the Home Office Voluntary Services Unit.
Many voluntary organisations are registered charities, and in England and
Wales the Charity Commission, a government agency, gives free advice to trustees
of charities, making schemes to modify their purposes or facilitate their
administration when necessary.
There are thousands of voluntary organisations ranging from national bodies to
small individual local groups. Most are members of larger associations or are
represented on local or national co-ordinating councils or committees. Some are
chiefly concerned with giving personal service, others in the formation of public
opinion and exchange of information. Some carry out both functions. They may
be staffed by both professional and voluntary workers.
The main voluntary body in England which aims to provide central links
between voluntary organisations and official bodies is the National Council for
Voluntary Organisations which acts as a resource and development agency for the
voluntary sector. It works to extend the involvement of voluntary organisations in
dealing with social issues, to protect the interests and independence of voluntary
agencies, and to provide them with a range of advice, information and other
services. There are also the Scottish Council of Social Service, the Council of Social
Service for Wales and the Northern Ireland Council of Social Service, which
perform similar functions.
Specialist voluntary organisations concerned with personal and family problems
include the family casework agencies like the Family Welfare Association, Family
Service Units, and the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children;
marriage guidance centres affiliated to the National Marriage Guidance Council;
the National Council of Voluntary Child Care Organisations; the National
Council for One Parent Families; Child Poverty Action Group and the Claimants’
Union, both of which provide expert advice on social security benefits; and the
Samaritans, who help the lonely, the depressed and the suicidal.
Community service of many kinds is given by young people; this is often
SOCIAL WELFARE
135
channelled through national and local organisations such as Community Service
Volunteers, Task Force, Scouts and Girl Guides.
Voluntary service to the sick and disabled is given by—among others—the
British Red Cross Society, St John Ambulance, the Women’s Royal Voluntary
Service and the Leagues of Hospital Friends. Societies which help people with
particular disabilities and difficulties include the Royal National Institute for the
Blind, the Royal National Institute for the Deaf, the Royal Association for
Disability and Rehabilitation, The Disabled Living Foundation, The Disablement
Income Group, MIND (National Association for Mental Health), MENCAP
(National Society for Mentally Handicapped Children), the Spastics Society,
Alcoholics Anonymous, Age Concern, Help the Aged and their equivalents in
Scotland and Northern Ireland.
National organisations whose work is specifically religious in inspiration include
the Salvation Army, the Church Army, Toe H, the Committee on Social Service
of the Church of Scotland, the Church of England Children’s Society, the Church
of England Council for Social Aid, the Young Men’s Christian Association, the
Young Women’s Christian Association, the Catholic Marriage Advisory Council
and the Jewish Welfare Board.
A wide range of voluntary personal service is given by the Women’s Royal
Voluntary Service, which brings ‘meals on wheels’ to housebound invalids and old
people, provides flatlets and residential clubs for the elderly, helps with family
problems and assists in hospitals and clinics, and work in emergencies.
Over 900 Citizens Advice Bureaux give explanation and advice to people who
are in doubt about their rights or who do not know about the state or voluntary
services available. There are law centres (see p 115) and housing advisory centres in
some areas.
7 Education
Policies
British education aims to develop fully the abilities of individuals, both young and
old, for their own benefit and that of society as a whole. The aim has assumed a :
new importance in an age of rapid technological change. Compulsory schooling
for children takes place between the ages of 5 and 16, although some provision is |
made for those under 5, and many pupils remain at school beyond the minimum
leaving age. Post-school education (mainly at universities, polytechnics and
colleges of further and higher education) is organised flexibly to provide a wide j
range of opportunities for academic and vocational education and continuing
study throughout life.
For many years British education has been characterised by change, and much of
the post-1945 period has also been marked by growth: large increases in the
number of pupils, the expansion of higher educational opportunities, and increased
expenditure. Although the process of change continues, recent years have seen
increasing reassessment and consolidation as well as a number of other significant
developments, including the beginning of a substantial drop in the number of |
school children following a fall in the birth rate, a slowing down in the demand for
higher education, and the need, because of economic circumstances, to reduce
public expenditure. The number of primary school children has already fallen
sharply, and the decline in numbers has begun to affect secondary schools. It has led
to a reduced demand for new teachers (although there is still a need for more
teachers of certain specialised subjects) and teacher training has been reorganised to
cope with the new situation while retaining flexibility for future expansion.
The Government’s education policies are designed to increase parental choice and
involvement in school organisation, to allow local authorities to organise publicly
maintained schools according to local needs and to take up places for pupils at
independent schools where appropriate, and to assist children from less well-off
homes to benefit from attendance at certain non-maintained schools. There are
plans to improve the special educational provision for handicapped children and
proposals have been made in England and Wales for a framework for the school
curriculum, and for the replacement of the dual system of examinations taken at
about the age of 16 by a single system. A further plan under consideration is to
provide pupils with a written record of school achievement and performance,
which would be of particular benefit to those who leave school without formal
qualifications. Other proposals include the provision of better vocational
education and training in schools and colleges for the id-to-iq age group with an
examination at the age of 17 and over, mainly for pupils intending to take jobs
directly after leaving school. Consideration is also being given to the development
of an intermediate level examination to broaden the scope of schools’ sixth form
curricula. It is recognised that co-operation between education and industry can
help the young to acquire the skills necessary to enable Britain to maintain its
position as a leading exporter of manufactured goods. Many organisations already
work to improve contacts between educational institutions and industry, and
further links are being encouraged, especially locally. A four-year Micro-
Electronics Education Programme in England, Wales and Northern Ireland and a
EDUCATION
137
separate programme in Scotland aim to give young people a better understanding
of the potential applications of micro-electronic technology through the com¬
missioning of new development projects and by building on existing work.
About four-fifths of education expenditure is incurred by local authorities, to
which grants are made by central government, with the authorities planning their
spending according to local needs and circumstances. Support for the universities
and certain other higher education institutions, and grants to students, account for
most of the direct expenditure by central government. Spending on education
(some X11*880 million in 1980, 6 per cent of the gross domestic product) amounts
to more than 11 per cent of all public expenditure, but a reduction is planned in the
years to 1983-84 taking into account the declining number of school children and
considerable savings in the provision of school meals and milk. In spite of cuts in
expenditure, it is the Government’s policy to maintain and improve the quality ot
education.
Administration The Secretary of State for Education and Science is responsible for all aspects of
education in England, and for the Government s relations with and support for
universities throughout Great Britain. (He is also responsible for basic civil science,
p 50.) The Secretaries of State for Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland have full
responsibility in their respective countries for non-university education; they are
consulted about (but do not carry formal responsibility for) education in
universities and civil science.
Administration of publicly provided schools and further education is
decentralised. Responsibilities are divided between the central government
departments (the Department of Education and Science, the Welsh Office, the
Scottish Education Department, and the Department of Education for Northern
Ireland), local education authorities (education and library boards in Northern
Ireland), and various voluntary organisations.
The provision of maintained school education and most post-school education
outside the universities is the responsibility of local education authorities which
decide local policy. They employ teachers and other staff, provide and maintain
buildings, supply equipment and materials, and, in England and Wales, provide
grants to students proceeding to further and higher education. In Scotland the
central institutions which provide most vocational further education to degree
level, and colleges of education which provide teacher training, are administered
by independent governing bodies. Apart from three central institutions financed
by the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland, these institutions and
the colleges of education are financed directly by the Scottish Education
Department which also pays grants to students on advanced courses. In Northern
Ireland the Ulster Polytechnic (an institution of higher education) is likewise
administered by an independent board of governors and financed directly by the
Department of Education for Northern Ireland. Colleges of education are
controlled by the Department or voluntary agencies.
SCHOOLS Parents are required by law to see that their children receive efficient full-time
education, at school or elsewhere, between the ages of 5 and 16.
Over 11 million children attend Britain’s 38,500 schools. Most receive free
education financed from public funds, but a small proportion (very roughly 6 per
cent) attend schools wholly independent of public financial support.
Boys and girls are taught together in most primary schools and in an increasing
number of secondary schools. Over 88 per cent of pupils in maintained secondary
schools in England and Wales and over 54 per cent in Northern Ireland attend
mixed schools. In Scotland nearly all secondary schools are mixed. Most
Management
Nursery and
Primary
Schools
Secondary
Schools
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
independent schools for younger children are co-educational; the majority
providing secondary education are single-sex, although the number of mixed
schools is growing.
No fees are charged to parents of children at maintained schools, and books and
equipment are free, although in Northern Ireland a small proportion of grammar
school pupils are admitted on a fee-paying basis.
Schools supported from public funds are of two main kinds in England and Wales:
county schools and voluntary schools. County schools are provided and
maintained by local education authorities wholly out of public funds. Voluntary
schools, mostly established by religious denominations, are also wholly maintained
from public funds but the governors of some types of voluntary school contribute
to capital costs. Nearly a third of the 30,000 or so schools supported by public funds
in England and Wales are voluntary schools, most of them Church of England or
Roman Catholic. Each publicly maintained school has a governing body, which
includes governors appointed by the local education authority. The Education Act
1980 provides for the wider representation of parent and teachers on school
governing bodies: it is intended that all schools should have at least two parent and
two teacher governors normally elected by parents and teachers. In Scotland most
of the schools supported from public funds are provided by education authorities
and are known as public schools (in England this term is used for a type of
independent school, see p 139).
In Northern Ireland there are two main categories of school: voluntary schools
which are mainly under Roman Catholic management receiving grants towards
the capital running costs; and controlled schools owned and managed by the area
education and library boards and having all their expenditure met from public
funds. It is government policy to encourage integration between Protestant and
Roman Catholic schools where there is a local desire for it.
Successive Governments have expanded nursery education within the constraints
of limited resources, and this means that in England over half of four-year-olds and
about a fifth of three-year-olds are receiving education in nursery schools or classes
or in infants’ classes in primary schools. In addition many children attend informal
pre-school playgroups organised by parents and voluntary bodies.
Compulsory education begins at five when children in England and Wales go
to infant schools or departments; at seven they go on to junior schools or
departments. The usual age of transfer from primary to secondary schools is 11 in
England, Wales and Northern Ireland but a number of local authorities in England
have established ‘first’ schools for pupils aged 5 to 8 or 10 and ‘middle’ schools
covering various age ranges between 9 and 14. In Scotland, the primary schools
take children from 5 to 12, normally having infant classes for children under 7,
although in a few areas there are separate infant schools.
The publicly maintained system of education aims to give all children an education
suited to their particular abilities. Over 85 per cent of the maintained secondary
school population in England and Wales attend comprehensive schools which take
pupils without reference to ability or aptitude and provide a wide range of
secondary education for all or most of the children of a district. They can be
organised in a number of ways including schools that take the full secondary school
age-range from 11 to 18; middle schools whose pupils move on to senior
comprehensive schools at 12, 13 or 14, leaving at 16 or 18; and schools with an age-
range of 11 or 12 to 16 combined with a sixth-form or ‘tertiary’ college for pupils
over 16. Most other children receive secondary education in ‘grammar’ and
EDUCATION
139
Independent
Schools
Special
Educational
Needs
Teachers
‘secondary modern’ schools to which they are allocated after selection procedures
at the age of 11.
In England, Wales and Scotland parents have a statutory right to express a
preference for a particular school for their children, and have an effective
channel of appeal at local level. Schools also have to publish their public examin¬
ation results and basic information about themselves. An assisted-places scheme
enables children from less well-off homes who are capable of benefiting from the
education provided to attend certain independent secondary schools belonging to
the scheme, by means of government grant, depending on parents’ income.
Scottish secondary education is almost completely comprehensive; almost all
pupils are in schools with a non-selective intake. The majority of schools are
six-year comprehensives. Because of local circumstances there are some
comprehensive schools at which courses may extend to four years or less; pupils
may transfer at the end of their second or fourth years to a six-year comprehensive.
Northern Ireland secondary education is organised largely along selective lines
according to children’s abilities.
Independent schools are outside the publicly supported sector but are open to
inspection and must register with the appropriate government education
department which can require them to remedy features in their premises,
accommodation or instruction and to exclude anyone regarded as unsuitable to
teach in or to be the proprietor of a school.
There are nearly 2,500 registered independent schools catering for pupils of all
ages. The largest and most important are the public schools,1 which accept pupils
at about 12 or 13 years of age usually on the basis of a fairly demanding
examination. There are about 460 public schools in England and Wales, most of
them single-sex (about half of them for girls) and at least partly boarding. Local
education authorities in England and Wales may assist with the payment of fees for
children at independent and other non-maintained schools, and there are also the
assisted-places schemes (see above). A number of preparatory schools prepare
children for entry to the public schools.
There are separate special schools (both day and boarding) which cater for a wide
variety of handicap. For a number of years, however, the general trend has been
increasingly to provide special education in ordinary schools where this is in the
educational interest of the child and the nature of the disability permits.
Recent legislation provides for a new system of special education based on the
concept of the special educational needs of the child rather than on categories of
disability. The new system also covers children with emotional or behavioural
disorders and those with significant learning difficulties, as well as physical or
mental handicap. Local education authorities must ensure that children with
special needs are educated in ordinary schools provided that this is compatible with
meeting their needs, with the provision of efficient education for the other children
in the school, and with the best use of resources.
Teachers in publicly maintained schools are appointed by local education
authorities or school governing bodies. There are more than 500,000 teachers
(including the full-time equivalent of part-time teachers) in publicly maintained
and assisted schools in Britain and the pupil/teacher ratio in primary and secondary
1 ‘Public schools’ are usually taken to mean those schools in membership of the Headmasters’
Conference, the Governing Bodies Association or the Governing Bodies of Girls’ Schools Association.
They should not be confused with the State-supported public schools in Scotland.
140
The
Curriculum
Religious
Education in
Schools
Educational
Standards
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
schools is about 19 to 1. Teachers must hold qualifications approved by the
appropriate education department.
In England and Wales the secular curriculum in maintained schools is the
responsibility of the local education authority, or, in the case of secondary schools,
of the schools’ governors. In practice, responsibility is largely devolved upon head
teachers and their staff. The Government has published guidance recommending a
wider programme of work for primary and secondary school pupils, to ensure a
balanced education and to widen educational opportunities as much as possible. It
states that secondary school pupils up to the age of 16 should follow a broad
curriculum including English, mathematics and science, religious and physical
education, some study of the humanities and both practical and aesthetic activities.
Most pupils should also study a modern language. In Wales, the Welsh language is
taught and is used as either the main or secondary medium of teaching in some
schools. Her Majesty’s Inspectors review and report on the content and value of the
education provided in all schools, including independent schools, and advise local
education authorities, schools and the Government. Local education authorities
also employ inspectors or advisers to guide them on maintained schools.
Curriculum materials and guidance and encouragement for school-based research
and development are available to teachers through the independent Schools
Council for Curriculum and Examinations. The Schools Committee for Wales
carries out similar activities. At some 500 teachers’ centres in England and Wales
teachers meet for curriculum development work, discussion and in-service training.
In Scotland a new structure for the curriculum in secondary education is being
developed. The function of Her Majesty’s Inspectors is in general the same as in
England and Wales; the content and balance of the curriculum is kept under
continuous review by the Consultative Committee on the Curriculum. Provision
is made, where appropriate, for the teaching of Gaelic. Northern Ireland has a
Council for Educational Development which is responsible for developing the
curriculum; the Inspectorate of the Department of Education helps and advises
teachers and inspects and evaluates the work of all schools.
In England and Wales by law all children in county or voluntary schools receive
religious instruction and take part in a daily corporate act of worship unless their
parents choose otherwise. In county schools, and sometimes in voluntary schools,
non-denominational religious instruction is given which may include the study of
comparative religions. In all kinds of voluntary schools there is opportunity for
denominational instruction. In Scotland, religious instruction must be given, but
the content is determined by education authorities and the schools in accordance
with the wishes of the local community. Certain schools provide for Roman
Catholic children but in all schools there are safeguards for the individual
conscience. In controlled schools in Northern Ireland clergy have a right of access
which may be used for denominational instruction; in voluntary schools corporate
worship and religious education are controlled by the management authorities.
There is general concern that there should be an effective means of assessing the
standards of pupils’ performance. The Assessment of Performance Unit of the
Department of Education and Science promotes the development of methods of
assessment and monitors the achievement of school children. Annual monitoring is
now being undertaken in language and mathematics at the ages of 11 and 15, and in
science at the ages of 11, 13 and 15- Monitoring of the first foreign language is
expected to begin in 1983, and exploratory work is being conducted into the
development of pupils’ aesthetic, physical and technological abilities. New
assessment techniques are also being developed in Scotland.
EDUCATION
Educational
Aids
Secondary
School
Examinations
Health and
Welfare of
School
Children
141
In most schools, teachers and pupils use a range of aids to assist the processes of
teaching and learning, and educational broadcasting is of major importance.
Almost all schools can receive radio and television programmes. In addition the
British Broadcasting Corporation produces radiovision programmes which, in
effect, are low cost tape/slide units. Teachers’ notes and pupils’ pamphlets
accompany many broadcast series. Each year more than 500 hours of school radio
and 600 hours of school television are transmitted by the BBC and the independent
broadcasting companies.
Computers are increasingly used to assist learning, to plan timetables, and in the
management of courses. It is the Government’s aim that every secondary school
should have its own micro-computer by the end of 1982.
The principal examinations taken by secondary school pupils in England and
Wales at the age of 16 and over are those leading to the General Certificate of
Education (GCE) at Ordinary (‘O’) level and to the Certificate of Secondary
Education (CSE). Both are normally taken after five years of secondary education.
The GCE Advanced (‘A’) level is normally taken after a further two years’ study.
Entries for GCE examinations are also accepted from private candidates and those
at further education establishments.
The highest grade in the CSE is widely accepted as being of the same standard as
at least grade C at GCE ‘O’ level and these are the qualifying grades for entry to
further education and training. The ‘A’ level examination is the standard for
entrance to university and other higher education, and to many forms of pro¬
fessional training. After much discussion the Government has proposed that the
present system should be simplified by replacing the ‘O’ level and CSE with a
single system of examining at the age of 16 and over. The ‘A’ level examinations
will remain.
In Scotland school pupils in the fourth year of secondary courses sit an
examination at 16 years for the Ordinary grade of the Scottish Certificate of
Education, and pupils in the fifth or sixth year for the Higher grade. Passes at the
Higher grade are the basis for entry to university or professional training. For those
who have completed their main studies at the Higher grade but wish to continue
their studies in particular subjects there is a Certificate of Sixth Year Studies.
In Northern Ireland candidates may take the Northern Ireland General
Certificate of Education or the Northern Ireland Certificate of Secondary
Education, which are equivalent to those examinations in England and Wales.
The International Baccalaureate, offered to sixth formers by several educational
institutions in Britain, leads either to a diploma, or to separate subject certificates,
the latter being recognised for admission to higher education in Britain and many
other countries.
Physical education, including organised games, is part of the curriculum of all
schools. Those receiving financial assistance from public funds must have the use of
a playing field, and most secondary schools have a gymnasium.
The government health departments are responsible for the medical inspection
of school children and for advice and treatment of specific medical and dental
problems associated with children of school age.
Local education authorities have discretion to decide what milk, meals or other
refreshment to provide at their schools, and what charges to make. Provision has to
be made free of charge, however, for pupils from families receiving certain social
security benefits. Under certain conditions the authorities must provide free school
transport, and they have discretionary powers to assist financially in the provision
of transport for pupils between their home and school.
142
School
Building
POST¬
SCHOOL
EDUCATION
Institutions
Finance
Students
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Local education authorities are responsible for the provision of school buildings,
under the general supervision of the central departments. Since 1945 an extensive
school building programme has been carried out, together with extensions,
alterations and remodelling of existing schools. Government grants are normally
available to help with the costs of building.
Post-school education is available to everyone above school-leaving age, is ;
provided at all levels and may be part-time or full-time, vocational or non-
vocational.
More than a third of young people receive some form of post-school education, 1
compared with a fifth in 1965. Further education is usually taken to refer to all
post-school education outside the universities. Higher education (postgraduate, \
first-degree and similar level work) is provided at universities and on advanced
courses at polytechnics and other establishments of higher and further education, j
The principal institutions of post-school education are the 46 universities (see j
p 143); the 30 polytechnics in England and Wales and the 14 Scottish central
institutions; the Ulster Polytechnic in Northern Ireland; and some 800 other
colleges which are maintained or assisted from public funds.
In addition, there are many independent specialist establishments, such as
secretarial and correspondence colleges and colleges teaching English as a foreign
language; a number of voluntary and private bodies providing cultural and
general education, sometimes with assistance from local education authorities; and
a large number of other education and training schemes run by public or private
organisations.
Most establishments for post-school education are either maintained or assisted
from public funds. Some undertake training, research or consultancy for
commercial firms, making charges which broadly reflect the economic cost of
provision, and a number have endowments or receive grants or gifts from
foundations and benefactors.
Although the Government is responsible for financing well over 80 per cent of
universities’ expenditure, the universities are guaranteed as autonomous
institutions by a special financial arrangement. A block grant is paid to the
University Grants Committee which allocates funds to the universities, the
London Graduate School of Business Studies and the Manchester Business School.
The Department of Education and Science finances directly the Open University
(sec p 144), the Royal College of Art and the Cranfield Institute of Technology.
The independent University College at Buckingham receives no assistance from
public funds although its students can apply for mandatory grants (see p 144)- The
Northern Ireland Department of Education makes grants directly to the
universities.
Some 852,000 students take full-time and sandwich courses (courses where
substantial periods of full-time study alternate with periods of supervised
experience on a relevant job) at universities and major establishments of further
education in Britain (1978-79 figures). Of these about 296,000 are at universities
while another 223,700 follow advanced courses outside universities, at colleges of
further and higher education, polytechnics and Scottish central institutions. More
than 332,000 take non-advanced courses, most of them studying for recognised
vocational or educational qualifications.
In addition, there are over 3 -6 million part-time students, over 640,000 of whom
EDUCATION
143
Higher
Education
Universities
are released by their employers for further education during working hours. Many
of the remainder take part in adult education classes (see p 145).
Many full-time students are helped by grants from public funds which are
mandatory for most students taking first-degree and other comparable courses
who qualify under national rules. (Grants for other courses may be given at the
discretion of a local education authority.) Grants cover tuition fees and
maintenance, but where parents can afford to contribute this is taken into account.
They are awarded by local education authorities in England and Wales up to first-
degree level; in Scotland they are made by the Scottish Education Department;
and in Northern Ireland by Education and Library Boards. For postgraduate study
and research grants are offered by the education departments and the research
councils. In all, about 90 per cent of students on full-time and sandwich advanced
courses receive help from public funds. Some scholarships are available from
endowments and from particular industries or companies.
Following rapid expansion post-school education is moving into a period of
consolidation. Some 7 per cent of 18-year-olds enter courses of higher education.
Nearly 520,000 full-time and sandwich course students and over 263,000 part-time
students follow courses at a variety of institutions.
There are 46 universities in Britain, including the Open University, compared
with 17 in 1945.
The English universities are: Aston (Birmingham), Bath, Birmingham,
Bradford, Bristol, Brunei (London), Cambridge, City (London), Durham, East
Anglia, Essex, Exeter, Hull, Keele, Kent at Canterbury, Lancaster, Leeds, Leicester,
Liverpool, London, Loughborough, Manchester, Manchester Institute of Science
and Technology, Newcastle upon Tyne, Nottingham, Oxford, Reading, Salford,
Sheffield, Southampton, Surrey, Sussex, Warwick, and York. The London
Graduate School of Business Studies and the Manchester Business School also have
university status. The federated University of Wales comprises seven constituent
institutions. The Scottish universities are: Aberdeen, Dundee, Edinburgh,
Glasgow, Heriot-Watt (Edinburgh), St. Andrews, Stirling, and Strathclyde
(Glasgow). In Northern Ireland there are the Queen’s University of Belfast and the
New University of Ulster in Coleraine.
The universities of Oxford and Cambridge date from the twelfth and thirteenth
centuries, and the Scottish universities of St. Andrews, Glasgow, Aberdeen and
Edinburgh from the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. All the other universities
were founded in the nineteenth or twentieth centuries.
Admission to universities is by examination or by selection. In 1979-80 there
were about 293,000 full-time university students in Britain, including over 47,500
postgraduates. Just over a half lived in colleges and halls of residence.
There were about 33,300 full-time university teachers paid wholly from
university funds. The ratio of staff to students was about one to nine, one of the
most favourable in the world.
Except at the Open University, first-degree courses are mainly full-time and
usually last three or four years, though medical and veterinary courses usually
require five or six.
Degree titles vary according-to the practice of each university; in England and
Wales the most common titles for a first degree are Bachelor of Arts (BA) or
Bachelor of Science (BSc) and for a second degree Master of Arts (MA), Master of
Science (MSc), Doctor of Philosophy (PhD); while in Scotland Master is
occasionally used for a first degree in arts subjects. On the other hand, uniformity
of standards between universities is promoted by the practice of employing outside
144
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
examiners for all university examinations, and the general pattern of teaching is
fairly similar throughout Britain.
The independent University College at Buckingham, which opened in 1976,
does not yet award degrees, but its Licence has been accepted as the equivalent of a
degree by relevant professional bodies and by other universities for admission to
postgraduate studies.
The Open The Open University is a non-residential university which provides part-time
University degrees and other courses, using a combination of television and radio broadcasts,
correspondence texts and summer schools, together with a network of viewing
and listening centres. No formal academic qualifications are required to register for
these courses, but the standards of its degrees are the same as those of other
universities. The university’s first degree, the BA (Open), is a general degree
awarded on a system of credits for each course completed. The first courses began
in 1971, and in 1981 some 65,000 undergraduate and over 10,000 associate students
were following courses. The university had advised many other countries on the
setting-up of similar institutions.
Teacher Training
In England and Wales all new entrants to teaching must generally have taken a
recognised course of teacher training. Courses are offered by most universities and
by a number of polytechnics and other institutions of higher education. Non¬
graduates usually qualify by way of a three- or four-year course leading to the
Bachelor of Education degree; graduates take a one-year postgraduate Certificate
of Education.
In response to the change in demand for newly trained teachers, caused by
restrictions on public expenditure and the decline in the size of the school
population, the number of training places has been considerably cut. However,
because of a shortage of qualified teachers of mathematics, science, craft, design
and technology, special financial arrangements are being offered to encourage
suitably qualified mature people to undertake one-year training courses to enter
the profession. Teachers qualified in other subjects are also encouraged to retrain to
teach one or more of these subjects.
In Scotland all teachers in education authority schools must be registered with
the General Teaching Council for Scotland and all teachers of academic subjects in
secondary schools must be graduates. College of education courses lead to the
award of a Teaching Qualification (Primary Education or Secondary Education).
Graduates and holders of specialist diplomas take a one-year course; courses in
practical and aesthetic subjects for non-graduates extend to two, three or four
years. Most Scottish colleges of education also offer four-year courses leading to
the degree of Bachelor of Education. In Northern Ireland teacher training takes
place in the two university education departments, three colleges of education, the
Ulster Polytechnic and one technical college. The principal courses are the
certificate (for three years) and the Bachelor of Education (four years) but there are
also one-year courses for graduates or holders of other appropriate qualifications.
Other Advanced In 1979-80 about 394,000 students, including part-time students, were taking
Courses advanced courses other than in universities in a wide variety of subjects, including
architecture, art and design, catering, engineering, natural sciences, social work,
business and management studies and teacher training. An increasing proportion
of the students were taking courses leading to the awards of the Council for
National Academic Awards (CNAA). The Council awards degrees and other
academic qualifications, comparable in standard with those granted by
universities. The courses range from science and technology to the arts, social
EDUCATION
145
Adult
Education
studies, business studies and law, but the proportion of technological, business or
other broadly vocational courses is much higher than in universities.
In England and Wales a major contribution to higher education is made by the
30 polytechnics which provide courses on a wide range of subjects at all levels,
though the trend is towards a concentration on advanced work. In Scotland similar
provision is made in the 14 central institutions and a few further education colleges,
though the tendency to specialise in particular subjects is greater than in the
polytechnics. In Northern Ireland such higher education provision is concentrated
within the Ulster Polytechnic.
The institutes and colleges of higher education, formed by the integration of
teacher training with the rest of higher education, account for a significant
proportion of higher education students, and other further education colleges
run some, usually specialised, higher education courses. Full-time or part-time
vocational courses leading to nationally recognised qualifications are available
in further education colleges, polytechnics and other establishments of further
education.
The City and Guilds of London Institute offers qualifications in a wide range of
craft and vocational subjects. At technician level the Technician Education Council
(TEC) is developing a unified national system of courses leading to awards at two
levels: certificate and diploma; and higher certificate and diploma. Many further
education colleges also offer courses in shorthand, typing, book-keeping, and
office studies. More advanced business studies are generally available in poly¬
technics and some other colleges. The further education sector makes a major
contribution to management education at all levels.
Much business education is related to the specialised examination requirements
of various professional bodies, and courses leading to them are provided in many
colleges, although numbers of candidates seeking qualifications do so through
correspondence courses. The Business Education Council (BEC) is developing a
system of unified national vocational courses in business studies and public
administration at three levels: general, national and higher national certificate and
diploma. (The highest awards of the TEC and BEC approach pass degree
standard.) The Scottish equivalents of the councils are the Scottish Technical
Education Council and the Scottish Business Council.
‘Adult education’ is a broad term, ranging from the development of the special
skills required by rapid change in industry and technology to ‘self-fulfilment’
through a very wide range of courses. An important element is remedial, allowing
people to make up for opportunities missed at school; the adult literacy campaign
and programmes to help members of minority ethnic groups are particular
examples. Courses are provided by local education authorities, residential colleges,
extra-mural departments of universities, the Open University and various other
bodies including a number of voluntary organisations.
A major part of adult education is financed by local education authorities and
provided mainly in their establishments, including schools used for adult evening
classes and in some cases in ‘community schools’ which provide educational, social
and cultural opportunities for the wider community. Most courses are part-time.
Local authorities maintain or aid most of the short-term residential colleges or
centres which provide courses lasting between a weekend and a fortnight.
Long-term residential colleges, grant-aided by central government
departments, provide courses of one or two years. They aim to provide a liberal
education without academic entry tests. Most students admitted are entitled to full
maintenance grants.
University extra-mural departments and the Workers’ Educational Association
Teaching
Methods
EDUCA¬
TIONAL
RESEARCH
EDUCA¬
TIONAL LINKS
OVERSEAS
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
(WEA), the largest recognised voluntary body, provide extended part-time
courses of more academic studies, as well as short courses organised for special
(including vocational) interests. Often the WEA provides the organisation and the
universities the tutors.
Many other organisations, national and local, provide many kinds of education
and training. Several, such as the National Federation of Women’s Institutes, the
National Union of Townswomen’s Guilds, and the National Council of Young
Men’s Christian Associations, receive government grants; others are commercially
or privately financed.
The National Institute of Adult Education is a centre of information, research
and publication for adult education, as well as a channel of co-operation and
consultation for the many interested organisations in England and Wales. Mainly
financed by local education authorities and a government grant, the Institute
administers the government-funded Adult Literacy and Basic Skills Unit which
covers proficiency in areas such as numeracy and communication, as well as
literacy, without which people are impeded in applying or being considered for
employment. The Institute’s counterpart in Scotland is the Scottish Institute of
Adult Education and in Northern Ireland the Council for Continuing Education.
The general pattern of teaching and learning on full-time courses at universities
and colleges remains a mixture of lectures, prescribed or suggested reading,
seminars or tutorials, exercises and tests, and, where appropriate, practical work.
Educational aids are widely available at most universities, polytechnics and
colleges.
Radio and television programmes, both specifically educational and general, are
important media for continuing education and are often linked to a range of
supplementary publications, courses and activities. BBC radio study programmes
are transmitted late at night on weekdays and on Sunday afternoons. Educational
television programmes are shown on Saturday and Sunday mornings, during the
day on weekdays with some early and late evening transmissions. Both the BBC
and independent television provide programmes which range from basic
education and progressive vocational training to domestic, social and craft skills.
The BBC also works with the Open University (see p 144), producing and
broadcasting radio and television programmes as part of the courses.
Research into the theory and practice of education and the organisation of
educational services is supported financially by central and local government,
philanthropic organisations, universities and teachers’ associations. Some research
is also sponsored at further education institutions and by a few independent
organisations. The Schools Council and the Social Science Research Council are
important channels for government support.
The major research institute outside the universities is the autonomous National
Foundation for Educational Research in England and Wales, with income mainly
from funds received from research projects and from corporate members,
including local education authorities, teachers’ organisations and universities. It
receives an annual government grant. There are also the Scottish Council for
Research in Education and the Northern Ireland Council for Educational
Research.
School children, students, teachers and experts come to Britain from overseas to
study and British people work and train overseas. Many opportunities for such
movement are the result of international co-operation at government level within
the European Community and within the Commonwealth, and of educational
EDUCATION
H7
Educational
Exchanges
Overseas
Students in
Britain
schemes, courses and professional contacts organised by official and voluntary
organisations in Britain. The British aid programme also encourages links between
educational institutions in Britain and in developing countries.
British membership of the European Community is creating closer ties with
other countries. Both in schools and in the colleges and universities there has been
an expansion of interest in European studies and languages. Exchanges of teachers,
school children and students take place. Britain has adhered to the Statute of the
European Schools (nine of which have been established throughout the
Community including one at Culham, Oxfordshire) to provide school education
for children of people employed in Community institutions. Particular attention is
being paid to foreign language learning, the language and other educational needs
of migrants and their children, and the relationship between education and
working life. Policies of admission to higher education in member countries are
being studied.
The promotion of cultural and educational relations with other countries is a major
concern of the British Council (see p 67), which plays an important part in the
management of the aid programme to education. It recruits teachers for work
overseas, organises short visits overseas by British experts and encourages cultural
exchange visits. It is also responsible for schemes to promote academic interchange,
including the Academic Links and Interchange Scheme between universities and
higher education institutions in Britain and other countries, and schemes to
encourage exchanges in other scientific, educational and cultural areas. The
promotion of co-operation between universities in Britain and developing
countries is undertaken by means of staff recruitment, the secondment of staff from
British universities, inter-departmental faculty link schemes, local staff
development, short-term teaching and advisory visits, and general consultancy
services.
The Central Bureau for Educational Visits and Exchanges, an independent
foundation financed by the Government, aims to enrich British education through
international contact and exchange. It is responsible, with the League for the
Exchange of Commonwealth Teachers, for teacher exchanges with most West
European countries, a number of Commonwealth countries and the United States.
It arranges links and exchanges between schools, further education establishments
and local authorities, and organises study visits for teachers, education
administrators, and young workers. It also appoints language assistants and
develops opportunities for exchange in special areas such as sport and the
performing arts, as well as between disabled people.
The Association of Commonwealth Universities promotes co-operation
between member universities in 28 Commonwealth countries. It organises
meetings, provides information and academic appointments services; administers
the Commonwealth Scholarship and Fellowship Plan in Britain; and generally
promotes the movement of academic and administrative staff and of students from
one country to another.
The Commonwealth Education Liaison Committee supplements normal direct
dealings on education between the countries of the Commonwealth. The United
Kingdom Council for Overseas Student Affairs is an independent body serving
overseas students and organisations and individuals concerned in student affairs.
Students come to Britain from countries throughout the world to study at
universities or other educational institutions or for professional training. In the
academic year 1978-79 there were about 86,000 students in publicly maintained
institutions, some 36,800 at universities and about 50,000 at further education
148
The Teaching
of English
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
establishments. In addition, others (around 41,5°° in 1978-79) were training as
nurses, for the law, banking and accountancy, for industry or services. About 30
per cent of all overseas students were from the Commonwealth and 54 per cent
from developing countries.
Many come to Britain for advanced training. Of the 49,000 students enrolled for
full-time postgraduate study or research at British universities in 1979, 36 per cent
came from overseas. Of those working for a master’s degree 45 per cent came from
overseas and of those working for a doctorate 34 per cent. British universities, |
polytechnics and other further education establishments have built up their
reputation overseas by providing tuition of the highest standards, maintaining low
student to staff ratios, and adopting courses and qualifications to meet present-day
and possible future needs. First degree courses tend to be shorter and more
intensive than in many countries (three years is the minimum length; two for the
University College at Buckingham licence).
The majority of overseas students pay their own fees and expenses or hold
awards from their own governments. In addition, over 10,000 overseas students <
were fully supported in 1980 under British technical co-operation with developing
countries. New students from overseas in higher and further education are charged
at the level the institutions consider necessary to meet the cost of study subject to
a minimum figure. Students from other member countries of the European
Community are charged the lower level of fees that applies to British students.
There is, however, a scheme to provide financial help for overseas research students
of high ability.
Many public and private scholarships and fellowships are available to students
from overseas (and to British students who want to study overseas). Among the
best known are the British Council Scholarships, the Commonwealth Scholarship
and Fellowship Plan, the Marshall Scholarships and the independently funded
Rhodes Scholarships, and the Churchill Scholarships for men and women in all
walks of life. Most British universities and colleges offer scholarships for which
graduates of any nationality are eligible. (The British Council and the Association
of Commonwealth Universities are involved in the selection of British students for
awards offered by many overseas countries.) The Atlantic College at St. Donat s,
South Wales (one of the colleges of the United World Colleges), provides two-
year residential courses for overseas students before they enter university.
'
The continuing increase in interest in English as a foreign language is reflected in
the growth of the number of private language schools and the greater proportion
of these recognised by the British Council. At the same time the British Council
has greatly expanded the volume of its own teaching of English overseas by
opening new centres in many countries and extending existing ones. Publications
and other material relating to English language teaching have also increased and
are now a large component in publishers’ lists and constitute a major export.
The BBC’s English by Radio and Television Service provides a world-wide
facility for the individual learner at home.
The Youth Service
The aim of the youth service is to promote the social and informal education of
young people by offering them opportunities in their leisure time to mix socially,
to develop and enlarge their range of interests and to support their development to
adulthood. The service is provided by a partnership between public authorities and
a large variety of voluntary organisations. Membership of groups is voluntary and
there is no attempt to create anything in the nature of a national youth movement.
EDUCATION
149
Youth Workers
Other
Organisations
Concerned with
Young People
The youth service forms part of the education system. Government education
departments formulate broad policy objectives for the service and encourage their
achievement through financial assistance and advice. They assist national and local
voluntary youth organisations through grants towards administrative and
building costs, new developments and experimental projects.
Local education authorities provide and run their own youth clubs and centres
(some of which are residential) which may be purpose-built or associated with
schools. They also assist local voluntary youth groups by lending premises and
equipment and by contributing to their capital and running costs. Many
authorities have youth committees on which official and voluntary bodies are
represented, and employ youth officers to co-ordinate youth work and to arrange
in-service training. There are also youth councils which are representative bodies
of young people from local youth organisations.
National voluntary organisations promote the larger share of youth activities
through local groups which raise most of their day-to-day running expenses by
their own efforts. These have an estimated combined membership of over 6
million. They vary greatly in character, some concentrating on social and
recreational pursuits, others on educational or religious activities. Most national
organisations in England are members of the National Council for Voluntary
Youth Services, a consultative body. In Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland
there are similar representative bodies.
Among the largest of the voluntary youth organisations are the Scout and Girl
Guides Associations (with about 542,000 and 892,000 members), the National
Association of Youth Clubs (about 770,000), the National Association of Boys’
Clubs (some 200,000) and the Youth Hostels Association (about 309,000). The
three pre-service organisations (the Sea Cadet Corps, Army Cadet Force and Air
Training Corps) combine social, educational and physical development with
training for possible entry to the armed forces.
Full-time youth workers are supported by over 300,000 part-time workers, many
of them unpaid. Part-time workers usually have no professional qualification in
youth work but some have allied qualifications, for instance as teachers, and a large
number attend short courses and conferences on youth work. Qualified school
teachers are recognised as qualified youth workers.
In England and Wales, basic two-year training at certain universities and higher
education colleges leads to the status of a qualified youth and community worker.
A number of colleges of higher education include study of youth work within
teacher-training courses. In Scotland one- and three-year courses are provided at
certain colleges of education and in Northern Ireland courses are provided by the
Ulster Polytechnic.
The Duke of Edinburgh’s Award Scheme, which operates through bodies such as
local authorities, schools, youth organisations and industrial firms, is a challenge
for young people from Britain and other Commonwealth countries to reach
certain standards in leisure-time activities with the voluntary assistance of adults.
The Scheme celebrated its 25th anniversary in 1981.
A substantial sum of money is awarded by the many grant-giving foundations
and trusts each year for activities involving young people. The Royal Jubilee
Trusts, formed in 1978 from King George’s Jubilee Trust (started in 1935 at the
time of the Silver Jubilee of King George V) and the Queen’s Silver Jubilee Trust
(which arose from the 1977 Queen’s Silver Jubilee Appeal) support work
involving young people aged 8 to 18 (King George’s Jubilee Trust) and young
people up to the age of 25 involved in community service work (the Queen’s Silver
150
Voluntary
Service by
Young People
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Jubilee Trust). King George’s Jubilee Trust has distributed over £4 million since
1935 and the Queen’s Silver Jubilee Trust over £5 million since May 1978.
Thousands of young people voluntarily take part in community service designed
to assist those in need, including the elderly and the disabled, and many others
work on conservation projects. Organisations providing opportunities for
community service such as International Voluntary Service, Task Force and
Community Service Volunteers receive grants from the Government. Many
schools also organise community service activities as part of the curriculum.
The Community Projects Foundation is an independent body which advises
interested organisations in England and Wales on methods of involving young
people in providing service to the community. The Foundation receives a
government grant and employs teams of young people who are available on
request to assist in promoting voluntary service.
8 The Environment
The Plans
By comprehensive land-use planning and development control Britain has had
considerable success in resolving the conflicting demands of industry, commerce,
housing, transport, agriculture and recreation and in reducing environmental
pollution. There is no ‘national plan’ for urban and land development, but there is a
statutory system of land-use planning applying over the whole country and to
virtually every kind of development, and there are laws dealing specifically with
environmental health and the control of pollution. All development requires local
‘planning permission’, and applications for permission are dealt with in the light of
development plans which set out strategies for each area on such matters as
housing, transport, industry and open land. The underlying approach is to identify
people’s needs and possible ways of meeting them, and there is a growing move
away from narrow land-use allocation towards broader strategic planning
recognising the community’s social and economic goals. Throughout Britain
voluntary organisations, too, take an active interest in planning, conservation and
the control of pollution.
The system of land-use planning in Great Britain involves a centralised structure
under the Secretaries of State for the Environment, Wales and Scotland, and
compulsory planning duties for local planning authorities. The Department of the
Environment brings together the major responsibilities in England for land-use
planning, housing and construction, countryside policy and environmental
protection. The Welsh Office and the Scottish Development Department have
broadly equivalent responsibilities. Large-scale planning in England and Wales is
primarily the responsibility of the county councils and the Greater London
Council while district councils and the councils of the London boroughs and the
City of London are responsible for most local plans and development control, the
main housing functions and many other environmental health matters. In
Scotland, planning functions are undertaken by regional and district councils
whose responsibilities are divided on a basis broadly similar to that in England and
Wales. In the more rural regions and the islands, all planning responsibilities are
carried out by the regional and islands councils respectively. In Northern Ireland
the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland is responsible for
planning matters through its local offices which work closely with the district
councils. The councils have local environmental health responsibilities.
Special provisions, in addition to the general town and country planning
measures, control the location of major industry (see p 192). General problems of
industrial development are dealt with jointly by a number of government
departments, but each development scheme, as a rule, requires the local planning
authority’s consent. Financial incentives from the Government encourage the
location of industry in particular areas.
The development plan system in England and Wales involves ‘structure’ and
‘local’ plans. Structure plans are prepared by county planning authorities and
require ministerial approval. They set out broad policies for the development and
other use of land (including measures for the improvement of the physical
environment and traffic management). Local plans containing detailed proposals,
152
Public
Participation
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
including plans for ‘action areas’ where comprehensive development is expected to
start within a specified period, are normally prepared by district planning
authorities, although sometimes by county planning authorities, and must 1
conform generally with the approved structure plan. In exceptional cases, with
ministerial approval, the approval of a local plan may precede that of a structure
plan. Local plans are adopted by the planning authorities without being subject to
ministerial approval unless the Secretary of State calls in a plan for his own
decision. All plans are under continuous review and may be altered from time to
time. Scotland has a broadly similar system which can also include the production
of a regional report by regional and islands authorities, outlining their priorities
and policies. In Northern Ireland there is a single-tier system; plans are prepared by
the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland.
Members of the public and interested organisations are given an opportunity to
express their views on the planning of their areas during the formative stages of the
structure and local plans. The local planning authorities must ensure adequate
publicity for matters proposed for inclusion in the plans; representations may be
made about them to the authorities. These opportunities for public participation
are additional to provisions for objecting to prepared plans. In the case of structure
plans the Secretary of State holds an examination in public of matters on which he
requires more information in order to reach a decision. In the case of local plans
objectors have a right to be heard, and a public local inquiry is normally held by the
planning authorities.
Where specific proposals for development differ substantially from the
intentions of a development plan, they must be publicised locally. Other schemes i
affecting a large number of people are usually advertised by the local planning
authority and applications seeking permission for certain types of development
must also be advertised. The applicant has a right of appeal to the appropriate
Secretary of State if planning permission is refused or. granted subject to
conditions. Most appeals are transferred for decision to inspectors (in Scotland
reporters) appointed by the Secretary of State.
The Secretary of State can direct that a planning application be referred to him
for decision. This power is exercised sparingly and usually only in respect of
proposals of national or regional importance, for example, the inquiry held in 1980
into the proposal to mine major coal deposits under the Vale of Belvoir, an area of
largely unspoilt countryside. The applicant has the right to be heard by a person
appointed by the Secretary of State and a public inquiry is normally held for this
purpose. In the case of development schemes of national or regional importance or
of a technical or scientific nature, and if an ordinary inquiry is inadequate for the
purpose, the ministers responsible may decide to set up planning inquiry
commissions to carry out investigations and hold inquiries locally. VAhere ,
highway development is proposed, the government minister concerned can hold
such inquiries as he considers appropriate.
Similar provision is made in Northern Ireland for public participation in the
planning process and for the hearing of objections. There is a right of appeal to an
independent Planning Appeals Commission. j
For certain planning purposes England is divided into eight regions, each with
its own planning board. Wales and Scotland each have Economic Planning Board,
and Northern Ireland has an Economic Council.
Housing
The significant general improvement in housing supply and conditions during the
THE ENVIRONMENT
153
Housing
Characteristics
last 30 years has resulted, in national terms, in a slight excess of supply over
demand, while needs and problems have become increasingly specific and local.
The emphasis of public sector housing policy is being shifted from new building to
modernisation, improvement and making better use of the existing stock. In the
private sector encouragement of home ownership and of the rented sector are
central policy aims.
There are over 21 million dwellings, houses being much more common than flats
(the ratio is roughly three to one). Nationally dwellings slightly outnumber
households, but there continue to be shortages in certain areas.
More than two families in every five live in a post-1945 home, but there remain
a large number of old dwellings, some of which have been kept in good repair and
modernised, but many others of which (particularly in the centres of cities) are
unsatisfactory by modern standards.
Throughout this century pressure on housing accommodation has been
increased more by the rapid rise in the number of separate households than by the
increase in the population. While the number of people has increased by about
two-fifths, the number of households has more than doubled. A recent housing
survey showed a fall in England, from 800,000 to 500,000, in the number of
households sharing a dwelling between 1971 and 1977-78, a halving, from 2-8
million to 1 -4 million, in the number of households without exclusive use of at least
one of the basic amenities, such as a bath, and a fall of two-thirds, from 219,000 to
73,000, in the number of overcrowded households. The survey also showed that 82
per cent of those questioned were ‘very satisfied’ or ‘satisfied’ with their
accommodation.
Over half of all dwellings are owned by their occupiers, nearly a third are rented
from public housing authorities, and most of the remainder are rented from
private landlords (see diagram below). There are variations, however, in the
distribution of tenure between different parts of the country; in Scotland more
than half the dwellings are rented from public authorities. Private rented
accommodation is generally more common in the central parts of large towns,
while owner-occupation is more frequent in outer suburbs and in country areas.
New house construction is undertaken, on a roughly equal scale, by both public
and private sectors, and in addition about 10 per cent of new building is carried out
by voluntary housing associations and societies. Public authorities provide
dwellings mainly for renting while private interests build mainly for sale to owner-
occupiers. There has been very little building of private dwellings to rent (see
154
Administration
Home
Ownership
Mortgage Loans
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
p 156), but the provisions in the Housing Act 1980 for ‘assured’ tenancies are
designed to encourage new building for private letting by such bodies as building
societies, pension funds and insurance companies.
Responsibility for formulating housing policy and supervising the housing
programme is borne by the Secretary of State for the Environment in England and
by the Secretaries of State for Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland.
The construction or structural alteration of housing in both the public and
private sectors is subject to the Building Regulations in England (except inner
London) and Wales. They are enforced by the local authorities and are made
primarily for the health and safety of people in and around the buildings, although
they also include requirements for the conservation of energy. Different systems
with the same aims are operated in inner London, Scotland and Northern Ireland.
For building in the private sector the National House Building Council sets
standards and enforces them by inspection and certification. Almost all new
private houses are covered by the Council’s insurance scheme which provides ten-
year guarantees against major structural defects. A two-year guarantee is also given
against faulty workmanship. Most lenders will not make a loan for the purchase of
a new house unless it is covered by a Council certificate.
Local authorities are also responsible for the payment of house renovation grants
and the implementation of housing renewal programmes. Many have established
housing advisory centres to provide information on aspects of housing.
Research into building materials and techniques, as well as into the social,
economic and design aspects of housing, is undertaken by the Department of the
Environment, the Scottish Development Department and the Welsh Office.
The number of people owning their own homes has more than doubled in the last
20 years, and the number of owner-occupied homes now amounts to over 11
million. Most public sector tenants have the right to buy the homes they occupy at
discounts which vary according to the length of their occupancy. Local authorities
have been asked to encourage low-cost home ownership by selling land to builders
to construct homes for ‘first-time’ buyers, or to individuals or groups to build their
own ‘first-time’ homes in partnership with private builders; by improving homes
for sale; by selling dilapidated homes for improvement by the purchaser (‘home¬
steading’) ; by offering shared ownership (part owning, part renting); and by using
local authority guarantee powers to facilitate lending by building societies.
Most people buy their homes through a mortgage which is a system of instalment
purchase through loans (for which the properties are regarded as securities) from
such sources as building societies, insurance companies, industrial and provident
societies, local authorities and banks. Some companies also make loans for house
purchase to their own employees.
Building societies (see also p 3!9) are by far the largest sources of such funds,
their share of the market being about 80 per cent. They do not build houses
themselves but lend money upon security by way of a mortgage on the home
bought for owner-occupation. They usually advance up to 80 per cent of their
valuation of a property but it is possible to borrow up to 100 per cent with the help
of an appropriate insurance guarantee. Loans are normally repayable over periods
of 20 or 25 years (up to 30 or 35 years in certain circumstances) by equal monthly
instalments to cover capital and interest. Ordinary mortgages from building
societies are usually available to purchasers on average income or above.
Owner-occupiers are entitled to tax relief on their mortgage interest payments
THE ENVIRONMENT
155
Public Sector
Housing
arising on up to ^25,000 of their mortgages (on their main home only). An
alternative form of assistance is the option mortgage scheme, designed to help
those with smaller incomes who pay little or no tax. It allows the borrower to
receive, instead of tax relief, a subsidy which has the effect of reducing the rate of
interest on the loan. A new homeloan scheme came into operation in 1980 under
which first-time home buyers who have saved for two years and are buying a
home in the lower-price range, may qualify for a loan of ^6oo, interest-free for up
to five years, and a tax-free cash bonus of up to £110.
The option mortgage scheme, the homeloan scheme for first-time buyers and
home-steading (see p 154) all operate in Northern Ireland. The concept of shared
ownership is being developed in the public sector by the Northern Ireland
Housing Executive and in the private sector by the Northern Ireland Co-
ownership Housing Association. The Executive has offered most of its homes for
sale to the tenants, and provisions similar to those in the Housing Act 1980 should
be in force from the end of 1981.
Most of the public housing is provided by 459 local housing authorities, which are
responsible for ensuring that the supply of housing in their areas is adequate. The
authorities are: in England and Wales (outside London) the district councils; in
London, the Greater London Council, the London borough councils and the
Common Council of the City of London; and in Scotland, the district and islands
councils. Other public housing authorities are the new town authorities, the
Scottish Special Housing Association which supplements building by local
authorities in Scotland, and the Development Board for Rural Wales. The
Northern Ireland Housing Executive is responsible for the provision and
management of public housing in Northern Ireland. Subsidies are made available
to the authorities to assist them with housing costs, and guidance is given on design
and layout. Public housing authorities own nearly seven million houses and flats.
The number of homes owned by each authority varies widely, several of the larger
authorities having a stock of well over 100,000.
Local authorities meet the capital costs of new house construction and of
modernisation of their existing stock by raising loans on the open market or by
borrowing from the Public Works Loan Board. Current expenditure, including
maintenance and management costs and loan interest and repayments, is met from
rents, supplemented by subsidies from the Government and, where required to
balance housing revenue accounts, from the rates (the local property tax). Local
authorities are required to charge their tenants reasonable rents (which keep a
balance between the interests of tenants and ratepayers).
Sheltered accommodation (with an alarm system and resident warden) is
provided for many elderly people who need this degree of support. Increasing
importance is also being placed on the housing needs of physically handicapped
people, and a small but growing proportion of the new housing stock is suitable for
them. Also receiving attention are the needs of other ‘disadvantaged’ groups such
as one-parent families, those who have suffered from mental illness, and victims of
violence within the family.
Local authorities have a statutory duty to ensure that accommodation (not
necessarily an authority house) is available for homeless people who have
dependent children or are vulnerable on grounds such as age or disability.
The Housing Act 1980 established a charter for public-sector tenants, giving
them statutory rights which include security of tenure, provision for succession by
a resident relative to the tenancy on death, rights of subletting and taking in
lodgers, and reimbursement for improvements made by the tenant. With certain
exceptions, public sector tenants of at least three years’ standing can buy the
Privately
Rented
Housing
Housing
Associations
Improving
Older Homes
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
freehold of their house, or a long lease of their flat, at a discount which depends on
the length of occupation. Similar provisions for Scotland are contained in the
Tenants’ Rights etc (Scotland) Act 1980.
A National Mobility Scheme, sponsored by the Department of the
Environment and the principal bodies concerned with public sector housing, has
been introduced to assist tenants in England and Wales who need to move to
another area for employment or social reasons.
During the last quarter of a century there has been a steady decline in the number
of rented dwellings available from private landlords (including tied accom¬
modation)—from over 50 per cent of the housing stock to about 12 per cent
(2-6 million). Major factors have been the increased demand for owner-
occupation, the greater availability of public rented housing, and the operation of
rent restriction. Privately rented dwellings form a high proportion of the older
housing, most landlords being individuals with limited holdings; some rented
housing is provided by larger property owners, including property companies.
Most privately rented dwellings are subject to rent restriction. Tenants have a
wide degree of security of tenure, and may not be evicted without a court order.
Harassment of residential occupiers is a criminal offence. To increase the
availability of privately rented property the Government has introduced in the
Housing Act 1980 and in the Tenants’ Rights etc (Scotland) Act 1980 a new system
of‘shorthold’ lettings, under which tenants have security of tenure at a fair rent for
an agreed period of between one and five years, but not for life; existing regulated
lettings are not affected by the new legislation. In England and Wales building of
private dwellings to let is encouraged by the system of‘assured’ tenancies, which
allows approved bodies to let property at freely negotiated rents outside the
provisions of the Rent Acts. Tenants with incomes up to average levels are eligible
for assistance with their rent under a national scheme of rent allowances which is
operated by local authorities and financed mainly by government subsidies.
Housing associations extend the choice of housing by providing accommodation
available for rent through new building or the rehabilitation of older property.
The associations normally cater for people who would otherwise look to a local
authority for a home. In addition to normal family housing, they provide
particularly for the special needs of elderly, disabled and single people.
The associations, which are non-profit-making, have grown under government
encouragement and now own some 340,000 homes. Individual associations range
in size from a group of‘almshouses’ for less than ten old people to associations with
more than 10,000 homes. Rented housing schemes carried out by associations
qualify for government grant if the association is one of the 3,000 registered with
the Housing Corporation, a statutory body. Rented homes owned by housing
associations come within the ‘fair rent’ and ‘rent allowance’ arrangements, and
some housing association tenants have rights under the tenants’ charter in the
Housing Act 1980, including the right to buy.
Housing associations are involved in various alternative forms of tenure
intended to give occupiers a greater stake in the ownership or management of their
homes. These include shared ownership and co-ownership.
Modernisation and conversion of sub-standard homes, with the help of grants
from public funds, has increasingly been encouraged as an alternative to clearing
and rebuilding and as a way of preserving established communities and of making
more economic use of resources.
Home improvement grants for nearly 15 million homes were paid to
THE ENVIRONMENT
157
householders in Great Britain between 1967 and 1980. A further 1-25 million
public sector homes were also improved in this period. There are four types of
grant: improvement grants, for carrying out improvements to a good standard or
for conversion into flats; intermediate grants, for the provision of standard
amenities (such as a bath and an inside lavatory) and associated repairs; grants for
substantial and structural repairs to pre-1919 houses; and special grants (not
available in Scotland) for providing standard amenities, repairs and means of
escape from fire in houses which are in multiple occupation.
Declaring ‘general improvement areas’ and ‘housing action areas’ enables local
authorities in England and Wales to tackle the improvement of whole areas of
older housing systematically. General improvement areas (of which there are
about 1,400) consist of fundamentally sound houses and a stable population.
Housing action areas (about 500) are characterised by relatively poor housing and
bad physical conditions combined with social stress. Local authorities have special
powers to bring about an improvement in living conditions for the benefit of
residents within a five-year period. In both types of area government financial aid
for environmental improvement (such as tree-planting and pedestrianisation) is
available to local authorities. Grants to householders may range up to 75 per cent of
the eligible expense limit, and in certain cases of hardship up to 90 per cent.
An ‘improvement-for-sale’ scheme has also been introduced; the Government
helps to meet any loss a local authority may make in buying, improving and selling
rundown or neglected housing.
In Scotland housing action area powers are available for areas in which at least
half the houses fail to meet prescribed physical standards and there is no time limit
on the period within which improvement must be carried out. Outside housing
action areas in Scotland local authorities have power to require the improvement
of houses below the statutory tolerable standard, or lacking a bathroom, by
improvement orders. In housing action areas or where an improvement order has
been made grants of up to 75 per cent of the eligible expense limit (up to 90 per cent
in cases of hardship) may be made.
Northern Ireland has a major problem of derelict and unfit housing, especially in
Belfast, the situation having been made worse by civil disturbance. Concerted
measures are taken in housing action areas, and there is a continuing programme of
rehabilitation in Belfast.
Slum Clearance In urban areas of Britain slum clearance and redevelopment have been major
features of housing policy. Since the mid-1950s about 3-5 million people have been
rehoused in England and Wales as a result of slum clearance programmes.
Clearance of large areas of‘irredeemable’ slums is now almost at an end and greater
emphasis is placed on renewal and modernisation wherever possible. Local
authorities receive special financial assistance from the Government.
Housing authorities are obliged to see that other accommodation exists, or can
be provided by them, for people displaced by slum clearance. Owners of land
compulsorily acquired during slum clearance programmes receive as compen¬
sation either the full market value or, if the property consists of unfit houses, a
sum based on the value of the cleared site; additional payments are, however, made
to most owner-occupiers of unfit houses to bring their compensation up to market
value.
Redevelopment of slums has presented considerable problems. Many of the
areas were seriously overcrowded and lacked social facilities but usually had the
advantages of the basic utilities, local employment and easy access to town-centre
facilities. In order to house as many people as possible on the sites, large areas were
cleared and high-rise flats built. Despite the high standards of many of the homes
158
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
New Towns
Inner City
Policies
Urban Programme
themselves, multi-storey flats have not proved satisfactory for some types of
tenant, particularly families with children, because of the lack of safe and
convenient play space. Where there is need to build to a high density in inner city
areas it is now met by carefully grouped low-rise blocks, including individual
houses wherever possible.
The 32 new towns designated since 1946 represent one of the most successful
achievements in recent British planning. Twenty-one of them are in England, two
in Wales, five in Scotland and four in Northern Ireland. Most of them had an
existing town or village as a nucleus. The policy behind their creation was mainly
one of encouraging the gradual dispersal of industry and population from
congested cities to new areas, planned in advance to become self-contained towns
with their own industry, services and amenities within convenient distance of the
whole community.
In England four of the new towns have been substantially completed and the
development corporations, which supervised the planning and development of the
towns, dissolved. Target dates for the dissolution of a further eight new towns
development corporations by the early 1980s and of the remainder by the late
1980s have been announced. In Wales responsibility for one of the two new towns
has been taken over by the Development Board for Rural Wales. In Northern
Ireland, development of the new towns has been incorporated in a new District
Towns Strategy which is the responsibility of the Department of the Environment
for Northern Ireland. The Government plans substantial disposals of the
completed assets of the new towns in order to release resources for investment and
to reduce the involvement of the public sector.
The new towns have a total population of over 2 million. Young people form a
somewhat higher proportion than in the population of the country as a whole.
Several of the more developed towns are becoming regional centres and, as the
populations grow large enough to give the necessary support, offices, hotels and
department stores, as well as art centres and full entertainment and recreational
facilities, are gradually being provided.
Town development (or ‘expanding town’) schemes involve the transfer of
people and industry from overcrowded areas to existing towns suitable for
expansion; these are arranged directly between the local authorities of the towns
concerned. Most of the towns expanded under these schemes are well established
and are providing homes, jobs and amenities for people from large cities.
Revitalising the inner areas of many towns and cities is one of the most important
tasks in modern planning. Past policies have produced many successes (most of the
slums have been replaced, much old housing has been improved and the clean air
legislation has enhanced the general environment and public health) but some of
the problems associated with poor housing have still to be overcome. In many
areas they have been joined by problems of high unemployment, decay and
dereliction and population structures with relatively high proportions of the
elderly and the disadvantaged. Government policy is not to seek a universal
solution but to work out for each city the package of measures that is most likely to
improve conditions and to encourage, as far as possible, local voluntary action,
notably by means of‘partnerships’.
Greater resources and priority have been given to the inner city areas. The ‘urban
aid programme’ has been increased from a 1977—78 level in England and Wales of
under £30 million a year to X224 million a year in 1981-82, including funds for
the new urban development corporations. The programme traditionally
THE ENVIRONMENT
159
Enterprise Zones
Historic
Buildings and
Conservation
Areas
complemented the work of major social programmes by providing extra facilities
which would otherwise not have been available, such as day nurseries, centres for
the elderly and language classes for immigrants, but has been recast so as to cover
industrial, commercial, environmental and recreational provision as well. The
urban programme represents only a small part of the central assistance to urban,
and other, local authorities. The main contribution is through the annual ‘rate
support’ grant, transport supplementary grant (in England and Wales only),
housing subsidy and other programmes.
In certain places, special schemes are in operation. A co-ordinated ‘partnership’
approach has been adopted in seven English areas whereby central and local
government work together to tackle places where the problems are greatest. Each
partnership has a three-year action programme rolled forward annually, which is
based on the needs of the area and its particular priorities. Partnerships receive
allocations of urban programme resources ranging from £7 million to ^18
million a year. To meet the particular problems and opportunities of the London
docklands and the Merseyside dock area the Government has set up urban
development corporations, modelled on the new town development corporations,
and these are to receive some £66 million in 1981-82. Elsewhere in England 15
areas have been identified where the problems are on a slightly smaller scale but still
merit special attention. These areas prepare their own inner city programmes and
like the partnerships receive special allocations of urban programme resources.
Additional resources are also made available to a further 14 English and five Welsh
districts designated under the Inner Urban Areas Act 1978.
In Scotland, where the urban programme amounted to £20 million in 1980-81,
a major urban renewal exercise in Glasgow to regenerate the city’s east end is
organised on somewhat similar lines to the partnership areas in England, and a
further eight Scottish districts have been designated under the Inner Urban Areas
Act. In Northern Ireland a special effort is being made to tackle Belfast’s inner city
problems.
The Government is in the process of establishing 11 ‘enterprise zones’ (in London’s
docklands, Swansea, Salford/Trafford, Corby, Dudley, Hartlepool, Wakefield,
Liverpool, Newcastle/Gateshead, Clydebank and Belfast) to bring new life to areas
of urban decay. The zones, to be designated for ten years, will cover 200 hectares
(500 acres) on average. Firms established in the zones are exempt from
development land tax and general rates. They receive 100 per cent capital
allowances for corporation or income tax purposes on new commercial and
industrial buildings; planning procedures have been simplified so that most
developments do not need permission individually. Government requirements for
statistical information are minimised and various other controls have been relaxed
or speeded up. All firms in a zone qualify for these benefits whether or not they
were located there before designation.
Conservation
Britain is one of the leading countries in the conservation movement. A wide range
of groups are active in it including many voluntary organisations. The Council for
Environmental Conservation is a national coalition of non-governmental
organisations which focuses attention on major environmental issues.
Lists of buildings of special architectural or historic interest are compiled, as
required by the planning Acts, by the Secretary of State for the Environment and
the Secretaries of State for Scotland and Wales; over 300,000 buildings are already
listed. It is against the law to demolish or alter the character of any listed building
&
o
Orkney
Islands
20
Scotland
80 miles
_!
C7
Glasgow
Cumbernauld
Glenrothes'
\
1 A Livingston
(Irvine
East
Kilbride
i—i—i—i—i—i
0 20 40 60 80 100 kilometres
Boundaries of economic
planning regions
(these coincide
with the standard regions
for statistical purposes)
A New towns
O Enterprise zones
Ha Londonderry]
Ballymena4
Antrim n-
r* Northern D o.,
Xj reland» ABelfast-
Hartlepool
^ ^Craigavon_
V-
Newcastle/
Gateshead
0A
Washington
Peterlee
Aycliffe^
Northern
Yorkshire
and
^Northt Humberside
WestJ
Skelmersdale
  A W O
I Wit'
Runcorn
Osf^N^Waketield
\ J^Salford/T rafford
Warrington
East
Telford
’Newtown'
Dudley
O
Corby
aO
Wales
Swansea
West Redditch
Midlands.,...
MiltonA
_Keynes
Cwmbran"
Midlands
Peterborough
East Anglia
Northampton
AK N
Welwyn
Garden City /
Hemel Hempstead Bracknell
South
East
Stevenage
—’ ^ a Harlow^
' Hatfield
\
London’s
Docklands.
Crawley
South West
Architecture
Tree
Preservation
THE ENVIRONMENT l6l
without special consent from the local planning authority or the appropriate
Secretary of State; where consent is given to demolish a building, the Royal
Commission on Historical Monuments (for England) and similar bodies for
Scotland and Wales have an opportunity to make a photographic record of the
building. Emergency ‘building preservation notices’ can be served by the local
planning authority to protect buildings not yet listed.
Grants and loans for the repair or maintenance of buildings (or groups of
buildings) of outstanding interest can be made by the Secretaries of State (on the
recommendation of the appropriate Historic Buildings Council), and local
authorities can make grants and loans for any building of architectural or historic
interest even if it is not listed. The Architectural Heritage Fund, voluntary
contributions to which are matched by the Government, provides loans for local
historic buildings trusts.
Local planning authorities have designated for special protection over 4,800
‘conservation areas’ of particular architectural or historic interest. Grants and loans
are available for works which make a significant contribution towards the
preservation or enhancement of a conservation area.
Maintaining royal parks and palaces is the responsibility of the Secretaries of
State for the Environment, Scotland and Wales, as is the protection of ancient
monuments of which about 800 are in their care. The Ancient Monument Boards
recommend which monuments are considered to be of national importance and
therefore worthy of preservation.
In Northern Ireland the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland is
responsible for the protection of historic monuments, of which 141 are in its care.
The Department, acting on the advice of the Northern Ireland Historic Buildings
Council, is also responsible for listing buildings of special architectural or historic
interest, for designation of conservation areas, and for payment of grants.
Among the voluntary organisations which campaign for the preservation of
buildings are the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings and the Ancient
Monuments Society; the Georgian Group and the Scottish Georgian Society; the
Ulster Architectural Heritage Society and the Victorian Society.
Besides helping to conserve the best buildings inherited from the past, the
Government encourages high standards in new building. The Secretary of State
for the Environment, in collaboration with the Royal Institute of British
Architects (RIBA), makes annual awards for good design in both the public and
private sectors, with categories for renovation as well as new building. The
Government has also encouraged the use of architectural competitions, and has set
an example in the award of some of its own contracts. Royal Fine Art
Commissions for England and Wales and for Scotland advise government
departments, planning authorities and other public bodies on questions of public
amenity or artistic importance.
The RIBA, which is the principal professional body for architects, exercises
control over standards in architectural education. The Royal Incorporation of
Architects in Scotland is allied to it. The Civic Trust encourage high standards in
architecture and planning, together with the protection and improvement of the
environment. Associate trusts in Scotland, Wales and north-east and north-west
England are linked to it. The National Trust (for Places of Historic Interest or
Natural Beauty) which has about one million members, owns and protects 240
historic buildings in addition to 180,000 hectares (452,000 acres) of land and large
stretches of coastline. Scotland has its own National Trust.
The local planning authorities have power to protect trees and woodlands in the
interest of amenity by means of tree preservation orders. When granting planning
162
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Green Belts
The Coast
Outdoor
Advertising
permission for development, a local planning authority must, where appropriate,
impose conditions to secure the preservation or planting of trees. Landowners
generally must replace ‘preserved’ trees which die or are removed or destroyed in
contravention of a preservation order.
In order to restrict the further sprawl of large built-up areas, to prevent
neighbouring towns merging into one another, and in some cases to preserve the
character of a town and the amenities of the countryside, ‘green belts’ (areas where
it is intended that the land should be left open and free from building development
and where people can seek recreation) have been established or proposed on the
fringes of certain urban areas. Much of London’s green belt, for example, is
agricultural land or woodland, some of which is used for recreation. There are also
areas specifically for recreational use, such as country parks, public open spaces,
playing fields and golf courses.
The maritime local planning authorities are responsible for planning land use at the
coast providing, for example, recreational facilities and amenities for
holidaymakers and local residents; at the same time they attempt to safeguard and
enhance the coast’s natural attractions and preserve coastal areas of scientific
interest.
A comprehensive study of the coastline of England and Wales, undertaken by
the Countryside Commission (see p 163) in 1966-70, recommended that certain
stretches of undeveloped coast of particular scenic beauty should be treated as
heritage coast. Jointly with local authorities, the Commission has defined 34 of
these coasts so far, protecting just over 1,000 kilometres (621 miles).
In 1965 the National Trust launched its Enterprise Neptune campaign to raise
funds for the nation to acquire stretches of coastline of great natural beauty and
recreational value. More than £5 million has been raised so far and as a result the
Trust has under its protection 664 kilometres (413 miles) of coastline in England
and Wales. Some 127 kilometres (79 miles) of coast in Scotland are protected by
conservation agreements with the National Trust for Scotland. In Northern
Ireland 56 kilometres (35 miles) of coast and coastal path have been acquired by the
National Trust.
In exceptional cases economic arguments override conservation; development
associated with North Sea oil and gas is occurring on remote and unspoiled coastal
areas in Scotland, for instance, but planning guidelines drawn up by the Scottish
Development Department aim to ensure that oil-related activities are sited so as to
make the best use of existing labour and infrastructure and to minimise the effect
on the coastline. Provision has also been made for funds to be set aside for the
restoration of sites once there is no further need for them.
The protection of the coastline against erosion, for which the Department of the
Environment, the Welsh Office and the Scottish Office are centrally responsible in
Great Britain, presents difficult engineering problems and heavy costs for the
maritime local authorities. Substantial grants from central funds may be made to
the authorities.
The display of outdoor advertisements is controlled by planning legislation.
General consents have been issued for certain classes of advertisement but these can
be withdrawn in particular cases where there is a serious threat to amenity or public
safety. Consent for advertisements outside these classes must be sought from the
local planning authority. Rural areas and urban areas requiring special protection
can be designated as areas of special control which impose more restrictive
standards.
THE ENVIRONMENT
163
Countryside
Commissions
National Parks,
Areas of
Outstanding
Natural Beauty
Two Countryside Commissions (one for England and Wales, the other for
Scotland) are responsible for encouraging and promoting measures to conserve
and enhance the natural beauty and amenity of the countryside and for
encouraging the development of facilities for open-air recreation in the
countryside. These include the provision by local authorities (sometimes in
association with other bodies) and private individuals of country parks and picnic
sites often within easy reach of towns; the provision or improvement of
recreational paths; the encouragement of amenity tree-planting schemes; and the
increased use of reservoirs, canals and other waterways for bathing, sailing and
other activities. Some 150 country parks and 200 picnic sites have been recognised
in England and Wales by the Countryside Commission. In Scotland a large
number of local authority schemes for the provision of a variety of countryside
facilities have been approved for grant aid. The Commissions undertake research
projects and experimental schemes, working in consultation with local authorities
and such bodies as the Nature Conservancy Council (see p 164) and the Sports
Councils (see p 369). The Commissions give financial assistance to public bodies
and individuals carrying out countryside recreation and amenity projects.
Attention is increasingly being given to small-scale amenity tree-planting and to
techniques of countryside management to supplement the statutory planning
controls.
The Countryside Commission (for England and Wales) is empowered to
designate, for confirmation by the appropriate minister, national parks and ‘areas
of outstanding natural beauty’; to define heritage coasts in conjunction with local
authorities (see p 162); and to make proposals for the creation of long-distance
footpaths and bridleways. Ten national parks have been established (shown on the
map at the end of the book) covering some 13,600 sq km (5,250 square miles), or 9
per cent of the area of England and Wales. Some 33 areas of outstanding natural
beauty have been designated, covering some 14,500 sq km (5,600 square miles).
The land in these designated areas generally remains privately owned, but
agreements or orders to secure additional public access may be made by local
authorities. Steps are taken to preserve and enhance the landscape’s natural beauty
by high standards of development control, and by positive measures, for which
grants are available, such as tree planting and the removal of eyesores. In the
national parks, other measures for the benefit of the public include the provision of
car parks, camping and caravan areas, and information centres. All national parks
and some other designated areas have warden services. Most local authority
expenditure on national parks is met by central government grants. Twelve long
distance footpaths and bridleways covering 2,528 km (1,580 miles) have been
approved. Eleven are open to the public, while the twelfth will open in autumn
1982 and two more are under consideration.
In Northern Ireland the Ulster Countryside Commission advises its Department
of the Environment on the preservation of amenities and the designation of areas of
outstanding natural beauty. Eight areas of outstanding natural beauty have been
designated covering 259,500 hectares (641,000 acres) and six areas are being
managed as country parks and one as a regional park.
In Scotland there are no national parks as such, but there are 40 ‘national scenic
areas’ where certain kinds of development are subject to consultation with the
Countryside Commission for Scotland, and the Secretary of State for Scotland, in
the event of a disagreement. More than 98 per cent of the land in Scotland is
countryside within the jurisdiction of the Commission.
There are, in addition seven forest parks in Great Britain, covering some 243,000
hectares (600,000 acres) and administered by the Forestry Commission, and six in
164
Local Footpaths
and Open
Country
Nature
Conservation
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Northern Ireland administered by the Forest Service of the Department of
Agriculture. Camping and other recreational facilities are provided.
There are many voluntary organisations concerned to preserve the amenities of
the countryside; they include the Councils for the Protection of Rural England
and of Rural Wales, the Association for the Protection of Rural Scotland and the
Ulster Society for the Preservation of the Countryside.
County councils in England and Wales are required to prepare and keep under
review definitive maps showing public rights of way; they are also responsible for
keeping rights of way free from obstruction and signposted. If a path is not shown
on the map, a private citizen may claim that it is a public right of way if it has been
used and regarded as such without hindrance for at least 20 years. Public footpaths
are maintained by local authorities which also supervise landowners’ duties to
repair stiles and gates. Local authorities in Great Britain can create paths, close
existing paths no longer needed for public use and divert paths to secure either a
shorter route or the efficient use of land. Local planning authorities can also convert
minor roads into footpaths or bridleways to improve the amenities of their area.
Voluntary organisations concerned with footpaths include the Commons, Open
Spaces and Footpaths Preservation Society, the Scottish Rights of Way Society
and the Ramblers’ Association.
There is no automatic right of public access to open country, although many
landowners permit such access more or less freely. Local planning authorities can
secure access by means of agreements with landowners; if agreements cannot be
obtained, authorities may acquire land or make orders for public access. Similar
powers cover Scotland, while comparable legislation is being introduced in
Northern Ireland.
Common land, a large proportion of which is open to the public, totals an
estimated 600,000 hectares (15 million acres) in England and Wales. (There is no
common land in Scotland or Northern Ireland.) This land is usually privately
owned, but people other than the owner have various rights on or over it, for
example, of pasture for farm animals. Commons are protected by law and cannot
be built on or enclosed without the consent of the Secretaries of State for the
Environment or Wales.
The official body responsible for nature conservation in Great Britain is the Nature
Conservancy Council which has the functions of establishing, maintaining and
managing nature reserves, advising ministers, providing general information and
advice, and commissioning or supporting research. There are 180 national nature
reserves covering 138,240 hectares (341,590 acres). Some 3,900 sites of special
scientific interest have been scheduled because of their flora, fauna or geological or
physiographical features.
About 10,000 hectares (25,000 acres) of Forestry Commission land are managed
as areas in which nature conservation is the main object. Local authorities have
declared about 80 local nature reserves. Nature conservation trusts and the Royal
Society for the Protection of Birds play an important part in protecting wildlife,
having established between them some 1,200 reserves. The trusts are affiliated to a
parent organisation, the Royal Society for Nature Conservation. The Royal
Society for the Protection of Birds, with more than 400,000 members, is the largest
voluntary wildlife conservation body in Europe.
In Northern Ireland the Nature Reserves Committee advises the Department of
the Environment for Northern Ireland on the designation of national nature
reserves and areas of scientific interest; there are 37 and 46 respectively.
The Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 restricts the introduction into the
THE ENVIRONMENT
165
Land
Reclamation
Land Registers
countryside of animals or plants not found in the wild. Other provisions relate to
areas of special scientific interest, to the making of grants and loans by the Nature
Conservancy Council and to the powers of the Countryside Commission with
respect to experimental schemes. The Act also contains a number of measures
designed to enhance and promote the national parks and amends the law relating to
public rights of way. In Northern Ireland a proposed wildlife protection order
would bring legislation into line with the rest of Britain on species and habitat
protection.
Derelict land, often concentrated in places associated with nineteenth century
industrial development, presents special problems to planners. It includes mineral
waste tips, old mineral workings, obsolete industrial buildings and disused railways
and docks. In England most derelict land reclamation is undertaken, with the help
of central government grant, by local authorities, who have the power to acquire
derelict land and bring it back into use or improve its appearance. Mainly as a result
of government encouragement, local authorities have shown an increasing interest
in reclaiming derelict land, and greater emphasis is being placed on grant assistance
for the reclamation of derelict land in urban areas for industrial and other
development. In addition, grants have recently been made available for the first
time to people and public bodies other than local authorities.
In Scotland and Wales responsibility for derelict land reclamation rests with the
respective development agencies, who may acquire land and reclaim it themselves,
employ local authorities as their agents (in Scotland) or make grants to local
authorities for the purpose (in Wales). In Northern Ireland grants may be paid to
landowners who restore or improve derelict sites.
To prevent new dereliction, planning controls require that when permission is
given for mineral working various measures must be taken to minimise the
disturbance caused by the work and to secure whatever restoration is practicable,
either progressively or when working ceases. The use of land for disposal of waste
materials is also subject to conditions restricting height or requiring treatment on
completion.
In 33 areas in England the Government has instituted, and made available for
inspection, registers of under-used land held by local authorities, nationalised
industries and other public bodies. There is power to direct a public body to
dispose of registered land.
Control of pollution
Government measures to control environmental pollution, in which industry and
voluntary organisations co-operate, are long established, and are seen as
complementary to the planning system and the various measures to conserve
amenities and the country’s heritage.
The Control of Pollution Act 1974, which applies to England, Scotland and
Wales, sets out a wide range of powers and duties for local and water authorities,
including control over wastes, air and water pollution and noise, and contains
important provisions on the release of information to the public on environmental
conditions. In particular, it introduced a new system for the comprehensive
planning of waste disposal operations so as to ensure that disposal is carried out to
satisfactory standards and that where practicable waste materials are recovered and
re-cycled. The Act also increased the penalties for a large number of pollution
offences. The provisions relating to noise and air pollution are fully in force in
England and Wales, as are a substantial number of those relating to waste on land,
166
Administration
The Land
Recycling and
Materials
Reclamation
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
but most of the part which deals with water pollution has not yet been brought
into effect. Similar legislation applies in Northern Ireland.
Responsibility for the control of pollution is shared by various central government
departments, local and water authorities and statutory agencies. Industry co¬
operates with these authorities and voluntary organisations help to focus public
interest on the process of control. An independent standing Royal Commission on
Environmental Pollution advises the Government on national and international
matters concerning the pollution of the environment, on the adequacy of research
and on the future possibilities of danger to the environment. In England and Wales
the Secretary of State for the Environment has a co-ordinating role concerning
pollution matters as a whole, exercised through a Central Directorate on
Environmental Pollution within his department, while an independent Standing
Commission on Energy and the Environment provides the Government with
advice on the inter-action of energy policies and the environment.
Local authorities are responsible for matters such as collection and disposal of
domestic wastes; control of air pollution from domestic and certain industrial
premises and noise abatement measures. Sewerage and sewage treatment and
disposal are the responsibilities of water authorities in England and Wales, of local
authorities in Scotland and of the Department of the Environment in Northern
Ireland. The regional water authorities in England, the Welsh Water Authority,
the river purification boards and islands councils in Scotland and the Department
of the Environment for Northern Ireland are responsible for control of water
pollution.
The main risks of land pollution lie in the indiscriminate dumping of waste
materials on land, careless disposal of pesticides and chemicals, fall-out of materials
from the atmosphere and the deposition of materials from flood-water. The use of
sewage sludge on farms, too, involves risks as well as benefits to the land'. -
The Control of Pollution Act will place a duty on waste disposal authorities
(county councils and the Greater London Council in England, for example) to
ensure that there are adequate arrangements to dispose of controlled wastes. It
requires them to draw up and revise periodically a waste disposal plan and
establishes a licensing system for all waste disposal sites, treatment plants and
storage facilities receiving controlled wastes. In addition it provided for a more
intensive control system for certain specially hazardous or difficult wastes.
It is a criminal offence to leave litter in any public place in the open air or to
dump rubbish except in designated places.
The Government encourages the reclamation and recycling of waste materials
wherever this is practicable and economic in order to reduce imports and waste
disposal costs and to help to conserve natural resources. Industry already makes
considerable use of reclaimed waste material such as metals, paper and textiles.
Local authorities collect about 200,000 tonnes of waste paper and about 100,000
tonnes of ferrous scrap annually. Waste disposal authorities are required under the
Control of Pollution Act to take full account of opportunities for waste
reclamation in drawing up their waste disposal plans. Voluntary organisations also
organise collections of waste material.
The Department of the Environment is providing financial and technical help to
South Yorkshire and Tyne and Wear County Councils for full-scale prototype
plants for the mechanical sorting of household refuse. The two plants, at Doncaster
and Byker, are in operation.
Laser systems
With the introduction of two laser systems
called Vulcan and Helen, British scientists
now have a potential in laser physics claimed
to be unequalled in western Europe.
Above: Assembling the laser amplifiers of
Vulcan. Said to be the world’s most versatile
laser system, Vulcan can manipulate
atoms and microscopic particles so that
they can be separated, levitated,
^ channelled or forced to
combine together chemically
Below: The target chamber
of Helen. This system is
thought to be the world’s
most powerful.
Cranes
Left: An oil-rig crane designed to cope with
the North Sea’s harsh conditions. Special
features are a short tail and no counterbalance
weight. The crane won a 1981 Design
Council Award.
Right: One of the world’s largest gantry
cranes. It has an internal span of 19-9 m
(65-4 ft), an internal height of 12-19 m (4° ft)
and can lift up to 50 tonnes.
Below: A rail-mounted inspection unit for
bridges and viaducts. The unit can carry men
and their equipment 23 m (75 ft) above and
16 m (52 ft) below the level on which it
stands.
Left: A new reconnaissance camera tor both
air-to-air and air-to-surface photography. It
can be used with a data system that records on
the film related alphanumeric information
extracted from the navigation computer ot
the aircraft or control ship.
Below: One of the world’s most advanced
television cameras, with no motorised parts. It
has a mini computer which provides
completely automatic correction.
THE ENVIRONMENT
Water
Pollution
Marine
Pollution
Clean Air
167
There has been a steady and significant improvement in water quality: the level of
pollution in the tidal Thames, for example, has been reduced to a quarter of the
1950s’ level and some 97 different kinds of fish have been identified there since
1964. Discharges of polluting matter into rivers, lakes, estuaries and some coastal
waters are already controlled by law. Powers will be extended to lakes
underground and all coastal waters when the Control of Pollution Act is fully
implemented. More than 90 per cent of the British population is provided with
main drainage, and public authority sewage treatment works serve over four-fifths
of the population—a very high proportion by international standards.
Control of marine pollution from ships is based largely on international
conventions drawn up under the auspices of the Inter-Governmental Maritime
Consultative Organisation, a United Nations agency with headquarters in
London, and implemented for British ships by domestic legislation. The
Prevention of Oil Pollution Act 1971 makes it an offence for ships of any
nationality to discharge any oil into British territorial waters and for British
registered ships to discharge persistent oil anywhere at sea, except in accordance
with very stringent regulations.
The Department of Trade has developed a nationwide organisation using the
resources of its Coastguard and Marine Survey Services, to deal with oil spills at sea
which threaten to cause coastal pollution or are likely to endanger wildlife. If
necessary, action is taken to clear the oil by using low toxicity dispersant and
spraying equipment. Central government and local authorities have contingency
plans under review for dealing with oil and chemical pollution of beaches and in
inshore waters. A Marine Pollution Control Unit within the Department co¬
ordinates contingency arrangements and takes charge of operations to deal with
pollution at sea.
The development of the offshore oil industry has brought an increased risk of oil
pollution in the North Sea. Offshore operators are required to ensure that oil does
not escape into the sea and are also expected to have contingency plans for dealing
with oil spills. Not all traces of oil can be removed from water separated from
crude oil before its discharge from production platforms into the sea, and these
discharges from offshore installations are normally granted exemption from the
1971 Act subject to strict controls laid down by the Department of Energy. The
Department of the Environment, the Welsh Office, the Scottish Development
Department and the Northern Ireland Department of the Environment have
powers to grant exemptions subject to similar controls for discharges from land-
based sources.
Under the Dumping at Sea Act 1974 a licence has to be obtained for the
permanent deposit of any substance or article into tidal waters and the sea.
Dumping at sea is permitted on the basis of the scientific criteria set out in the
annexes to the Oslo Convention (International Convention for the Prevention of
Marine Pollution by Dumping from Ships and Aircraft 1972) and the London
Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping Wastes and
Other Matter 1972.
Responsibility for clean air rests primarily with local authorities. Under the
provisions of the Clean Air Acts 1956 and 1968 they may declare ‘smoke control
areas’ within which the emission of smoke from chimneys constitutes an offence.
About two-thirds of the premises in conurbations are now covered by smoke
control orders. Emissions from most industrial premises are also subject to the
control of local authorities under the Clean Air Acts. The emission of dark smoke
from any trade or industrial premises or from the chimney of any building is in
i68
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Smoke: Emissions from Coal Combustion
Million tonnes
* Includes commercial/public services, agriculture and miscellaneous.
Excludes fuel conversion industries (for example, power stations)
where smoke elmissions are relatively low.
general prohibited, and new furnaces must be capable as far as practicable of
smokeless operation. The height of the chimney serving a new furnace must
generally be approved by the local authority, and approved grit and dust
arrestment plant has to be installed. Regulations have been made which prescribe
specific limits to the quantities of grit and dust which may be emitted from certain
furnaces. Industrial premises that give rise to particularly offensive or dangerous
emissions are, in England and ^Aales, under the control of the Alkali and Clean Air
Inspectorate of the Health and Safety Executive. The Inspectorate requires the best
practicable means to be used to prevent or abate emissions. Similar legislation and
controls apply in Northern Ireland. Controls are also in force on emissions from
motor vehicles, such as the maximum permitted lead content of petrol which was
reduced to 0-40 grammes per litre at the beginning of 1981, and will be reduced
further to 0-15 grammes per litre by 1985-
Considerable progress has been made towards the achievement of cleaner air
and a better environment, especially in the last 20 years or so. Total emissions and
average concentration of smoke in the air have fallen by 80 per cent since i960. The
domestic smoke control programme has been particularly important in achieving
this result. London no longer has the dense smoke-laden ‘smogs’ of the 1950s and in
central London winter sunshine has been increasing since the 1940s when average
hours a day were about 40 per cent less than at Kew in outer London; the levels are
Noise
Radioactivity
THE ENVIRONMENT 169
now virtually the same. Similar improvement has been achieved in other cities
including Glasgow and Sheffield. Controls have reduced urban ground-level
concentrations of sulphur dioxide in Britain by 40 per cent in the last ten years.
The Control of Pollution Act 1974 (and similar legislation in Northern Ireland)
provides local authorities with the power to inspect their areas for noise nuisance
and to deal with it. It also enables them to set up ‘noise abatement zones’ within
which they can require levels of noise from scheduled buildings to be held constant
or reduced, and within which these noise levels may not be increased without their
permission. The Act contains special provisions to control noise from construction
and demolition sites.
Transport is one of the main offenders in noise pollution, and control measures
are aimed at reducing noise at source, through requirements that aircraft and
motor vehicles be quieter, and by protecting people from its effects. The Motor
Vehicles (Construction and Use) Regulations 1978 set out the permissible noise
levels for various classes of vehicles when new and when in use and more stringent
limits will apply for vehicles coming into use from 1983.
Under the Land Compensation Act 1973 compensation is payable for loss in
property values caused by physical factors including noise arising from the use of
new or improved public works such as roads and airports. The Act also enables
highway authorities to carry out or make grants for insulation of homes subject to
specified levels of increased noise caused by new or improved roads. Noise
insulation may also be provided where construction work for new roads is likely
seriously to affect nearby homes.
Noise emission levels of most aircraft on the United Kingdom Register of Civil
Aircraft are regulated in accordance with standards agreed by the International
Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO). Subsonic jets acquired by British operators
after September 1978 must already meet the noise certification criteria agreed by
ICAO, and all those on the United Kingdom Register will have to do so from
1 January 1986. Various operational restrictions have been introduced to reduce
noise disturbance further, and people living in the worst affected areas round a
number of airports may be eligible for noise insulation grants.
In Britain radiation resulting from industrial and other processes represents only a
small fraction of that to which the population is exposed from the natural
environment. Nevertheless, that fraction is subject to stringent control because of
possible effects on health or longer-term genetic effects. Under the Radioactive
Substances Act i960 users of radioactive materials other than those subject to
licence under the Nuclear Installations Act 1965 (see below) must be registered by
the appropriate department and authorisation is also required for the disposal of
radioactive waste, with exemption for very minor users and disposals. The Health
and Safety Executive, through its Nuclear Installations Inspectorate, is the
authority concerned with the granting of nuclear site licences for commercial
nuclear installations. No such installation may be constructed or operated without
a licence granted by the Executive. The National Radiological Protection Board
established under the Radiological Protection Act 1970 provides an authoritative
point of reference on radiological protection.
Various methods are used to store radioactive wastes, depending primarily upon
their physical form and radioactivity. Wastes of sufficiently low radioactivity are
dispersed safely direct to the environment. Those of higher activity are stored
while ways of disposing of them are being developed; a comprehensive research
programme, funded by the Government and the nuclear industry, is in progress.
g The Churches
The Church of
England
Everyone in Britain has the right of religious freedom (in teaching, worship and
observance) without interference from the community or the State. Churches and
religious societies may own property, conduct schools, and propagate their beliefs
in speech and writing. There is no religious or denominational bar to the holding
of public office.
Clergy of the established churches of England and Scotland work in services
administered by the State, such as the armed forces, national hospitals and prisons,
and are paid a salary by the State. Clergy of other denominations are also
appointed. Voluntary schools provided by any religious denomination may be
wholly or partly maintained from public funds.
There is no precise or uniform information about the number of church
adherents since no inquiries are normally made about religious beliefs in censuses
or other official returns, and each church adopts its own criteria in counting its
members. Membership figures in this chapter are therefore approximate.
The established Church of England’s relationship with the State is one of mutual
obligation—privileges accorded to the Church balanced by certain duties which it
must fulfil. The Sovereign must always be a member of the Church, and promises
to uphold it; Church of England archbishops, bishops and deans are appointed by
the Sovereign on the advice of the Prime Minister; all clergy take an oath of
allegiance to the Crown. The Church can regulate its own worship. The two
archbishops (of Canterbury and York), the bishops of London, Durham and
Winchester, and 21 other bishops (according to their seniority as diocesan bishops)
sit in the House of Lords. Clergy of the Church (together with those of the Church
of Scotland, the Church of Ireland and the Roman Catholic Church) are not
allowed to sit in the House of Commons.
The Church has two provinces: Canterbury, comprising 30 dioceses, and York,
14 dioceses. The dioceses are divided into parishes, of which there are some 13,860.
The Archbishop of Canterbury is ‘Primate of All England’, and the Archbishop of
York ‘Primate of England’. Of the population born and resident in the two
provinces (roughly 46 million), about 58 per cent are baptised into the Church and
some 19 per cent are confirmed members.
The central governing body, the General Synod, has both spiritual authority
and legislative and administrative powers; and bishops, clergy and lay members
are involved in decisions. Certain important issues must be referred for the
approval of the dioceses before being decided by the Synod. Lay members are
associated with church government in the parishes through the ancient office of
churchwarden and the modern parochial church councils.
The General Synod is the centre of an administrative system dealing with such
matters as education, mission, inter-church relations, social questions, recruitment
and training for the ministry, church work at home and overseas and the care of
church buildings, particularly those of historic and architectural interest. The
Synod is also concerned with church schools; church colleges of education,
theological colleges; and establishments for training women in pastoral work.
THE CHURCHES
The Anglican
Communion
The Church of
Scotland
The Free
Churches
171
The Church has its own courts whose jurisdiction today extends only to matters
of purely ecclesiastical concern.
Church finance is administered locally by the parishes and the dioceses, with
contributions to a central fund for the maintenance of central services, including
capital expenditure on training and theological colleges and grants for training
candidates for ordination. The State makes no direct financial contribution to
church expenses. The Church’s endowment income is mainly administered by the
Church Commissioners, the body largely responsible for the payment of clergy
stipends and pensions.
The Anglican Communion comprises 25 autonomous provinces in Britain and
overseas and three regional councils overseas with a total membership of about 67
million. In the British Isles, there are four provinces: the Church of England
(established), the Church in Wales, the Episcopal Church in Scotland, and the
Church of Ireland.
Every ten years the Lambeth Conference meets for unofficial consultation
among all Anglican bishops (the last meeting was in 1978); presided over by the
Archbishop of Canterbury, it has no executive authority, but enjoys great prestige,
and its findings on doctrine, discipline, relations with other communions, and
attitudes to political and social questions are widely studied. The Anglican
Consultative Council—an assembly of laymen and clergy as well as bishops which
meets every two or three years—is designed to provide consultations within the
Anglican Communion and to serve as an instrument of common action. The
Council last met in 1979.
The Church of Scotland has a presbyterian form of government. Its status as the
national church derives from the Treaty of Union 1707 and the Church of
Scotland Act 1921 which confirmed its complete freedom in all spiritual matters. It
appoints its own officers, and its decisions on questions of doctrine and discipline
are not subject to parliamentary discussion or modification.
All ministers have equal status, each of some 1,840 churches being governed
locally by the Kirk Session, consisting of the minister and the elected elders of the
Church; above the Kirk Session is the Court of the Presbytery, then the Court of
the Synod, and finally the General Assembly, consisting of elected ministers and
elders, which meets annually under the presidency of an elected moderator who
serves for one year. The Sovereign is represented at the General Assembly by the
Lord High Commissioner. The adult communicant membership of the Church of
Scotland is estimated at over 950,000.
The expression ‘Free Churches’ is commonly used to describe those Protestant
churches in England and Scotland which, unlike the Church of England and the
Church of Scotland, are not established. In the course of history they have
developed their own convictions in church order and worship.
The Methodist Church, the largest of the Free Churches with nearly 488,000
adult full members, originated in the eighteenth century following the evangelical
revival under John Wesley, and is based on a 1932 union of most of the separate
Methodist Churches. The Methodist Churches which did not join the union
include the Independent Methodists (5,000 members) and the Wesleyan Reform
Union (with some 4,000 members).
The Baptists are nearly all grouped in associations of churches, most of which
belong to the Baptist Union of Great Britain and Ireland (formed in 1813), with a
total membership of about 178,000; in addition there are separate Baptist Unions
for Scotland, Wales and Ireland and other Baptist churches.
The United Reformed Church, with some 160,000 members, was formed in
172
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Roman
Catholic
Church
1972 when the Congregational Church in England and Wales (the oldest
community of dissenters in Britain) and the Presbyterian Church of England
merged—the first transdenominational union of churches in Britain since the
Reformation in the sixteenth century. In 1981 there was a further union with the
Re-formed Association of the Churches of Christ.
Among the other Free Churches are the Presbyterian Church in Ireland (with
some 132,000 regular communicants in Northern Ireland); the Presbyterian (or
Calvinistic Methodist) Church of Wales, which arose from the revivalist
movement led in 1735 by Howell Harris and now numbers about 85,000; the
Union of Welsh Independents; the Free Church of Scotland; the United Free
Church of Scotland; the Free Presbyterian Church of Scotland; the Reformed
Presbyterian Church of Scotland; the Reformed Presbyterian Church of Ireland;
and the Non-Subscribing Presbyterian Church of Ireland.
Other Protestant denominations include: the Unitarian and Free Christian
Churches; the Churches of Christ (known also in the United States of America as
Disciples of Christ), which have been an organised community in Britain since
early in the nineteenth century; the British Province of the Moravian Church,
which is an international missionary church; the Free Church of England (or
Reformed Episcopal Church), which was formed in 1844 as a direct result of the
Oxford Movement; and the Congregational Federation, formed from
Congregational churches which did not enter the United Reformed Church.
There are also the Pentecostalists, who are increasing in numbers. Their two main
bodies operating in Britain are the Assemblies of God and the Elim Pentecostal
Church.
The Religious Society of Friends (Quakers), with about 19,000 members in
Britain and over 440 places for worship, came into being in the middle of the
seventeenth century under the leadership of George Fox and works for peace and
the relief of suffering in many parts of the world.
The Salvation Army, founded in Britain in 1865, has since spread to 86 other
countries and has a strength of about 2-5 million. Within Britain it has some
100,000 active members operating from more than 1,000 centres of worship.
Believing in a very practical expression of Christian concern, the Salvation Army
has 200 centres to help people in need.
There are also a number of other religious organisations with churches or
assemblies in Britain, including the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints
(the Mormon Church); and the Christian Scientists with some 262 branch
churches and societies in the British Isles.
The Roman Catholic hierarchy in England and Wales, which became temporarily
extinct during the sixteenth century, was restored in 1850; the Scottish hierarchy
became extinct in the early seventeenth century and was restored in 1878. There
are now seven Roman Catholic provinces in Great Britain, each under an
archbishop, 29 episcopal dioceses, and some 3,000 parishes, In Northern Ireland,
there are six dioceses, some of which have territory partly in the Irish Republic. It is
estimated that there are some 5 million adherents (including children) to the
Roman Catholic faith in the whole of Britain.
The Roman Catholic Church attaches great importance to the education of its
children and requires its members to try to bring up their children in the Catholic
faith. Many schools for Catholic children are staffed by members of the religious
order who also undertake other social work such as nursing, child care, and the
conduct of homes for old people.
Jews first settled in England at the time of the Norman conquest, but the
Jewry
THE CHURCHES
173
Other
Religious
Communities
Co-operation
among the
Churches
community in Britain dates from 1656; consisting of some 400,000 people,
including both Sephardi (originally from Spain and Portugal) and Ashkenazi
(from Germany and Eastern Europe), it has become one of the largest groups of
Jews in Europe. The community is divided into two schools of thought—the
Orthodox, to which about 80 per cent of practising Jews belong; and the Reform,
which originated in 1840 and was followed in 1901 by the Liberal Jewish
movement. The Chief Rabbi is the head of the largest group (Ashkenazi) within
Orthodox Jewry; the Haham is the head of the Sephardi group. Jewish
congregations in Britain number about 300. Jewish denominational schools are
attended by about one in four Jewish children.
Immigrants to Britain from Commonwealth and foreign countries have
established centres of worship, especially in London, for their own communities.
Among the Christian communities represented are Orthodox, Lutheran and
Reformed Churches of various European countries and the Armenian Church.
The principal non-Christian communities in Britain, apart from the Jews, are
the Muslims, Buddhists, Hindus and Sikhs. For the many Muslims in Britain there
are mosques or Islamic centres in London, Birmingham, Manchester, Cardiff,
Glasgow and in many other large cities. The community’s most important
institution is the London Central Mosque and Islamic Cultural Centre.
The Buddhist Society, with headquarters in London and affiliated centres and
groups in many large towns and universities, publishes and makes known the
principles of Buddhism and encourages their study and practice. It adheres to no
one school of Buddhism. There are other centres for Buddhism, and also centres of
eastern philosophy and religion among immigrant communities.
The British Council of Churches, with representatives or observers from all the
main Christian churches in the British Isles, facilitates common action and seeks to
further Christian unity. It works through five divisions: Christian Aid (which has a
separate constitution); Conference for World Mission; Ecumenical Affairs;
Community Affairs; and International Affairs.
The Free Church Federal Council (which has a concordat with the British
Council of Churches) comprises most of the Free Churches in England and Wales.
It promotes unity and joint action among the Free Churches and is a channel for
communication with central and local government.
The permanent Anglican-Roman Catholic Commission explores points of
possible unity between the two communions.
The Anglican and the main Free Churches in the British Isles also participate in
the World Council of Churches (of which the British Council of Churches is an
associated national council) which links together some 300 churches in over 80
countries for co-operation and the study of common problems. The Council of
Christians and Jews works for better understanding among members of the two
religions and deals with problems in the social field. The British Council of
Churches has also established a Committee for Relations with People of Other
Faiths.
The Sharing of Church Buildings Act 1969 enables agreements to be made by
two or more churches for the sharing of church buildings.
National Economy
Britain is a trading nation, exporting a higher proportion of its production of
goods and services than any other industrial country of comparable size (31 per
cent of gross domestic product—GDP). This is a far higher share than in the |
United States or Japan and is also higher than in two of Britain’s larger partners in j
the European Community (France and the Federal Republic of Germany).
Britain accounts for 5-6 per cent of world exports, and is fourth in its share ot
world exports (after the United States, the Federal Republic of Germany and
Japan). It is one of the world’s largest importers of agricultural products, raw
materials and semi-manufactures and is among the largest exporters of aerospace |
products, motor vehicles, electrical equipment, finished textiles and most types of
machinery. Britain is also self-sufficient in oil.
Of all market economies, Britain is fifth in size of GDP and twenty-third in
terms of GDP per head.
The British economy is primarily based on private enterprise. There are some
major nationalised industries, accounting for about 8 per cent of all employees,
while the public sector as a whole employs about 30 per cent of the working
population.
The traditional economic strength of Britain, as a pioneer in the Industrial
Revolution, was based on manufacturing. More recently there has been a decline
in the relative importance of manufacturing and a rise in that of services. This
pattern is in evidence throughout the industrialised world, where the industrial
sector accounted for 32 per cent of total employment in the late 1970s compared
with 36 per cent in the late 1960s. The trend has coincided with a rise in the relative
importance of manufacturing in the developing countries.
Less than 2 per cent of Britain’s employed labour force is engaged in
agriculture—a lower proportion than in any other major industrial country.
However, because of a high level of productivity, Britain is able to produce more
than half of its own food.
With the discovery and exploitation of oil and natural gas from the bed of the
North Sea, Britain has become self-sufficient in energy in net terms. Offshore oil
and gas have brought substantial benefits to the economy, notably by increasing
national income and bringing about improvements in the balance of payments. In
addition, substantial revenues from taxation have helped to ease the pressure of 1
government borrowing and other forms of taxation, thus making an important
contribution to the Government’s medium-term strategy against inflation.
Production of petroleum and natural gas amounted to about £7,600 million in
1980, equivalent to 4 per cent of GDP. Coal has traditionally played an important
role as a source of energy and still accounts for some 37 per cent of Britain’s
needs; its value has been enhanced by the substantial increase in world oil prices
since 1973.
The broad historical pattern of Britain’s overseas trade has been a deficit on
visible trade offset by a surplus on invisible transactions. In 1980, however, there
was a strong visible surplus. A major influence was the fall in the volume of
imports, largely as a result of the sharp reduction in stock levels by domestic
companies.
NATIONAL ECONOMY
175
ECONOMIC
BACK¬
GROUND
Post-war
Developments
Industry
Overseas
Sector
The most significant change in Britain’s trading patterns over the last decade has
followed from its joining the European Community in 1973. Between 1972 and
1980 the proportion of Britain’s exports going to other Commonwealth countries
fell from 18 per cent to 13 per cent while that going to other Community countries
rose from 31 per cent to 43 per cent. Trade with the newly industrialising
countries, including Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan and Malaysia, has also risen
substantially.
Oil production has led to a major shift in the commodity composition of both
exports and imports. In 1974 oil accounted for some 4 per cent of Britain’s exports
and 19 per cent of imports; by 1980 both proportions were 13 per cent.
Invisible transactions including, for example, those relating to international
investment, travel, shipping and financial services, have retained their traditional
importance. In 1980 earnings from invisibles comprised 35 per cent of Britain’s
earnings on current account. In 1979 Britain accounted for 9 per cent of world
invisible receipts (excluding government transactions). The significant con¬
tribution made by invisibles to the current account is largely a reflection of
Britain’s position as a major financial centre. The banks, insurance underwriters
and brokers and other financial institutions of the City of London provide
worldwide financial services, and the City contains perhaps the most
comprehensive and advanced capital market in the world.
In the period since the end of the second world war in 1945 there has been a marked
rise in living standards, the emergence of new industries and the renewal and
improvement of much of the country’s infrastructure. At the same time, in spite of
short periods of rapid economic growth, the rate of growth has been low in
comparison with the rates in most other industrialised countries, averaging 2-3 per
cent annually up to 1971 but lower in subsequent years. Although attention has
been paid over the years to achieving higher levels of exports (with considerable
success, the proportion of GDP exported rising from under 20 per cent in 1950 to
31 per cent in 1980), the economy has been historically vulnerable to balance-of-
payments problems, with a strong rise in imports at times of expansion. The effects
during the years of fixed exchange rates bore most heavily on the reserves of gold
and foreign currencies and led repeatedly to the imposition of restraints on home
demand, in a pattern which became known as ‘stop-go’.
Manufacturing and other production industries, facing strong competition in
overseas markets from newly industrialising* as well as from other developed
countries, have undergone considerable re-organisation to improve competitive¬
ness. A number of industries such as aerospace, chemicals, oil, gas and electronics
have gained strength while textiles and some other traditional industries, including
steel and shipbuilding, have contracted, shifting emphasis to more profitable or
specialised products. Regional policies, promoted by successive governments,
have encouraged the development of newer manufacturing and service
employment and improved the environment to attract firms to areas of high
unemployment.
The strength of overseas invisible earnings has been maintained by the continued
adaptation to new conditions and growth in world markets of insurance, banking,
tourism, consultancy and other services. Direct investment overseas which, until
the abolition of exchange controls in 1979, had usually to be financed in foreign
currency, has helped to build up inflows of interest, profits and dividends. All
constraints on portfolio investment have also been removed and in 1980 private
portfolio investment overseas by British residents was over three times the 1979
figure.
I y6
Inflation
Oil and Gas
Sterling
Recession
ECONOMIC
POLICY
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Since about 1970 a further major problem has been the gradual increase in the
momentum of inflation, which placed a growing strain on systems of wage¬
bargaining in addition to adverse effects on competitiveness and business
confidence. Governments aimed for many years at restraining pay rises not
accompanied by increased productivity, by means of voluntary or statutory
controls on incomes and also, periodically, on prices. The period saw an increase in
trade union bargaining strength and the five-fold increase in world oil prices in
1973-74, which was followed by a rapid rise in public spending. The inflation rate
reached 23 per cent in 1975 but was brought down to below 10 per cent by
1978—79. After a reversion to higher levels during 1980 a substantial decline in the
rate was again achieved.
The beneficial effects of growing North Sea oil and gas production on the balance
of payments were apparent over the second half of the I97°s, when a deficit on the
oil account of nearly £4,000 million in 1976 was turned into a favourable balance
of over £250 million by 1980. Britain now exports about half of domestic
production, most of it to other European Community countries, although the
exports are largely offset in balance-of-payments terms by imports of other grades
of crude oil from the Middle East and elsewhere.
These developments contributed to the strengthening of the pound in foreign
exchange markets, where it increasingly took on the status of a ‘petro-currency’,
with the attendant risks of fluctuations, in both directions, in its value. During 1980
sterling appreciated by 12 per cent in terms of its effective exchange rate, by 7 per
cent against the dollar and by 21 per cent against the currencies of the European
Monetary System. Exporting companies had to adapt to this sharp rise by tightly
restricting increases in domestic costs, but exports held up well. In 1981, however,
sterling fell in value, especially in relation to the dollar at a time of high United
States interest rates.
In the course of 1979 a further doubling of world oil prices precipitated a new
recession throughout most industrialised countries. In Britain, exporters’ loss of
competitiveness was combined with the more fundamental problems of low
productivity associated, in some traditional industries, with a slowness to adapt to
changing trading conditions and excessive wage increases. This helped to increase
the severity of the recession and the rise in unemployment, in Britain as elsewhere.
These trends were, however, accompanied by favourable developments on
inflation and industrial relations. The annual rate of inflation fell almost steadily
from 22 per cent in May 1980 and stood at 11 per cent in August 1981. The number
of industrial disputes in 1980 was the smallest for 40 years and there was a
continued improvement in 1981. There was also a considerable reduction in the
level of pay settlements during 1980—81.
In response to the rise in unemployment the Government expanded measures to
help those without work particularly by providing work experience for school-
leavers. By mid-1981 some 800,000 people were being assisted by government
programmes.
The Government’s medium-term objectives are to bring down the rate ofinflation
and to create conditions suitable for a sustainable growth of output and
employment. The Government is committed to a progressive reduction in the
growth of the money stock, and to the pursuit of the fiscal policies necessary to
achieve this without excessive reliance on interest rates or an undue burden on
taxation. The strategy entails reducing public sector expenditure and borrowing
and is linked with policies to improve the supply side of the economy, such as a
NATIONAL ECONOMY
I??
ECONOMIC
MANAGE¬
MENT
NATIONAL
INCOME AND
EXPENDITURE
Output
Use of
Resources
Personal
Income and
Expenditure
reduction in taxation, the encouragement of small firms, the provision of a more
effective framework for industrial relations and the removal of administrative
controls on prices, wages, dividends and outward capital movements.
The target for monetary growth is a reduction in the annual rate of growth of
sterling M3 (that is notes and coins in circulation and British residents’ sterling
bank deposits) to 4-8 per cent by 1983-84 (from 6-10 per cent at an annual rate
over the 14 months to April 1982). Against the recessionary background of
1980-81, the reduction of public expenditure was hampered by the increase in
spending on unemployment and other social security benefits and the weakened
financial position of public corporations. The Government set an illustrative figure
°f ^7>500 million for public sector borrowing for 1981-82, but the forecast in the
1981 Budget was £10,500 million, reflecting the need for increased spending on
social security, special employment measures and nationalised industries and the
loss of tax revenues implied by lower output.
It is planned to reduce the volume of public expenditure by 4 per cent between
1980-81 and 1983-84. The illustrative path set out in the medium-term financial
strategy shows a reduction in the public sector borrowing requirement from 6 per
cent of GDP in 1980—81 to 2 per cent by 1983—84.
The Government’s policies are carried out by the main departments with
economic responsibilities on a national scale: the Treasury, the Departments of
Trade, Industry, Employment, Energy, the Environment and Transport and the
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food. Other bodies advise on specific
aspects of economic policy. These include the Bank of England (the central bank),
the National Economic Development Council, which brings together
representatives of government, management and trade unions under the
chairmanship of the Prime Minister, the Office of Fair Trading (see p 197) and the
Monopolies and Mergers Commission (see p 197).
On matters of major public policy such as the broad economic strategy, and on
the economic problems it faces, the Government makes known its purposes and
keeps in touch with developments throughout the economy by means of informal
and continuous links with the chief industrial, financial, labour and other interests.
Final responsibility for the broad lines of economic policy rests with the Cabinet.
In 1980 gross domestic product at factor cost (the total value of goods and services
produced at home) is estimated to have been £193,000 million. After allowing for
price changes the increase since 1970 was 17 per cent. Production in Britain is
relatively heavily oriented towards services, which in 1980 accounted for 64 per
cent of GDP. Table 11 contains an analysis of GDP by industry; the general
features of industrial activity in Britain are described more fully in Chapter 11.
The diagram shows that in 1980 Britain consumed 65 per cent of what it produced
(final consumption of general government added to consumers’ expenditure).
Between 1970 and 1980 the proportion of final expenditure devoted to exports
rose from 18 per cent to 23 per cent.
Personal incomes at current prices before tax rose rapidly and fairly steadily from
£43,000 million in 1970 to £201,000 million in 1980. In real terms (that is
excluding the effects of inflation) personal disposable income was 1 per cent higher
in 1980 than in 1979.
That part of personal pre-tax income which is not taken in taxes or national
insurance is used for consumption or else is saved (see Chapter 18 for some channels
for personal savings). Consumers’ expenditure amounted to 67 per cent of pre-tax
i?8
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
income in 1980 compared with 73 per cent in 1970; there was a rise in saving as a
percentage of income from 9-3 per cent in 1970 to 15-8 per cent in 1980. (A rise in
the personal savings ratio during periods of inflation may reflect people’s wish to
compensate for the decline in the real value of assets fixed in money terms.)
Final Expenditure at Current Market Prices in 1980 Totai-£283 4 million
0/
/o
501-
Consumers’
expenditure
' Current expenditure on goods and services
plus non-trading capital consumption.
Final consumption at market prices is equal to
gross domestic product at market prices plus imports.
-1.3% -£3.6m
Physical increase
in stocks and
work in progress
TABLE 11: Gross Domestic Product by Industrya
1970
jT million per cent
1980
£ million per cent
Agriculture, forestry and fishing 1,266 2-9 4>296 2-2
Petroleum and natural gas 24 01 7*649 4 °
Other mining and quarrying 615 1-4 3*222 i'7
Manufacturing I4>3°9 32'8 48,060 24-8
Construction 3*05° 7'° I3*025 6-7
Gas, electricity and water 1*385 3-2 5*803 3-0
Transport 2*749 6-3 10,084 5-2
Communication 1,005 2'3 5*326 2’8
Distributive trades 4*603 io-6 I9>328 to o
Insurance, banking and finance 3>°97 7'1 18,288 9-5
Ownership of dwellings 2,368 5 4 11,996 6-2
Professional and scientific
services 4*49t I0’3 25*467 O'2
Miscellaneous services 3,645 8-4 18,734 9-7
Public administration and
defence 2*874 6-6 13,987 7'2
Adjustment for financial services —1,410 —3'2 —9*732 —5-0
Residual error —497 —11 —2,045 — i-i
Gross domestic product at factor
cost
43,574
100-0
193,488
ioo-o
Source: National Income and Expenditure 1981 Edition
‘’Before provision for depreciation but after deducting stock appreciation.
NATIONAL ECONOMY
179
Sources of
Income
Consumers’
Expenditure
Current
Government
Expenditure
Investment
THE
EXTERNAL
POSITION
The proportion of total personal income accounted for by income from
employment was 68 per cent in 1980; average gross weekly earnings in April 1980
in Great Britain were X122 f°r full-time adult male workers (21 and over) and £77
for full-time adult female workers (18 and over). The three other main sources of
personal income were self-employment (9 per cent), income from rent, dividends
and interest (10 per cent) and grants from general government (13 per cent). The
diagram on page 180 shows the effect of taxes on the distribution of income.
The diagram on page 181 shows the pattern of consumers’ expenditure in 1980.
Food, alcoholic drink, housing, fuel and light, and clothing and footwear together
accounted for over half the total. Consumers’ expenditure increased hardly at all
in real terms between 1979 and 1980. The changes in the pattern between 1970 and
1980 in Britain were paralleled in other industrialised countries: declining
proportions spent on food, tobacco, clothing and footwear and increasing
proportions spent on durable consumer goods including vehicles.
Current expenditure on goods and services by central government and local
authorities rose by 13 per cent in real terms over the period 1970 to 1980, when it
amounted to 21 per cent of gross domestic product. The main cause of this was the
growth over the period of the social services, especially education and the National
Health Service.
In addition to their expenditure on goods and services, public authorities
transfer large sums to other sectors, mainly the personal sector, by way of national
insurance and other social security benefits, grants, and interest and subsidies.
Central government also makes grants to local authorities to finance some 60 per
cent of their current expenditure.
Gross domestic capital formation (total investment) represents 14 per cent of total
final expenditure. Excluding the value of the physical change in stocks and work in
progress, the private sector accounted for 69 per cent of gross domestic capital
formation in 1980 and the public sector for 31 per cent, compared with 57 per cent
and 43 per cent respectively in 1970.
Britain’s overseas trade performance fluctuated during the 1970s. With the
exception of 1971, when there was a surplus on visible trade, the pattern was one of
a deficit on visible trade being wholly or partly offset by a surplus on invisible
trade. In 1980, however, there was a considerable surplus on visible trade.
Although non-oil trade accounted for most of the improvement, there was also the
first-ever surplus in oil trade; imports were lower than they would otherwise have
been as industry met a large part of its input requirements by running down stocks
rather than by importing. The surplus on invisibles was .£2,028 million, giving a
surplus on current account of £3,206 million. Following the abolition of exchange
controls in 1979 there were substantial outflows of capital which were only
partially offset by inflows resulting from the increased attractiveness of sterling.
During 1981 sterling lost some ofits strength and the effective exchange rate fell by
the end of September 1981 to 87-4 (1975 = 100) and the rate against the dollar to
£1 =$i-8i.
Britain incurred large overseas debts to finance balance-of-payments deficits in
the years 1973-76 and by the end of 1977 total official foreign borrowing
outstanding was $24,500 million. Subsequent improvements in the balance of
payments enabled the total debt outstanding to be reduced and restructured to
allow a more balanced repayment programme. During 1981 the Government
repaid the whole of a $2,500 million Euro-dollar loan raised in 1974.
i8o
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The reserves of gold and foreign exchange are officially revalued at the end of
March each year to bring their published value more closely into line with their
market worth by valuing non-dollar reserves on a market-related basis.
Revaluation reduced the value of the reserves to $28,212 million at the end of
March 1981. At the end of August 1981 the reserves stood at $24,511 million.
The European Community established a European Monetary System in March
Distribution of Personal Incomes Before and After Tax: 1977-78
2,000 4,000 6,000 8,000 10,000 12,000 12,000 and over
Annual income in £
Components of Consumers’ Expenditure in
1970 and 1980
1970 1980
Food
(household
expenditure)
Alcoholic drink
Tobacco
Housing
Fuel and light
Clothing
and footwear
Durable goods
Running cost of
motor vehicles
Travel
Catering (meals
and accommodation)
Othergoods
Other services
Other
1 % items* 1 %
Consumers’ expenditure abroad plus income in kind not included
elsewhere plus wages, salaries, etc paid by private non-profit-making
bodies (apart from those in catering) and capital consumption of assets
owned by them, minus expenditure by foreign tourists, etc in Britain.
182
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
1979 aimed at the creation of monetary stability in Europe. It consists of an
exchange rate mechanism, a monetary unit known as the European Currency Unit
(ECU—based on a basket of national currencies including sterling, its value being
recalculated daily) and enlarged Community short- and medium-term credit
facilities. The member states of the Community are also committed to the
establishment of a European Monetary Fund as part of the system. Britain has
participated in the system from the outset, although not in the exchange rate
arrangements, and has deposited 20 per cent of its gold and dollar reserve with the
European Monetary Co-operation Fund in exchange for ECUs. The Government
intends that Britain should join the exchange rate mechanism when conditions
permit.
u Framework (fIndustry
Among the most prominent trends in industrial activity in Britain during the 1970s
and early 1980s have been the growth of the offshore oil and gas industries together
with related products and services; the rapid development of electronic and
microelectronic technologies and their application to a wide range of other sectors;
and continued growth in employment in service industries, accompanied by a fall
in employment in production industries. In the latter part of the period, during
1980 and 1981, industrial recession in Britain and a number of countries with
similarly advanced economies followed the increase in world oil prices in 1979. In
order to prepare for re-expansion in the economy, the Government is encouraging
industry to become more competitive, and strengthening the small firms sector. It
is reducing state involvement in industry and concentrating regional aid on a
smaller area to make it more effective. It continues to contribute to the formulation
of European Community industrial policies.
This chapter describes some of the general features of industrial activity in
Britain such as the forms of enterprise, trends in production and investment, and
aspects of efficiency such as research and development, technological advance and
management education. It also outlines the framework of incentives for general
industrial development provided by the Government, and by Community
institutions, together with the regulatory framework within which industry
operates. The chapters following cover the main areas of industrial activity.
ORGANISA- The forms of industrial organisation and the pattern of ownership and control are
TION AND varied. Unincorporated, corporate (including co-operative) and public sector
PRODUCTION enterprise all assume a number of different forms, and all are important in the
economy. (For a definition of‘incorporation’, see p 199.)
The private sector accounts for nearly three-quarters of gross domestic product
in Britain and for the greater part of activity in the agricultural, mining and
quarrying (apart from coal), manufacturing (except steel and shipbuilding),
construction, distributive, financial and miscellaneous service industries. Industries’
in public sector ownership include most of the energy, transport and
communications industries.
The private sector comprises some 2 million unincorporated businesses (sole
traders and partnerships) and 772,000 corporate enterprises (companies), with a
combined labour force of 17 million in 1980. There are about 18 major public
corporations and the labour force in the public sector is about 2 million.
Unincorporated businesses, corporate enterprises and public sector enterprises
contribute about 19, 54 and 11 per cent of gross domestic product respectively (the
remainder being accounted for by central and local government).
Most of Britain’s large firms in the private sector are classified, under company
law, as public companies, while the great majority of small companies are
‘private’ (see p 199). At the end of 1980 there were 10,000 public companies and
762,000 private companies (as defined prior to the Companies Act 1980).
The largest organisations are shown in Table 12. Altogether about 50 companies
registered in Britain each had net assets of over £500 million in 1980. In terms of
184 BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
annual sales four of the top 20 industrial groups in Europe were British, with
British Petroleum first and Shell Transport and Trading third.
Industrial
Association
TABLE 12: Largest Industrial Organisations
Ranked by turnover
jQ million
Ranked by net capital employed £ million
Private sector
British Petroleum Company 22,706
Shell Transport and Trading 13.932
BAT Industries 6,877
Imperial Chemical Industries 5.368
Unilever 4>°58
Imperial Group 3.615
Ford Motor Company 3.!93
Esso Petroleum Company 3.113
Shell UK 3.003
BL 2,990
Rio-Tinto Zinc Corporation 2,517
General Electric Company 2,501
Allied Breweries 2,200
Public sector
Electricity Councils and Boards 6,171
Post Office 4.619
National Coal Board 3.74°
British Gas Corporation 3.5 0
British National Oil Corporation 3.245
British Steel Corporation 3>i°5
Private sector
British Petroleum Company 10,230
Shell Transport and Trading 6,754
Imperial Chemical Industries 4.549
BAT Industries 2,885
Shell UK 2,800
Rio-Tinto Zinc Corporation 2,319
Esso Petroleum Company 2,061
Unilever i,75°
General Electric Company i.45°
BL 1,398
Allied Breweries 1,383
Guest, Keen and Nettlefolds 1,228
Imperial Group 1,228
Public sector
Post Office 7,469
Electricity Councils and Boards 7,09
British Rail 2,619
British Gas Corporation 2,576
National Coal Board 2,376
British Steel Corporation 2,341
Source: The Times 1000 ig8o—8i
In some sectors a small number of big companies and their subsidiaries are
responsible for a great proportion of total production. Examples are oil refining,
non-ferrous metal smelting, motor vehicles and aircraft, heavy electrical
engineering, electronics, brewing, man-made fibres, basic chemicals, bread and
flour confectionery, tobacco and magazine publishing. Shares in these companies
are, however, usually distributed among many holders or are held by insurance
companies or pension funds representing a broad cross-section of the community,
and it is rare for a few holders to have a controlling interest other than in the case of
private companies.
Alongside these large organisations the many hundreds of thousands of small
firms play an essential part in the economy.
Voluntary associations representing private enterprises, and covering, with
varying completeness, most of British industry, exist for a number of different
purposes, including the provision of common services, the exchange of
information and representation of their members’ point of view, and negotiation
with trade unions on wages and conditions of work. The majority are either trade
associations or employers organisations. Trade associations, concerned mainly
with representation to the Government, the provision of common services and the
regulation of trading practices, are normally composed of concerns manufacturing
or retailing a particular product or group of products. Employers organisations
established on a national basis are usually concerned with negotiation of wages and
conditions of work; they normally consist of concerns engaged in the same type of
operation or manufacturing process. In an industrial sector concerned wholly with
an allied group of products, one association may undertake the functions of both a
trade association and an employers’ organisation.
Output
Productivity
and Investment
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY 185
The central body representing British business and industry nationally is the
Confederation of British Industry (CBI), recognised by the Government as a
channel for consultation between government departments and representatives of
both private and public sector employers.
The CBI represents directly and indirectly more than 300,000 companies
through parent companies, subsidiaries, employers’ organisations, trade and
commercial associations and the majority of the nationalised industries. For its
members it acts as an advisory and consultative body providing them with
information and statistics, ascertaining their collective views and representing
them nationally to the Government and the public and also internationally (see
p 297). CBI representatives sit on bodies such as the National Economic
Development Council, the Manpower Services Commission, the Health and
Safety Commission, and the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service. The
Institute of Directors has a representative role for directors of all types of company.
Chambers of commerce are open to all kinds of producers and traders and exist
to promote the interests of local, regional and national industry and commerce.
The chambers provide export facilities, including export documentation and the
sponsorship of outward trade missions and visits, as well as information services
and training courses. The Association of British Chambers of Commerce is the co¬
ordinating body for 87 affiliated local chambers, together with 11 British
Chambers of Commerce operating in Europe. The chambers operating in Britain
have a membership of about 56,000 companies, including a majority of Britain’s
exporters and a significant number of the largest companies. In Scotland there is an
additional central organisation, the Association of Scottish Chambers of
Commerce, and in Northern Ireland the Northern Ireland Chamber of
Commerce and Industry, to which local chambers are affiliated. Other voluntary
associations include industrial development associations for particular areas or
regions, sponsqred by local authorities, trade associations and individual firms.
Industrial output in Britain has twice been affected by recession in the last decade,
partly as a result of fluctuations in oil prices. The index of output indicates a decline
for two years after 1973, a steady recovery between 1975 and 1979, and a further
fall in 1980, stabilising in mid-1981. Manufacturing was especially affected in
the more recent decline (see also p 201), together with construction, while the
service industries experienced a less marked downturn in activity. In contrast,
mining and quarrying output continued to rise in 1980 (owing to the North Sea oil
and gas industries) though at a slower rate than in preceding years. Table 13 shows
the trend of output in 1979 and 1980 and the index of employment in 1980,
revealing the shift away from employment in production industries and towards
services.
Among traded services, growth in employment was especially strong in
financial and business services (including insurance, banking, leasing and real
estate) and in miscellaneous services, particularly those connected with tourism,
such as hotels and catering.
The improvement of productivity, which by international standards has shown a
relatively slow rate of growth in Britain, is recognised as being of prime
importance for the economy. Among the factors influencing productivity are
capital investment, innovations and improvements in products and processes,
management and labour. The proportion of gross domestic product invested in
Britain is about the same as that of other industrialised economies. Investment in
some of the major sectors between 1976 and 1980 is shown in Table 14 (see also
p 201). The figures for manufacturing industry do not include expenditure on
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
TABLE 13 : Industrial Output and Employment
186
(Indices: 1975 = 100)
Output
per cent
1975
Index of Output
1979 1980
Employment
per cent index
1980 1980
Agriculture 2-8 m-i 120-5
Production industries13 4°'7 112-8 104 9
of which:
Manufacturing 28-3 104-6 94'8
Mining and quarrying 1-7 295-7 3OI'4
Services 565 108-4 108-2
of which:
Transport and
communications 8-8 no-2 109-7
Distribution io-i 108-3 106-1
Finance and business 7'3 112-0 114-0
Miscellaneous 7'3 n6-o 116-0
Whole economy 100 110-3 107-2
Sources: National Income and Expenditure 1981 Edition and Monthly Digest of Statistics.
“The other production industries are gas, electricity, and water; and construction.
16
39 0
30-1
i-5
59 4
6-6
12-4
5'5
hi
100
92-2
92 0
90-6
95'5
103 9
97-6
100-4
m-o
ii3'4
986
leased assets, since these are attributed to the service industries on the basis of
ownership. The practice of leasing has grown rapidly since the early 1970s. The
index of output per head tends to move in line with the index of output, at a
slightly higher level, and stood at 108-7 (i975 = 100) for the whole economy in
1980, and at 105-4 for production industries (excluding North Sea oil and gas).
TABLE 14: Gross Domestic Fixed Capital Formation in Major Sectors 1976-80 (i975
prices)
1976
1977
1978 1979 1980
Mining and quarrying
Manufacturing
Gas, electricity and water
Transport and communications
Distributive trades
Other traded services
2,090
3,326
1,217
2,020
989
2,220
1,942
3,476
i,055
2,049
1,160
2,485
1.935
3,769
1,012
1.936
1,191
2,933
1,672
3,969
999
1,904
1,418
3,464
1,698
3,577
1,040
2,167
T4I9
3,947
Source: National Income and Expenditure 1981 Edition
"Financial and business services and miscellaneous services.
Technological Advanced applications of computers, microelectronics and biotechnology are
Advance having profound effects on the pace of technological change. Extensive use of
electronics and automatic controls is to be found across the whole range of
production industries including metal manufacture, the petroleum and chemical
industries, engineering, food, drink and tobacco manufacture, printing and
publishing, and power transmission; and in service industries such as transport,
posts and telecommunications, retailing, wholesale distribution and business and
financial services.
Britain was a pioneer in computers and has a significant mainframe industry.
Research and
Development
Management
Education
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY 187
There are many advanced applications of computer control in operation in both
the public and private sectors of industry (for example, in steel mills, coal mines, oil
refineries and chemical plants) and Britain is among the world’s leading nations in
the provision of ‘software’ services and systems (that is, the preparation of
instructions for computer operations and related services). The importance of
developments in microelectronics, including microprocessors, has been widely
recognised, partly through government initiatives. The Government announced
in 1981 a four-year campaign to promote the awareness and use of information
technology (representing the convergence of the previously separate technologies
of computing and telecommunications, made possible by microelectronics),
which is now providing the basis of a wide range of new products and services. It
has designated 1982 as ‘Information Technology Year’, ending in a major
international conference. A special scheme of support for the fibre-optics and
opto-electronics industries was announced in 1981.
The use of robots in manufacturing industry is increasing rapidly, notably in the
motor industry. According to the British Robot Association, Britain was the
world’s fifth largest user of robots in 1980, with 370 programmable robots installed
in manufacturing plants. There are expected to be over 500 by 1982.
British industry has a long-standing involvement in biotechnology (the
industrial application of biological organisms, systems or processes). Examples of
processes in use or being developed are fermentation methods to manufacture
penicillin; cell culture techniques to prepare interferon drugs; recombinant DNA
(deoxyribonucleic acid) techniques to modify micro-organisms for the production
of animal feed; the development of microbiological sources of protein and other
chemicals from carbohydrates; and the biological processing of sewage and waste.
Industrial research and development is carried out mainly by firms themselves.
Some 40 research associations, covering all areas of technology, conduct work for
their members. Work is also done by independent contract research laboratories,
universities and government research establishments, especially those for which
the Department of Industry is responsible (see p 190).
Industrial expenditure on research and development in 1978 was ^2,324
million. The major part, ^2,061 million, was accounted for by private sector
companies. Public corporations spent a further £213 million and research
associations ^51 million. The main industrial sectors incurring expenditure on
research and development were electronics (^650 million), chemicals and allied
products (^432 million), aerospace (^425 million), mechanical engineering
(^182 million) and motor vehicles (^130 million).
The British Institute of Management, which is playing an increasingly
representative role for the management and administrative professions, provides a
wide range of information services and has a particular interest in management
education and training. There are also a number of professional bodies concerned
with standards and training in specialised branches of management.
A large proportion of management education is provided by polytechnics and
many of the colleges of further education throughout Britain; 12 regional centres
of management education have been established in England and Wales through the
association of polytechnics and colleges which have high reputations for
management and business studies. Universities also make an important contri¬
bution, especially the full-time postgraduate programmes at the business schools
of London and Manchester Universities. Training courses for higher management
are offered by several independent colleges including the Administrative
Engineering
Design
Specification
Standards
Measurement
Standards
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Staff College, Henley-on-Thames, and Ashridge College of Management,
Berkhamsted.
Many firms provide general management courses for senior executives or
systems of informal training. (Industrial training and education below
management level are summarised on pp 291 and 145.)
Plans for the establishment of an Engineering Council, under a royal charter,
whose aims would be to improve the manufacturing performance of Britain
through the supply, best use, education and training of engineers and technicians,
were announced by the Government in 1981. The Council would maintain
registers for three categories of engineers (professional engineers, technician
engineers and engineering technicians) and would control the accreditation
of academic courses, industrial training programmes and other relevant
qualifications. It would employ existing bodies as its agents in the control of
accreditation. Membership of the Council would reflect the interests of those
involved in industry as employers of engineers, the academic community, the
engineering professions, learned societies and others who could contribute to
changing national priorities and attitudes to engineering. It is expected that the
Council would work closely with organisations representing these interests.
Design is a crucial factor in maintaining and improving the quality and
competitiveness of manufactured goods. It receives continuous attention from
industry and assistance is available from the government-sponsored Design
Council, while the Computer-Aided Design Centre (see p 191) also provides
assistance to individual firms. The Design Council has centres in London, Cardiff
and Glasgow, and its services include advice on design matters, the organisation of
product displays and overseas trade fairs, conferences and seminars on design, help
for design education and the publication of a range of materials. The Council also
provides annual awards for consumer and engineering products and for medical
equipment and motor vehicles. The Society of Industrial Artists and Designers is
the representative professional body in Great Britain of industrial designers.
The British Standards Institution (BSI) prepares and publishes standards which
specify dimensions, performance and safety criteria, testing methods and codes of
practice for a large range of products and processes in most fields of production. It
is a voluntary non-profit-making body, funded by sales of standards, subscriptions
and government grant. Voluntary acceptance of the standards by manufacturers,
buyers and sellers reduces unnecessary variety and simplifies the specification of
requirements. The board of BSI includes representatives of the main organisations
of employers and workers, professional institutions, consumers and the larger
government departments.
The National Physical Laboratory (NPL, see p 190), a research establishment of the
Department of Industry, is responsible for providing the measurement standards
and calibration facilities necessary to ensure that measurements made in Britain are
on a common basis and to the required accuracy. Measurement standards bear
directly on quality control in manufacture, efficiency in commerce and on health
and safety. The NPL maintains links with national standards laboratories all over
the world to ensure international compatibility in measurements essential for
overseas trade and technological co-operation. Much of the dissemination of
measurement standards is provided by the NPL s British Calibration Service
(BCS), which comprises over 90 independent approved laboratories located in
industry, universities and government establishments. These offer authenticated
THE GOVERN¬
MENT AND
INDUSTRY
Public
Enterprise
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY 189
calibrations of scientific instruments and official certificates for electrical,
mechanical, flow, optical, pressure, thermal and time interval measurements. BCS
measurements are linked directly or indirectly, within known and approved
uncertainties, to the national measurement standards at the NPL. BCS certified
measurement is an essential feature of many quality assurance schemes adopted by
manufacturing industry, and of measures taken to ensure industrial efficiency and
safety. Another laboratory approval scheme, the National Testing Laboratory
Accreditation Scheme (NATLAS), was set up by the NPL in 1981 to promote
the international recognition and standing of British testing laboratories. Under
NATLAS, assessments are made of the competence of laboratories to undertake
specific types of test.
The chief aim of the industrial policy of the Government elected in 1979 is to
encourage industrial enterprise and initiative in a flexible and competitive market
economy. The extent of state ownership is being reduced, a review of industrial
subsidies has been carried out (see p 192) and industrial investment agencies in the
public sector have been encouraged to secure private sector participation in their
projects. Competition policy (see p 197) has been strengthened in order to create a
climate in which commerce can flourish. The Government also aims to stimulate
the development of small businesses (see p 193) by reducing the administrative
burdens laid on them and through taxation and other policies.
Successive governments have aimed to provide an environment favourable to
industrial expansion. Encouragement for investment throughout the economy is
given by means of the tax system (see pp 307-11). For areas and industries with
special needs and difficulties, there are schemes of financial and other aid,
administered by a number of bodies, chiefly the Department of Industry. Aid
provided by the Department in 1979-80 amounted to ,£1,060 million, compared
with ;(T>070 million in the previous year. The 1979-80 total comprised ,£540
million for regional and general support, ,£140 million for scientific and
technological assistance, and ^3 80 million for manufacturing activities directly
sponsored by the Department (in aerospace, steel, shipbuilding and motor
vehicles) but excluding the general financing of nationalised corporations. The
largest component of regional and general industrial support has been the regional
development grant scheme (,£330 million in 1979-80). Various other agencies in
the public sector provide aid, either for specific geographical areas, or for more
closely defined activities (for enterprise zones, new towns and other urban area
schemes, see pp 158—60). These national industrial aids are supplemented by
assistance from European Community funds.
Direct investment from overseas is encouraged, and overseas firms are generally
offered the same facilities and incentives as British-based companies.
Official recognition of outstanding industrial performance is conferred by the
Queen’s Awards for Export and Technology which are made annually to firms in
all sectors of industry (including services) on the advice of a committee composed
of businessmen, trade union representatives and civil servants.
Direct state participation in industry is mainly effected through public
corporations known as nationalised industries. The major nationalised industries
are the National Coal Board, British Gas, the electricity industry and the British
National Oil Corporation; the British Steel Corporation and British Shipbuilders;
the Post Office and British Telecommunications; British Rail, the National
Freight Company, the National Bus Company and British Airways. These
industries and services, which employ about 8 per cent of all employees, are
described in their relevant sections.
190
Fiscal
Investment
Incentives
Financial
Investment
Incentives
Research and
Development
Support
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The managing boards and staffs of the nationalised industries are not generally
civil servants and, although accountable to Parliament for their actions in a variety
of ways, it is they and not the ministers of the sponsoring departments who are
responsible for management. Ministers appoint (and may dismiss) the chairman
and members of each board, and have power to give general directions as to how
the industry should be run, but do not interfere in day-to-day management. In
practice, there is very seldom occasion for a general directive to be issued. The
Government’s policy is to keep intervention to a minimum and to encourage the
nationalised industries to behave as far as possible as commercial enterprises.
The Government does, however, set a broad financial framework within which
the industries are expected to operate. A key feature of this is the setting, each year,
of external financing limits on individual industries, which place a ceiling on the
industries’ ability to raise finance for capital expenditure from other than internal
sources and thus on their contribution to public expenditure and the public
borrowing requirement. Finance which cannot be found from internal sources is
provided mainly by interest-bearing loans from the Exchequer. Other sources of
finance include grants and public dividend capital on which dividends are paid to
the Government. In addition financial targets have been agreed by the
Government for certain industries (and targets for the remaining industries are to
be set as soon as possible). The main form of target, usually set for three to five
years, is a real return before interest on average net assets employed. The
Government is also negotiating performance aims with each of the industries,
expressed in terms of measures such as real unit costs.
Ministers are usually required to see that the interests of the industry s customers
are protected (see p 198).
Government policy towards the nationalised industries is subject to the approval
of Parliament and provision is made for the examination of the affairs of
nationalised industries within the parliamentary committee system.
Incentives to encourage capital expenditure in plant and machinery take the form
of a system of free depreciation enabling the whole of such expenditure to be
written off against profits for tax purposes in the year in which it is incurred; there
is in addition a 79 per cent allowance in the first year on new industrial buildings
and structures and an annual writing down allowance of 4 P^r cent thereafter.
Corporation tax relief on the inflationary increase in the value of stocks is also
allowed (see p 309).
The Department of Industry may make selective assistance grants for
manufacturing investment projects which are judged to be in the national interest
and which would not proceed without assistance. The Department also operates a
Product and Process Development Scheme which supports industry through
grants or shared cost contracts, a Microprocessor Applications Project which
encourages the application of microprocessor technology, and a Microelectronics
Industry Support Programme.
Guarantees are provided for the repayment of loans and interest incurred in the
purchase of new ships and mobile off-shore installations built in Britain.
Expenditure on research and development supported by the Department is aimed
at the rapid exploitation of technology, emphasis being placed on partnership with
the private sector. A growing proportion of expenditure is going towards work
carried out in industry; other work is done at research associations and in
government research establishments. Establishments sponsored by the
Department of Industry include the National Physical Laboratory (responsible for
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY
National
Research
Development
Corporation
National
Enterprise
Board
191
measurement standards, see p 188, and for research and development in related
fields of national importance, which include work on the properties of industrially
important materials, computer technology and mathematical applications), the
National Engineering Laboratory (research in mechanical engineering), the
Warren Spring Laboratory (control engineering, materials handling, metal
extraction, mineral processing, waste materials processing and environmental
technology), the National Maritime Institute (which is to be converted into a non¬
governmental research body), the Computer-Aided Design Centre (development
of computer software for use by manufacturing and process industries) and the
Laboratory of the Government Chemist (providing analytical services mainly to
central and local government, public institutions and international organisations).
A significant proportion of the Department’s research and development work is
controlled by five requirements boards, the chairmen and members of which are
mostly drawn from industry. The boards can provide research and development
support to industry through grants or contracts. Their areas cover mechanical and
electrical engineering, electronics and avionics, materials and chemicals,
metrology and standards, and textiles and other manufactures.
An Advisory Council for Applied Research and Development, based in the
Cabinet Office, is a source of independent advice to ministers collectively on
applied research and development in both the public and private sectors, on the
future development and application of technology, and on the role of Britain in
international collaboration in such activities. It has published a number of reports
on aspects of new technology.
The National Research Development Corporation (NRDC) is an independent
public corporation which was set up in 1949 to promote the development and the
exploitation of new technology. Its two main activities are to exploit inventions
developed in the universities and research council and government establishments,
and to provide finance for innovation by industrial companies. The NRDC has a
portfolio of 6,700 British and overseas patents and about 570 licensees, and also
some 700 investments in development projects of which about 680 are joint
ventures with industrial companies. It is expected to operate as a commercial
organisation and has been profitable for many years. Some of the major technical
achievements which it has exploited or supported include cephalosporin
antibiotics, pyrethroid insecticides, glass-reinforced cement, carbon fibres, printed
circuit boards, computers and computer software, computer-aided design, electric
motors and hovercraft.
Following the appointment in 1981 of a chairman common to the NRDC and
the NEB (see below), it was announced that the two bodies would merge.
Legislation will be required to effect this. In the meantime a combined board of
directors has been appointed and the bodies are operating in partnership as the
British Technology Group.
A public corporation established in 1975, the National Enterprise Board (NEB)
was issued with new guidelines in 1980 giving it an investment role in connection
with: companies exploiting or developing advanced technologies; industrial
undertakings in the English assisted areas; loans of up to £50,000 to small firms;
and its existing investments. The NEB is expected to encourage maximum private
sector participation in its ventures and wherever practicable to make share
investment only in conjunction with private share investment. It is also required to
dispose of its shareholdings to private ownership as soon as it is commercially
practicable, having regard to the interests of the companies concerned. It is to be
merged with the NRDC (see above).
192
Regional
Development
Assisted
Areas
Incentives
Other
Assisted
Area
Measures
Administrative
Arrangements
Northern
Ireland
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Economic imbalance between different parts of the country is due partly to the
steady decline over the years, in certain regions, of older industries, such as coal,
steel, shipbuilding and textiles, and partly to the tendency of the newer and
expanding industries to develop elsewhere. Thus the traditional industrial areas,
mainly in Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and some parts of England
(particularly in the North and on Merseyside), have experienced higher
unemployment rates than regions such as the Midlands and the South East, and
have suffered from net outward migration and industrial dereliction. In order to
restore the economies of these regions, the Government offers incentives to
encourage industrial development. In Great Britain, these regions are designated as
‘assisted areas’; Northern Ireland is treated separately.
There are three categories of assisted area: special development, development, and
intermediate areas, the need for assistance being considered most urgent in the first
and least in the last. Following a review of the areas in 1979, when they covered
more than 40 per cent of the working population, the Government intends to
reduce them by August 1982 so that they cover about 25 per cent of the working
population, in order to concentrate the available resources more selectively and
therefore more effectively. One series of downgradings took place in 1980 and
another is planned for August 1982 (see maps on pp 194-95)-
Incentives to encourage industrial investment include automatic regional
development grants towards the cost of new fixed assets for manufacturing
industries at the rate of 22 per cent in special development areas and 15 per cent in
development areas; regional selective assistance grants for projects in
manufacturing, mining or construction which safeguard or create jobs in any part
of the assisted areas and strengthen the regional and national economy; grants of 80
per cent of training costs (half of which is normally provided by the European
Social Fund) for manufacturing projects safeguarding or creating at least 25 jobs in
an assisted area, where the training programme is essential to the project’s success;
grants for office and service industry jobs created in assisted areas together with
employee removal grants where appropriate; and government factories and
workshops at favourable rents.
Apart from direct incentives to industry in the assisted areas, firms in the special
development and development areas may be given preferential treatment when
tendering for public sector contracts; special grants are available towards the
improvement of the infrastructure in the assisted areas and towards the clearance of
derelict land (see p 165); and firms planning to build or extend factories above a
prescribed limit outside the assisted areas must obtain industrial development
certificates from the Government before seeking planning permission.
The Department of Industry takes the lead in the formulation of regional industrial
policy and administers the regional development grant scheme throughout Great
Britain. Regional selective assistance is administered in England by the
Department (with some powers delegated to its regional offices) and by the
Scottish and Welsh Offices. Factories in the assisted areas are provided, often in
association with the private sector, by the English Industrial Estates Corporation,
and by the Scottish and Welsh Development Agencies.
The Northern Ireland Department of Commerce offers a similar range of
incentives to those available in the assisted areas, sometimes at higher rates.
Incentives automatically available to manufacturing industry include grants of up
to 30 per cent of the cost of new fixed assets, training grants, grants for key workers
moving to Northern Ireland, and the lowering of local authority rates for
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY
193
Development
Agencies
Rural
Industries
Tourism
Small Firms
industrial premises. Manufacturing and service industry projects which create jobs
may be eligible for grants of up to 50 per cent of the cost of new fixed assets, interest
relief grants, factories on favourable rental terms, and grants to assist with setting¬
up costs and research and development costs. These industrial development
functions and those of the Northern Ireland Development Agency (see below) are
to be taken over by an Industrial Development Board in 1982.
The Scottish and Welsh Development Agencies promote industrial development
in their respective countries. They encourage investment by overseas companies,
provide equity and loan capital for industrial projects (which they are expected to
do with a maximum of private sector participation), provide government
factories, and have powers to assist small firms and undertake land reclamation.
The Northern Ireland Development Agency can provide equity capital, loans or
guarantees for new or expanding businesses, assist the development of new, high-
technology products and processes, and promote joint ventures with overseas
companies. Its functions are to be taken over by a new body in 1982 (see above).
In the rural areas of England, assistance towards any scheme likely to benefit the
local economy can be provided by the Development Commission. Through its
agency, the Council for Small Industries in Rural Areas (CoSIRA), the
Commission provides managerial and technical advice, training facilities and a
credit service to small manufacturing and service industries in rural areas. Loans
and advice are also provided by CoSIRA for small tourism enterprises in the rural
parts of the development areas and in areas designated by the Commission as
special investment areas. In addition the Commission provides factory premises
and support for pioneering and experimental schemes bearing on the rural
economy and for voluntary bodies aiming to enrich social and cultural life in the
countryside.
In Scotland and Wales these services are provided generally through the
development agencies, but separate bodies cater for two particular rural areas. In
north-west Scotland the Highlands and Islands Development Board provides loans
and grants for viable projects in manufacturing, agriculture, fisheries and services,
makes available, training grants and advice, and builds factories-r In mid-Wales the
Development Board for Rural Wales provides factories, key worker housing and
advice for small businesses. It has a general responsibility to promote the economic
and social well-being of its area and a particular responsibility for the new town
(Newtown, Powys) in its area.
Government support for the tourist industry is provided by four statutory bodies:
the British Tourist Authority, responsible for the overseas promotion of tourism in
Great Britain and for tourism generally in Great Britain; and the English, Scottish
and Wales Tourist Boards, which promote tourism in their respective countries
within Britain, encourage the development and improvement of tourism accom¬
modation and amenities, and, in the assisted areas (see p 192), administer grants
or loans for projects improving tourist amenities, and interest relief grants. The
Northern Ireland Tourist Board has a promotional role similar to that of the other
boards.
The Department of Industry has a separate division which is the focal point for the
formation of policy towards small firms. In association with the Scottish
Development Agency and the Welsh Office, the division administers a chain of
small firms centres throughout Great Britain which provide an information and
counselling service for small businessmen. The Government has been particularly
0 20 40 60 80 miles
0 20 40 60 80 100 kilometres
•m Special development areas
llll Development areas
Hill Intermediate areas
Northern Ireland
(full range of incentives
under separate legislation)
▲ New Towns where special
development area benefits
are available
Glenrothes
Livingston
Belfast:
'Skelmersdale
London •'
Orkney
Islands
Edinburgh
Cardiff
Proposed Assisted Areas
0 20 40 60 80 miles
0 20 40 60 80 100 kilometres
IMi Special development areas
lllil Development areas
Intermediate areas
Northern Ireland
(full range of incentives
under separate legislation)
A New Towns where special
development area benefits
are available
llivingston
Belfast
Skelmersdale:
London •
(From 1 August 1982;
subject to review)
Orkney
Islands
Shetland
Islands
Edinburgh
Cardiff
European
Community
Regional
Policy and Aid
European
Regional
Development
Fund
European
Investment Bank
European Coal
and Steel
Community
Exchange Risk
Guarantee
Scheme
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
concerned since the late 1970s to encourage small firms. Major measures
announced in 1981 include a bank loan guarantee scheme under which the
Government guarantees 80 per cent of bank loans approved by the Department of
Industry, and a business start-up scheme under which tax concessions are made to
private individuals investing in small businesses. Other tax concessions have been
provided for small firms in recent years (see p 309), experimental schemes to
provide premises and new sources of venture capital have been supported, and
administrative burdens and local authority rating demands have been made easier. ^
Among venture capital schemes are those run by public sector bodies including
the National Research Development Corporation, and the National Enterprise
Board. A number of private sector initiatives have been made by the clearing banks
and by groups of large firms and financial institutions. An export award for smaller
manufacturers is made annually.
Assistance for small firms is also provided by the development agencies and the
NEB and by the agencies for rural industry (see above). In Northern Ireland the
Local Enterprise Development Unit, established to promote the development of
smaller industries, provides grants, loans, premises and management advice to new
and expanding companies.
European Community regional policy has two major aims: the reduction of
existing regional imbalances; and the prevention of new imbalances arising from
the adoption of Community policies. Although the principal responsibility for
helping depressed areas remains with the national authorities concerned, the
Community may complement schemes through aid from a number of sources.
The Regional Development Fund is the principal European Community
instrument for regional development and assists regions affected by industrial
change, structural under-employment and an over-reliance on agriculture. The
Fund offers support for public works contributing to the improvement of the
regional infrastructure, normally of up to 30 per cent of public authority costs, and
grants of up to 50 per cent of assisted area funds paid to projects in manufacturing,
service or handicraft industries.
Britain’s share of the Fund in the period 1975-80 was ^566 million.
The European Investment Bank (EIB) is a self-governing institution set up by the
Treaty of Rome with member states of the European Community subscribing to
its capital. The Bank’s aims are to help to stimulate development in less favoured
regions, to modernise or convert industries, to help to create new activities and to
offset structural difficulties affecting certain sectors. The EIB also serves projects of
common interest to several member states or the Community as a whole. It has
loaned about £2,000 million since 1973 for projects in Britain, mostly for public
works such as the Sullom Voe oil terminal, and manufacturing projects in the
assisted areas.
The European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) makes loans to companies in
the coal and steel industries, and for manufacturing projects which create new
employment opportunities for redundant coal and steel workers. Non-repayable
aid may be available for workers who have been made redundant. The ECSC can
lend up to 50 per cent of the fixed capital costs of a project.
Exchange risk cover may be provided by the Government on EIB and certain
ECSC loans for projects qualifying for regional selective assistance. The British
borrower takes on only a sterling liability.
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY
197
COMPETI¬
TION
POLICY AND
CONSUMER
PROTECTION
Competition
Policy
Monopolies and
Mergers
Anti-competitive
Practices
The Public
Sector
A major feature of the Government’s economic policy is the stimulation of
competition and the control of practices which are restrictive or anti-competitive.
Linked to this policy is the encouragement of fair trading, with the particular aim
of helping consumers and safeguarding their rights. The Minister of State for
Consumer Affairs, who is answerable to the Secretary of State for Trade, has
special responsibilities for competition policy and consumer affairs (although
certain matters, such as safety of foodstuffs and road vehicles, are the concern of
other departments).
The Office of Fair Trading, a government agency headed by the Director
General of Fair Trading, is concerned with the conduct of trade and industry.
Competition policy has led to the development of machinery for scrutinising and
regulating monopolies, mergers, anti-competitive practices and restrictive trade
practices and of powers to regulate any structural changes or anti-competitive
practices which operate against the public interest. The Director General of Fair
Trading administers the Fair Trading Act 1973, which regulates monopolies and
mergers, the Restrictive Trade Practices Act 1976, which regulates restrictive
trading agreements and the Competition Act 1980, which regulates anti¬
competitive practices.
The Secretary of State for Trade and the Director General ofFair Trading can refer
monopolies for investigation by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission. The
legislation defines a monopoly as a situation where at least a quarter of a particular
kind of goods or service is supplied by or to a single person, or two or more people
acting in a common manner. Local monopolies and arrangements which prevent,
restrict or distort competition, and monopolies in public sector industries can also
be referred to the Commission. If the Commission finds that a monopoly operates
against the public interest, the Secretary of State for Trade has powers to remedy or
prevent the harm which the Commission considers may exist. It is more usual,
however, for the Director General to be asked to negotiate undertakings to
remedy the adverse effects identified by the Commission.
Proposals for a merger (defined as occurring when two or more enterprises are
brought under common ownership or control) may be referred to the
Commission by the Secretary of State for Trade if it would result in or intensify a
monopoly or if the total value of gross assets taken over exceeds ^15 million. If the
Commission finds that a merger or proposed merger may be expected to operate
against the public interest, the Secretary of State can prevent it from taking place
or, if it has already taken place, require it to be reversed. There are special
provisions for newspaper and certain other mergers.
Subject to certain exemptions, the Director General can investigate any business
practice (whether in the public or private sector) which may restrict, distort or
prevent competition in the production, supply or acquisition of goods or services
in Britain. If a practice is found to be anti-competitive, the Director General can
refer it to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission to establish whether it
operates against the public interest, or he can accept an undertaking from the
business responsible for the practice. On an adverse finding by the Commission,
the Secretary of State has powers to take remedial action.
The Competition Act also empowers the Secretary of State to refer to the
Monopolies and Mergers Commission any question on the efficiency and costs of,
the service provided by, or the possible abuse of a monopoly situation by,
particular named bodies in the public sector.
198
Restrictive Trade
Practices
European
Community
Consumer
Protection
Advice and
Information
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Under the Restrictive Trade Practices Act 1976 restrictive trading agreements
have to be registered with the Director General of Fair Trading. Broadly, an
agreement is registrable if two or more parties to it, engaged in business in Britain
in the supply of goods or services, accept some limitation on their freedom to make
their own decisions about matters such as prices or conditions of sale. Failure to
register an agreement means that the restrictions are void and the parties are liable
to legal proceedings. Having placed an agreement on the register, the Director
General has the duty of referring it to the Restrictive Practices Court and the Court
must declare the restrictions in it contrary to the public interest unless the parties
can satisfy the Court by reference to criteria laid down in the Act that this is not the
case. Restrictions declared contrary to the public interest are void and the Court
can order the parties not to give effect to them or make any similar agreement. In
practice, however, many agreements do not need to be referred to the Court
because, for example, the parties choose to give up the restrictions rather than go to
Court, or the Secretary of State accepts the Director General’s advice that the
restrictions are not significant enough to warrant reference to the Court.
The objective of the competition policy of the European Community is to
promote free and fair competition in trade between member countries. The
Community’s rules of competition, which are set out in the Treaty of Rome,
apply to industrial and commercial practices likely to affect trade and prevent,
restrict or distort competition in the Community. Agreements which fall within
the rules must be notified to the European Commission, which has its own
Competition Department; the Commission has powers to exempt agreements
which, though restrictive of competition between member countries, benefit the
Community in defined ways.
The Fair Trading Act 1973 provides machinery (headed by the Director General of
Fair Trading) for the continuous review of consumer affairs, for action to deal with
both trading practices which unfairly affect consumers’ interests and persistent
offenders under existing law, and for the negotiation of self-regulatory codes of
practice to raise trading standards. The Director General is also responsible for the
working of the Consumer Credit Act 1974, which provides for the licensing and
regulation of consumer hire business.
The consumers’ interests with regard to the purity of foods, the description and
performance of goods, and pricing information are safeguarded by the Food and
Drugs Acts 1955 and 1956, the Trades Descriptions Acts 1968 and 1972, the Unfair
Contract Terms Act 1977 and the Sale of Goods Act 1979- The marking and
accuracy of quantities are regulated by the Weights and Measures Acts 1963 and
1979, the latter introducing a system of average weights for certain pre-packed
goods. The Consumer Protection Acts 1961 and 1971 and the Consumer Safety
Act 1978 empower the Government to control the supply of any goods in the
interests of the safety of the consumer.
Provision of consumer information and advice is an important function of those in
local and central Government, and of several independent organisations concerned
with consumer protection. The local outlets are the Citizens Advice Bureaux (see
p 135) and in some areas Consumer Advice Centres.
The independent, non-statutory National Consumer Council (and associated
councils for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland), which also receives
government finance, ensures that the consumer’s view is made known to those in
Government and industry whose decisions affect consumers.
Consumer councils for the energy, rail and communications nationalised
industries investigate questions of concern to the consumer, while some trade
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY
199
COMPANY
LAW
INDUSTRIAL
PROPERTY
associations in industry and commerce have established codes of practice designed
to protect the consumer. In addition several private organisations work to further
consumer interests. The largest is the Consumers’ Association, funded by the
subscriptions of its membership of over 620,000. The Association conducts an
extensive programme of comparative testing of goods and investigation of
services; its views and test reports are published in its monthly magazine Which ? or
its satellite publications. The Association also provides an advice service on
subscription and undertakes consultancy work on European legislation for the
Department of Trade. Local consumer groups, many belonging to a national
federation also promote consumers’ interests and provide information and advice.
The European Community’s consumer programme covers a number of
important topics, such as health and safety, protection of the consumer’s economic
interests when purchasing goods and services, promotion of consumer education
and strengthening the representation of consumers. The views of British consumer
organisations arc represented by the European Community Group (UK).
The formation and conduct of private sector corporations is regulated by the
Companies Acts (principally that of 1948, as amended). ‘Incorporation’ means
registering an enterprise with an official registrar of companies, with related
obligations such as those concerning the capital structure of a company, the rights
and duties ofits directors and members, and the preparation of accounts. Nearly all
corporate businesses are ‘limited liability’ companies, which means that each
company is a legal entity distinct from its members, who are not as such liable for
its debts. Their liability is limited to contributing an amount related to their
shareholding. In unincorporated businesses, such as sole proprietorships or
partnerships, by contrast, individuals are personally liable for any business debts.
The European Community is pursuing a programme for the harmonisation of
company law among member states. In accordance with the programme, the
Companies Act 1980 provides for new arrangements for the classification and
registration of companies and their capital structure and distribution of profits and
assets. The Act sets out new criteria for public companies (that were previously
defined as those not meeting one or other of the tests for private companies) and by
exclusion, defines private companies as those which are not public. It continues to
be the case that private companies may not offer shares to the public. After
registering under the Act a public company must put ‘Public Limited Company’
or PLC after its name. Following a review by the Government, the Act also lays
down rules concerning the conduct of company directors, and makes illegal share
dealings that depend upon certain privileged kinds of information.
A Companies Bill was introduced in 1981 to implement a European
Community directive on company accounts that allows for less disclosure by
small- and medium-sized companies; to make provision to enable companies to
purchase their own shares (mainly in order to assist small businesses); to extend the
law requiring disclosure of interest in a company’s shares; and to alter the law
controlling company names and business names.
There is a substantial body of legislation designed to secure the rights of the
originators of inventions relating to manufacture, new industrial designs and trade
marks. These matters are administered respectively by the Patent Office, the
Design Registry and the Trade Marks Registry, while governmental
responsibility is exercised by the Department of Trade. British residents may also
seek protection under the European Patent Convention and the Patent Co¬
operation Treaty and claim the benefits in other countries granted reciprocally by
the International Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property.
12 Manufacturing and
Service Industries
Manufacturing plays a vital role in the economy. It accounts for some 25 per cent
of gross domestic product; about 30 per cent of the employed labour force is
engaged in manufacturing; and around 74 per cent of visible exports consists of
manufactured or semi-manufactured goods. Developments of particular note in
manufacturing in the last decade have been fluctuations in output in line with
international trends, and rises both in export performance and import penetration,
the latter growing at a slightly faster rate than the former. Growth in output and
exports was strongest in chemicals and electrical, electronic and instrument
engineering, while the food industries as a whole reduced the extent of import
penetration. Utilisation of advanced technologies in industry, especially micro¬
electronics, is steadily increasing (see p 186).
The proportion of gross domestic product contributed by service industries
continues to increase. Among traded services financial and business services and
tourism show the greatest growth.
The manufacturing industries are described by sector or group of sectors in this
chapter, together with the construction, distributive and service industries.
Manufacturing
Most manufacturing is carried out by private enterprise. Though the greater parts
of the iron and steel and shipbuilding industries are in public ownership, it is the
Government’s policy to reduce the extent of state ownership of industry. Table 15
shows the size distribution of manufacturing establishments. About 57 per cent of
the largest establishments were in engineering and metals and vehicle
manufacturing. Within the private sector, the 100 largest companies accounted for
37 per cent of manufacturing employment in 1978. (A company may consist of
one or more establishments.) In each of the following sectors over 90 per cent of net
output was attributable to the six largest companies: tobacco, man-made fibres,
wheeled tractors, margarine, locomotives and railway equipment, cement, and
hand tools and implements; and over 80 per cent in telegraph and telephone
apparatus, mineral oil refining, batteries and electrical equipment for vehicles,
biscuits, fertilisers, dyestuffs and pigments, industrial engines, soap and detergents,
cans and metal boxes, and watches and clocks.
TABLE 15 : Manufacturing: Size Distribution of Establishments
Number of
employees
Number of
establishments
% of total
establishments
% of total
employment
under 20
20 to 499
500 to 1,499
1,500 or more
76,682
28,972
1,800
594
71-0
26-8
1-7
0-5
7‘3
38-2
20-9
33-6
Source: Report on the Census of Production 1978
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
201
The Times 1000 ig8o-8i lists the largest of the manufacturing companies (by
£ million turnover) as BAT industries (6,877), Imperial Chemical Industries Ltd
(5,368), Unilever (4,058), Imperial Group (3,615), Ford Motor (3,193), BL (2,990),
General Electric Company (2,501), Allied Breweries (2,200), Rothmans
International (2,179), Guest, Keen and Nettlefold (1,961), Cavenham (1,885),
Courtaulds (1,819), Bowater Corporation (1,723), Gallaher (1,621) and Dunlop
Holdings (1,569).
Output and The figures for manufacturing output in the diagram below show the relative size
Investment of the sectors of manufacturing and their growth rates. Manufacturing output as a
whole fell after 1973, following the rise in international oil prices, but grew again
gradually between 1975 and 1979 most evidently in those industries using
advanced technologies such as electronics, instrument engineering, most sectors of
the chemical industry and paper, printing and publishing. A major stimulus has
been provided by the various needs of the offshore oil and gas industries. In other
long-established industries (for example, shipbuilding and marine engineering)
extensive re-organisation, re-equipment and modernisation are being undertaken
to meet changing economic conditions.
Manufacturing Net Output and Index of Production
Total £66,453 million
NET OUTPUT 1979
(£ million)
Metals, mechanical engineering
and small metal goods
115,667
Electrical and
instrument engineering
13,384
All Manufacturing
INDEX OF PRODUCTION
(1975 = 100)
1977 1978
98.8
102.1
98.9
114.2
104.0
101.6
105.4
103.9
97.4
107.7
97.0
115.0
106.2
101.3
108.2
104.4
1979
96.3
112.8
93.8
117.4
107.4
100.0
109.6
104.5
1980
82.3
112.2
85.7
106.7
106.4
84.3
100.3
94.4
In 1980 output began to decline again, owing largely to further rises in energy
costs, which produced a recession in manufacturing affecting nearly all the
industrialised market economies. Additional factors depressing output in Britain
during 1980 were high domestic interest rates and, for exporters, a rise in the
exchange value of sterling which raised the prices of British goods in overseas
markets. Increased domestic energy prices raised production costs in some sectors,
notably chemicals and related products, metals, paper and board and pottery and
glass, which use large quantities of energy. Output stabilised in 1981.
202
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Statistical Note
METALS,
MECHANICAL
ENGINEERING AND
METAL GOODS
Metals
Iron and Steel
Products
Since manufa'-turing industry lies mainly in the private sector, investment in
manufacturing tends to be determined by market considerations and to reflect
expectations of profitability. Since 1965 there have been regular fluctuations in the
level of investment by manufacturing industry, and there have been three
discernible cycles. The diagram on p 203 shows investment in 1980.
In the tables in the following sections, relating to the main sectors of
manufacturing industry, employment statistics are for June 1980 and are based on
figures supplied by the Department of Employment. Sales figures are compiled by
the Department of Industry from returns made by firms in industry. Export
figures come from Business Monitor MQ10: Overseas Trade Analysed in Terms of
Industries. Unless otherwise stated, export and manufacturers’ sales figures include
parts. (The tables contain a selection of leading activities within each sector and are
not comprehensive.) Figures in the text are for 1980.
1980
Labour"
’ooos
Sales*’ Exports Imports
£ m £ m £ m
Total
of which:
iron and steel products and
castings
non-ferrous metals
metal-working machine tools
industrial plant and steelwork
pumps, valves and compressors
construction and mining
equipment
mechanical handling equipment
wire and wire manufactures
T754
297
109
59
140
82
39
57
34
27,083
4,254
5,630
860
2,182
1,376
1,635
1,190
919
9,289
1,062
1,750
428
699
602
950
460
131
7,170
1,382
2,403
403
178
280
300
263
88
‘’Employees in employment
^Manufacturers’ sales
Although Britain’s largest manufacturing industry is the iron and steel industry,
aluminium and other non-ferrous metals are also important products.
Most of the early developments in iron and steel production originated in Britain,
still one of the world’s major steel-producing nations. Britain takes part, as a
member of the European Coal and Steel Community (see p 68), in joint efforts
with other member countries to regulate prices and reduce capacity in line with
world demand. The British Steel Corporation (BSC), formed as a public
corporation in 1967, has accounted in recent years for some 80 per cent of Britain’s
crude steel production.
BSC invested heavily in modernising its production capacity in the 1960s and
1970s. The obsolete open hearth process was replaced by basic oxygen steel¬
making (for bulk production) and the electric arc process (for more specialised
tasks). Because of a marked fall in demand for steel, BSC has had to accelerate the
closure of its older steelworks and reduce capacity at some of the more modern
works. Further re-structuring of the industry, involving the transfer of assets and
businesses from BSC to the private sector, and the closure of plants that cannot be
made profitable, is continuing. The remaining (private sector) companies are
represented by the British Independent Steel Producers Association whose
members account for over a third of the value of the industry s turnover. The
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
203
Capital Expenditure by Manufacturing Industry 1979
Total Expenditure £6,749 million
204
Castings
Non-ferrous Metals
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
private sector is particularly strong in the manufacture of alloy and stainless steels
and of finished products for the engineering industry. The main steel producing
areas are Yorkshire and Humberside (35 per cent of crude steel output in 1980),
Wales (26 per cent), the Northern region (16 per cent), Scotland (11 per cent) and
the West Midlands (5 per cent).
About 75 per cent of British steel producers’ deliveries of finished steel products
are used by home industry and the remainder for direct export, the major markets
for which are the rest of the European Community and the United States. A large
part of the steel used by industry in Britain is also subsequently exported as part of
other finished products.
The castings industry plays an important role in meeting the needs of
manufacturers for essential components for products sold both in Britain and
abroad. Its main customers are the vehicle, mechanical engineering and building
and construction industries. The larger mechanised foundries are dominant, but
many smaller craft foundries meet needs for specialised and low-volume castings.
Output (by volume) has been falling and the industry has been progressively
changing. While some foundries have been closing, many others have been
investing in new melting equipment, moulding equipment and processes, and
process and quality control equipment, both to meet demands for castings of
higher quality and strength and to improve working and environmental
conditions.
Britain’s non-ferrous metal processing and fabricating industry is one of the largest
in Europe. Its major products are aluminium (both virgin and secondary metal),
secondary refined copper, lead and primary zinc. Tin mining in Cornwall supplies
about 37 per cent of Britain’s tin requirements but otherwise British metal
smelting and refining industries are based on imported ores and concentrates
except for substantial secondary production from scrap metal. Britain is also a
major producer of the newer specialised metals including uranium, zirconium and
beryllium for the nuclear energy industry, niobium for aircraft production and
selenium, silicon, germanium and tantalum for electronic apparatus. Titanium and
titanium alloys are also produced and used in aircraft production, power
generation and North Sea oil production, where their lightness, resistance to stress,
flexibility and resistance to oxidisation are especially valued. Nearly half the
industry is situated in the Midlands. Other centres include south Wales, London,
Tyneside and Avonmouth, where a zinc smelter of some 100,000 tonnes capacity
operates. Three large-scale aluminium smelters provide 85 per cent of Britain’s
requirements for primary aluminium. The large non-ferrous metals fabricating
industry uses large quantities of imported refined metals such as copper, lead, zinc
and aluminium. A wide range of semi-manufactures is produced in these metals
and their alloys, and, particularly in aluminium, firms are engaged in smelting,
casting and fabrication by rolling, extrusion and drawing; advanced techniques of
powder metallurgy and pressure die-castings are also employed, which help to
conserve energy and materials. In recent years considerable progress has been made
in the development of‘superplastic’ alloys, which are more ductile and elastic than
conventional alloys.
The main products exported, including alloys and semi-finished products, are
copper, nickel, aluminium, lead, tin and zinc. Exports of aluminium and
aluminium alloys reached £301 million in 1980 while exports in the same year of
copper, brass and other copper alloys reached X254 million. Exports of silver,
platinum and other metals of the platinum group totalled over X9U million in
1980. The major export markets for the whole industry are the United States and
the rest of the European Community.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
205
Mechanical
Engineering
Machine Tools
Industrial Plant
and Machinery
The mechanical engineering industry comprises a group of industries
manufacturing all types of non-electrical machinery, machine tools, industrial
engines, mechanical handling equipment, construction equipment and industrial
plant. Over half the industry’s production is for the home market. The major
customers for the heavy equipment sectors are the nationalised fuel industries, the
chemical industry and the British Steel Corporation. A wide range of equipment is
supplied to the building and construction industry. Demand for other types of
equipment comes from all the production industries in Britain.
Other companies in the mechanical engineering industry manufacture parts and
components (including bearings, chains and gears) and undertake general sub¬
contracting, fabricating and repair work.
British industry manufactures almost every type of industrial (including process)
plant and steelwork (for nuclear power station construction see Chapter 13). Of
engineering, vehicles and metal goods industries.
The most important types of metal cutting machine tools are milling, grinding
and turning machines. Britain is an important producer of numerically controlled
machine tools, which are programmed to carry out, electronically, operations
previously undertaken by a human operator. The largest export markets for the
industry in 1980 were the United States, the Federal Republic of Germany, South
Africa and France. The Machine Tool Trades Association represents most of the
industry and is responsible for the international machine tool exhibition held in
Britain every four years, the next being due in 1984.
British industry manufactures almost every type of industrial (including process)
plant and steelwork (for nuclear power station construction see Chapter 13). Of
particular importance are fabricated products such as pressure vessels, heat
exchangers and storage tanks for chemical and oil refining (process) plant, steam¬
raising boilers (including those of high capacity for power stations), sintering
plant, metallurgical furnaces and plant, lime and cement kilns, nuclear reactors,
water and sewage treatment plant and fabricated steelwork for bridges, buildings
and industrial installations. The industrial plant industry comprises both
equipment manufacturers and contractors responsible for the design, engineering,
construction and commissioning of complete plants for process industries. British
manufacturers have contributed to advances in process technology and British
contractors are carrying out major plant projects in many countries.
Britain is an important manufacturer of industrial engines, including those
derived from aero-engines. Industrial pumps, valves and compressors are vital
components in many industrial processes, particularly in the chemicals, oil and
electric power industries. The fluid power industry makes oil hydraulic and
pneumatic equipment for operating machinery and construction and other
equipment. There are many new areas where these powerful and flexible systems
may be used.
Textile machinery produced in Britain includes machines and accessories for the
manufacture and processing of yarns and fabrics from all types of natural and man¬
made fibres. British inventions have remained the foundation of many textile
processes in use internationally and progress has been made in applying automated
techniques (including the use of micro-electronics) in the industry. In 1980 over 80
per cent of the industry’s total sales were to export markets.
Machinery for food and drink preparation, processing and sterilisation is
another important sector. Refrigerating machinery (excluding domestic
equipment) is used for food and drink processing, but the industry also covers plant
for ships and vehicles and equipment for conserving drinks, food and ice-cream for
the distributive and catering industries.
206
Construction,
Mining and
Mechanical
Handling
Equipment
Agricultural
Machinery
Office Machinery
Other Machinery
Metal Products
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Almost the whole range of plant required by the construction industry is
produced, including excavating, earth-moving and road-making equipment, pile
drivers and quarry crushing and screening plant. Overseas sales of construction
equipment and mining machinery and equipment, including coal cutting and coal
face loading machinery, are substantial. Mechanical handling equipment is used
not only for construction and related activities but throughout industry generally. 1
It extends from individual units and accessories to complete operating systems, the ;
main products being cranes and bridge transporters, lifts, escalators, conveyors,
elevators, hoists and certain special powered trucks. Electronically controlled and
completely automatic handling systems are also available.
Britain produces a wide range of agricultural equipment for general and special
use, including many special purpose machines such as fruit and vegetable
harvesters and improved root harvesters (for tractors see p 209). Mechanised
equipment is extensively used in the arable farming and dairy farming sectors. 1
Much of the new machinery is designed for use in a variety of conditions to meet
the needs of overseas farmers. A large-scale annual exhibition of the industry’s
products is the Royal Smithfield Show and Agricultural Machinery Exhibition
held in London in December. The annual Royal International Agricultural Show
is held in July at the National Agricultural Centre, which also provides regular
demonstrations of technical developments in agriculture.
The industry covers a wide range of products including duplicators, photocopiers,
typewriters, word processors, microfilm, dictation and mail-room equipment,
and cash registers. A large proportion of the industry is owned by multi-national
companies, and is likely to continue to be so, as the rapidly advancing technologies
involved require a heavy commitment to research and development. In particular,
the incorporation of micro-electronics into office products is rapidly increasing.
The industry is strong in microfilm readers/printers, duplicators and office offset
litho and rapid high volume photocopiers.
The other major products of the mechanical engineering industry include printing,
bookbinding and paper goods machinery, space heating, ventilating and air-
conditioning equipment, packaging and bottling machinery, hand tools, garden
tools, portable power tools and miscellaneous non-electrical machinery, such as
boot- and shoe-making machinery, laundry equipment, automatic vending
machines, plastics working machinery and other types of specialised equipment.
A range of metal products other than those described in previous sections is
produced by a group of industries made up of a very large number of firms. One of
the main groups, in which small firms predominate, manufactures engineers’ small
tools and gauges, which include jigs and fixtures, press tools and moulds, hard
metal-tipped tools and other metal cutting tools. Another group manufactures
cutlery and tableware (including safety razors and blades).
A wide variety of domestic utensils, such as saucepans, buckets and dustbins,
made mainly from aluminium and wrought steel, are produced by the hollow-
ware industry, together with industrial hollow-ware, such as kegs, drums and
barrels. The manufacture of hand tools, including files, saws, hammers, axes and
spades, is a long-established industry. About half of its total production is for
export. Jewellery, gold and silverware and the refining of precious metals is an
industry in which British craftsmen are world famous. The Royal Mint makes
coins for some 70 overseas countries. Other main groups of metal goods are bolts,
nuts and screws, cans and metal boxes, metal furniture, metal windows, metallic
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
207
ELECTRICAL,
ELECTRONIC AND
INSTRUMENT
ENGINEERING
Electrical and
Electronic
Engineering
Electrical
Engineering
Electronic
Equipment
closures, metal small-ware such as needles and pins, safes, locks and keys, domestic
gas appliances and drop forgings.
1980
Labour0
’000s
Sales*’ Exports Imports
£ m £ m £ m
Total
of which:
electrical machinery
insulated wire and cables
electronic equipment
telecommunications
components
consumer goods
computers
capital goods
scientific and industrial
instruments
860
126
39
68
121
102
44
101
94
12,800
1,770
870
943
L432
1,578
1,037
1,599
1,422
5,4i8
894
164
97
723
397
938
479
705
5,004
361
67
70
773
881
1,083
332
600
‘’Employees in employment
^Manufacturers’ sales
The electrical and electronic engineering industry is engaged in the manufacture
and installation of a wide variety of equipment, including all types of power
generation, transmission and distribution equipment, motors, telecom¬
munications and broadcasting equipment, capital electronics equipment and
systems, industrial electronics, computers, electronic components, consumer
electronics and domestic electrical appliances. Electronics, which makes a vital
contribution to the efficiency of many branches of the country’s economy, is one
of the most important sectors of British industry.
The main product categories are power equipment (generators, turbines, motors,
converters, transformers and rectifiers) and switchgear, starting and control gear.
The industry produces cables and wires for the distribution of electric power, for
telecommunication networks and other purposes; its products include submarine
cables and cables insulated by a great variety of materials. Optical fibres (hair-thin
strands of glass) for use in telecommunications were invented in Britain in 1964;
they can carry much more ‘traffic’ than copper wiring.
A few large firms also dominate the market for other electrical goods, including
domestic appliances such as heating and cooking equipment, washing machines
and dryers, refrigeration appliances, vacuum cleaners, irons and electric kettles.
Other major sectors are electrical equipment for motor vehicles and aircraft,
electric lamps and light fittings, and batteries and accumulators.
The British electronics industry is one of the largest and most comprehensive in the
world and British scientists and companies have made important contributions to
electronics technology. Because the applications of electronics technology are
continuing to multiply rapidly, definition of the industry must be arbitrary, but
the sectors included are radar and navigational aids, telecommunications
equipment, security systems, components, consumer goods, computers and
208
Instrument
Engineering
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
communication and other capital equipment, as well as electronic process control
and industrial instrumentation.
The dependence of the telecommunications industry on electronic techniques is
increasing as new switching systems are introduced. The main products are
switching and transmission equipment for telephone, telex and telegraph systems
and subscribers’ apparatus such as telephones, private automatic branch exchanges,
teleprinters and facsimile systems. British Telecommunications (see p 283) is the
main customer in the home market, which is largely supplied by four companies
(GEC, Plessey, Standard Telephones and Cables and Pye TMC) and carries out
research and development work in co-operation with companies.
The components sector manufactures a wide range of both active and passive
electronic components. In addition to a comprehensive indigenous industry, a
number of large United States companies are manufacturing components in
Britain. The sector meets requirements for components in Britain, and is also very
active in international trade. The manufacture of integrated circuits (in which
many components are fabricated within a tiny chip of semi-conductor material,
is an area of particularly rapid change. Britain is improving its position in the
manufacture of advanced components.
The major consumer goods produced are radio and television sets, music centres
and high-fidelity audio equipment. In the audio field, British manufacturers have a
reputation for high-quality goods but are less strong in the mass market.
Equipment is also being manufactured for reception of Britain’s ‘Prestel’ and
‘teletext’ services (see pp 284 and 368).
In the computer sector, an extensive range of computer systems, central
processors and peripheral equipment, from large computers for large-scale data
processing and scientific work to mini- and micro-computers for use in control
and automation systems and for home and office use, are produced. Essential to the
sector is the ‘software’ industry, in which Britain is especially strong, which
produces programs and associated services and complements the hardware
industry, enabling the systems manufacturers to provide complete solutions to
meet the requirements of users.
An expanding sector of the industry is that which covers the manufacture of
radio communication equipment, radar and radio navigational aids for ships and
aircraft, alarms and signalling equipment, public broadcasting equipment and
other capital goods. British equipment is used extensively overseas, for defence,
civil aviation, shipping, health, educational and other purposes.
An important advance in medical diagnosis was the development in Britain, in
the 1960s and early 1970s, of the tomographic X-ray scanner. This has made a
world-wide impact by providing images of sections of brain or whole body on
living subjects.
Instrument engineering is a particularly important sector of the engineering
industry. Electronic techniques are widely used, particularly in the industrial
instrument sector, which comprises integrated control systems and equipment,
optical instruments, electronic measurement and test equipment, analytical
instruments and a diverse group of others. The chemicals, power, petroleum and
iron and steel industries account for about 80 per cent of process control
applications, the largest sector of the industry and one which is expanding. Major
advances have been made in automatic testing equipment and analytical
instruments for non-destructive testing, medical diagnosis and pollution control.
Other sectors of the instrument industry include photographic, cinematographic
and reprographic equipment, watches, clocks and time recorders, and surgical
instruments and appliances.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
209
VEHICLES,
AIRCRAFT AND
SHIPS
Motor Vehicles,
Tractors and
Cycles
Railway
Equipment
Aerospace
1980
Labour11
’000s
Sales* Exports Imports
£ m £ m £ m
Total
of which:
cars and commercial vehicles
wheeled tractors
aerospace
shipbuilding and
marine engineering
860
436
32
200
147
14,529
1,266
6,038
404
5,148
8,158 3,190 3,214
893 744 192
3,755 i,5i6 1,223
3ii
‘'Employees in employment
^Manufacturers’ sales
The motor vehicle industry comprises the manufacture of cars and commercial
vehicles, caravans and trailers, and parts and components. Output of cars and
commercial vehicles is dominated by four large groups: BL Ltd., in which there is
a majority public shareholding, Ford, Vauxhall and Talbot (formerly Chrysler
UK), which account for over 99 per cent of car production and some 98 per cent of
commercial vehicle output; the remainder is in the hands of smaller, specialist
producers of cars, heavy commercial vehicles, buses and coaches. There has
traditionally been a substantial positive balance of trade in the industry, maintained
by surpluses on components and commercial vehicles offsetting increasing deficits
on cars. The balance of trade was largely restored in 1980 after an overall deficit
was recorded for the first time in 1979. The principal trade association for the
industry is the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders which holds a biennial
motor industry show at the National Exhibition Centre, Birmingham.
Britain is a leading world producer and exporter of agricultural tractors, which
account for the bulk of wheeled tractors produced. Production is dominated by
three large firms, with two others responsible for most of the remainder.
Though in recent years the motor cycle industry has contracted and the
domestic market is largely supplied by imports, the market for pedal cycles has
increased significantly in the last decade and is mainly supplied by British firms, the
largest of which is TI Raleigh.
British Rail builds most of its locomotives and rolling stock in its own workshops
using components from the private sector; it also supplies equipment and provides
consultancy services to many overseas countries. The large private sector supplies a
full range of equipment, including components, traction and control gear,
signalling, heating and ventilating systems and track equipment to British Rail; it
also builds trains for London Transport and rapid transit networks. All this
equipment is also supplied to overseas railway and rapid transit authorities. In
addition, the private sector undertakes electrification and other major works
overseas and provides overseas consultancy services.
Britain’s aerospace industry is one of the largest and most comprehensive in
western Europe and the western world. The products of the industry include civil
and military aircraft, helicopters, aero-engines, guided weapons, hovercraft and
space vehicles, supported by a. comprehensive range of aircraft and airfield
equipment and systems.
The main British airframe manufacturer is British Aerospace (BAe). During the
three years 1978-80, BAe (which brought together the former separate companies
British Aircraft Corporation, Hawker Siddeley Aviation, Hawker Siddeley
Dynamics and Scottish Aviation), was a nationalised corporation. At the
210
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
beginning of 1981 it was transformed into a public limited company and in
February 1981 the Government sold just over half of its shareholding in BAe to
private investors. Special arrangements were made for employee shareholdings. I
The Government, which has set itself a maximum investment limit of 48-43 per
cent, takes no part in BAe’s commercial decisions.
The major publicly owned companies are Rolls-Royce and Short Brothers. 1
Rolls-Royce is responsible for almost the entire output of aero-engines in Britain; |
it is one of the world’s three leading aero-engine manufacturers and over 10,000 of
the world’s civil and military aircraft are powered by Rolls-Royce engines.
The remainder of the industry is in private ownership and comprises a number
of aircraft companies, including Westland Aircraft and its subsidiary, Westland
Helicopters (which specialises in helicopter design and manufacture and, in
addition, performs a wide range of aviation equipment work) and all of the
aviation equipment sector.
Production of BAe includes such civil aircraft as the HS748 feederliner and the :
HS125 business jet, while the new BAe 146 feederjet and Jetstream 31 transport
aircraft are expected to be in service in 1982. BAe is a full partner in the European
consortium Airbus Industrie; it is continuing to manufacture the wings for the
A300 Airbus and is designing and manufacturing the wings for the A310
derivative. Military aircraft include the unique Harrier vertical/short take-off and
landing aircraft (which has achieved substantial sales to the United States), the
Hawk advanced trainer, the Anglo-French Jaguar tactical fighter/operational
trainer and the Tornado multi-role combat aircraft, which is a collaborative
venture by Britain, the Federal Republic of Germany and Italy.
BAe is also a major producer of guided weapons including a number which have
been sold overseas, in particular the Rapier ground-to-air missile. Collaborative
guided weapon projects between Britain and its NATO partners are becoming
increasingly important.
Short Brothers, which is based in Belfast, produces the Sky van, the SD 330 and
360 commuter airliners, airframe components and missiles. Westland Helicopters
manufacture the successful Sea King and are the British partners in the Anglo-
French collaborative programmes on the Puma, Gazelle and Lynx helicopters, |
which are being produced for the armed forces of a number of countries besides
Britain and France.
Rolls-Royce aero-engines in production include the collaboratively produced
RB199 for the Tornado, the RB211 civil engine and its more powerful derivative
the RB211—524, the Pegasus vectored-thrust engine for the Harrier and the Gem
helicopter engine. More advanced versions of the RB211—524 are under
development, as is another RB211 derivative, the RB211—535, which will be the
launch engine for the new Boeing 757 airliner. Industrial versions of aero-engines
such as the RB211 and the Olympus (developed for Concorde) are being produced
for use in oil and gas transmission and as stand-by power generators. Versions for
marine use, in particular of the Olympus and the Tyne, are being used to power a
new generation of warships for the Royal Navy and many overseas navies.
The aviation equipment manufacturers provide a wide range of systems
essential to the design of engines and aircraft, including engine and flight controls,
electrical generation, mechanical and hydraulic power systems, cabin furnishings
and flight deck information displays, which are sold both in domestic and overseas
markets. They also supply equipment for ground operation including that needed
for radar and air traffic control, ground power suppliers and flight simulators, to
airports and airlines throughout the world.
The space sector’s major effort in the manufacture of satellite systems and space
hardware has been for the programmes of the European Space Agency (ESA, see
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
211
Shipbuilding
and Marine
Engineering
p 342), although the industry has also met Britain’s own requirements and
contributed as manufacturers of sub-systems in, for example, the satellite system
developed for the International Telecommunications Satellite Organisation
(INTELSAT). The Dynamics Group of BAe has acted as prime contractor for all
the ESA’s telecommunications satellite projects, which include the Orbital Test
Satellite (OTS), launched in 1978 and still in operation, the European
Communications Satellites (ECS), procured for EUTELSAT (the European
telecommunications satellite authority), and the maritime series of com¬
munications satellites (MARECS), leased to the International Maritime Satellite
Organisation (INMARSAT), the first of which is due to be launched in the
winter of 1981. Marconi Space and Defence Systems was another major British
contractor for the first MARECS satellite and also built Britain’s SKYNET
defence communications satellite, launched in 1974. The British space industry has
contributed to ESA’s scientific satellites, through BAe’s prime contractorship for
the GEOS satellites and principal contractorship for the development of the Giotto
satellite, which will investigate Halley’s comet in 1986. British firms also built the
later satellites in the Ariel series (see p 342) and manufacture earth stations
(including those on the INTELSAT network) both to meet the requirements of
British Telecom (see p 284) and for export.
The industry is thus extensively involved in the manufacture of space systems
and in scientific research in other European collaborative programmes. It carries
out an extensive programme of research and development on airframes, aero¬
engines and equipment, including avionics, while considerable research is also
undertaken by universities and Government research establishments.
Aerospace production and exports, which are fairly evenly divided between
aircraft, engines and equipment (including avionics), have made considerable
progress over the past few years and now stand at record levels. The principal
destinations for exports are the United States and countries with which Britain is
involved in collaborative ventures such as France and the Federal Republic of
Germany.
The main trade association for the industry is the Society of British Aerospace
Companies which organises a major international air show at Farnborough,
Hampshire, every two years.
Britain has a long-established tradition of shipbuilding. Naval shipbuilding and the
construction of vessels and structures connected with offshore oil production are
important sectors of the industry. In merchant shipbuilding the SD14 general
cargo series has been especially successful. Programmes of modernisation and
reorganisation have taken place in most of the major shipyards, including the
construction of several covered-berth ship ‘factories’. British yards include some
which are among the most modern and efficient in the world.
The public sector, which mainly comprises British Shipbuilders and the Belfast
company Harland and Wolff, accounts for 98 per cent of output in merchant
shipbuilding, for all slow-speed marine diesel engines and for some 80 per cent of
turnover in ship-repairing. The public sector also includes a number of companies
engaged in general engineering work connected with the marine industries.
The continuing effect of the recession during 1980 and 1981 and the world excess
of shipbuilding capacity have meant that employment in the merchant
shipbuilding sector of the industry has continued to contract. Orders for
conventional naval vessels may also decline.
A number of yards in the private sector build smaller vessels, including patrol
boats, fishing and harbour craft, supply vessels, tugs, cargo ships, small tankers,
ferries, pleasure boats and yachts.
212
Offshore
Equipment
CHEMICALS AND
COAL AND
PETROLEUM
PRODUCTS
Chemicals
General Chemicals
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
About 40 per cent of the output of British yards is exported.
A number of British shipyards are able to supply a wide range of traditional and
specialised marine vessels for use in connection with offshore oil and gas
development. British Shipbuilders has the capability to construct a wide range of
advanced semi-submersibles for emergency support, firefighting, maintenance
and diving support. British Shipbuilders has also established ranges of conventional
drill ships, support vessels and other equipment such as modules and the Scotbuoy
loading buoy. Private sector yards build jack-up rigs, fixed platforms,
submersibles (the world’s first manned submersible made largely of glass-
reinforced plastic, was built by a British company) and a wide range of operational
equipment.
1980
Labour"
’000s
Sales6 Exports Imports
£ m £ m £m
Total
of which:
general chemicals
pharmaceuticals
plastics materials, synthetic
resins and synthetic rubber
toilet preparations
soap and detergents
coal and petroleum products
462
136
73
52
24
17
35
27,056
6,676
2,213
2,037
668
915
12,640
7,698
2,609
699
883
187
174
2,033
5,398
1,768
256
830
75
46
i,792
"Employees in employment
^Manufacturers’ sales
The chemicals industry is one of the most successful industries in Britain as well as
being its third largest industrial sector, accounting for about 10 per cent of
manufacturing net output. The industry is also the second largest in Europe and its
exports of ,£5,665 million in 1980 (accounting for 16 per cent of British
manufacturing exports) placed Britain among the top four chemical exporting
nations. The industry is undertaking a considerable investment programme,
despite continuing uncertainties over the price and availability of raw materials.
The largest British chemicals group, Imperial Chemical Industries, is the fifth
largest chemicals company in the world, accounting for some 25 per cent of
production in Britain. A further 40 per cent is in the hands of 20 other large- and
medium-sized companies. The industry is represented by the Chemical Industries
Association. Western Europe is the major export market.
About a quarter of the output of the general chemicals industry consists of a limited
number of relatively simple inorganic chemicals, such as sulphuric acid and
metallic and non-metallic oxides, serving as basic materials for industry.
Substantial quantities of inorganic chemicals are used in the manufacture of
fertilisers, detergents, paint, glass, metals and other products.
Organic chemicals include the heavy organics produced in bulk and the
speciality intermediate products. Oil and natural gas are the source of some 90 per
cent of world organic chemicals production. The most important products (by
weight) are ethylene, propylene and benzene. The main uses of organic chemicals
are in solvents, plastics and synthetic resins, synthetic rubber, man-made fibres and
detergents, and as intermediate chemicals in the manufacture of many other
products.
Outside the inorganic and organic sectors is a wide range of general chemicals
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
213
Pharmaceuticals
Plastics Materials,
Synthetic Resins
and Synthetic
Rubber
Fertilisers and
Crop Protection
Paint
Toilet Prepara¬
tions, Soap and
Detergents
Other Chemical
Products
formulated for specific uses. Radioisotopes are produced by Amersham
International (formerly The Radiochemical Centre), the world’s largest
manufacturer and exporter of radioactive products; over half of production is for
export.
Britain, whose scientists have discovered and developed many essential drugs and
medicinal products, produces a complete range of pharmaceutical preparations.
These include antibiotics and other drugs for the treatment of infective (including
tropical) diseases, drugs used for the treatment of respiratory, circulatory,
rheumatic and psychiatric conditions, antihistamines, anaesthetics, synthetic
steroid and other hormones, vaccines, sera and drugs obtained from natural
sources. Manufacturers in Britain are among the world’s leading producers and
exporters of preparations for the treatment of human and animal diseases. This
sector is one of the major growth areas of the chemical industry.
Many of the basic discoveries in plastics, including polyethylene, were made in
Britain. Plastics manufacture has been a fast growing section of industry and one
third of total production is exported. Expansion in recent years has mainly been in
thermoplastic materials, of which the most important are polyethylene (used on
coverings and packaging—notably for foodstuffs), polyvinyl chloride (known as
PVC and used for a wide range of industrial purposes and consumer goods),
polystyrene (a material used for toys, light mouldings and many consumer goods)
and polypropylene (which can be fabricated as mouldings, films and fibres). A new
group of plastics materials reinforced with carbon fibres is also in commercial
production in Britain; they have up to three times the strength but are only 20 per
cent of the weight of steel, and are being increasingly used in, for example, vehicle
manufacture. Styrene-butadiene and polybutadiene rubbers used for tyres, high
styrene rubbers for shoe soles and flooring, and nitrile rubbers for use where oil
resistance is required, are also in large-scale production, together with neoprene
rubber.
The development of chemical fertilisers owes much to the pioneer work of British
scientists. Production is dominated by a few large firms, with a number of firms
marketing compound fertilisers from the principal constituents—nitrogen,
phosphorus and potassium—and is almost entirely for the domestic market. The
use of ammonium nitrate, ammonium phosphate and urea is resulting in more
concentrated fertilisers. Notable recent British discoveries and developments in
crop protection include pyrethroid insecticides, ICI’s diquat and paraquat
herbicides (both of which kill only green plant tissue at low concentrations) and
systemic fungicides and aphicides (which kill through being taken up by growing
plants and spreading within them). Herbicides are the largest category of sales of
pesticides and allied products.
Britain is a major producer of paints, varnishes and allied products. In recent years
many improved techniques have been introduced into the paint and varnish
industry, including new ranges of synthetic resins and pigments, powder coatings,
non-drip, quick-drying paints and paints needing only one application.
These industries include soap, detergents, toilet preparations, cosmetics and
perfumes. Some of the large companies in the toiletries industry are owned or
financed by United States companies but there are a number of long-established
British cosmetics, toiletries and soap manufacturers. Both sectors are significant
exporters.
There is a varied group of chemical products which account for about 10 per cent
of the industry’s net output. It includes formulated adhesives, printing ink, colours
and dyestuffs, photographic chepiical materials and floor and furniture polishes.
214
Coal and
Petroleum
Products
FOOD, DRINK AND
TOBACCO
Bakery
Products
Dairy Products
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL FiANDBOOK
Refined mineral oil (see also p 235) is the largest product in this sector, together
with medicinal paraffin, paraffin wax, petroleum jelly and other manufactures.
Production of coke, other manufactured solid fuels, lubricating oils and greases is
also included.
Labour11 Sales6 Exports Imports
’ooos £tn £m £m
Total
of which:
bread, bakery products, biscuits,
flour confectionery
chocolate and sugar confectionery
bacon curing j
meat products L
fish products )
milk and milk products
fruit and vegetable products
drinks
tobacco
‘'Employees in employment
^Manufacturers’ sales
Britain has one of the world’s largest and most sophisticated food processing
industries and processed foods have accounted for a growing proportion of total
domestic demand for food in recent decades, though the rate of growth has slowed
since the early 1970s. Convenience foods, particularly certain frozen foods, have
formed the fastest growing sector. There is a high rate of innovation in processed
foods, largely owing to the need to increase sales in a food market which is not
growing in size, given nearly static population growth. While Britain is a net
importer of foodstuffs, the level of imports has declined in recent years. In 1980 the
tood industry supplied the domestic market with 71 per cent of foods capable of
home production compared with only 62 per cent in I97°- The greatest success has
been with dairy, meat and fish, fruit and vegetable products, and oils and fats.
Exports, mainly to other members of the European Community, have grown
steadily.
About two-thirds of the bread in Britain is manufactured in large mechanised
bakeries, most of which use a process (the ‘Chorleywood’ process) developed by
the industry’s principal research organisation, the Flour Milling and Baking
Research Association, and now widely used in other countries. Two groups are
predominant; Allied Bakeries and Ranks Hovb McDougall. In smaller bakeries
production of cakes and other flour confectionery is usually allied to bread
production. Biscuits and related products are a major sector of the industry and
have gained a world-wide reputation. Another sector is grain milling and the
production of various specialised flours and meal.
Production of milk was some 15,000 million litres in 1980, of which just under half
was for sale as liquid milk. Nine out often households in Britain receive pasteurised
milk in bottles through a unique daily door-step delivery system employing about
44,000 roundsmen (not included in the employment figure in the table above)
driving electric vehicles. There are about 200 dairy companies and co-operatives
662 27,885
133 2>39I
68 1,472
103 3,020
54 3,631
52 1,501
126 4,962
30 4,095
2,483 4,065
96 28
219 185
157 1,040
295 504
112 415
862 396
301 56
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
215
Confectionery
Bacon Curing,
Meat and Fish
Products
Fruit,
Vegetable and
Other Products
Beverages
buying, processing and distributing milk and some 6,000 small dairymen
distributors. Milk consumption per head (133 litres in 1979) is among the highest in
the world.
The main milk products are butter (169,000 tonnes in 1980), cheese (233,000
tonnes), cream (87,000 tonnes), full-cream condensed milk (187,000 tonnes), full-
cream milk powder (31,000 tonnes) and skim milk powder (240,000 tonnes). The
dairy industry accounted for 58 per cent of new butter supplies to the British
market in 1980, 72 per cent of new cheese supplies, and nearly all of other milk
products. Production and exports of butter and cheese have increased significantly
in recent years: butter exports in 1980 were 80,000 tonnes and cheese exports
18,000 tonnes, compared with 16,000 tonnes and 10,000 tonnes respectively in
1976. The other main exports are skim milk powder (147,000 tonnes in 1980) and
condensed milk (38,000 tonnes). The industry’s interests are represented by the
Dairy Trade Federation.
The cocoa, chocolate and sugar confectionery industry is composed of a small
number of very large manufacturers and many medium-sized and small
companies. The three main manufacturers are Rowntree Mackintosh, Cadbury
Schweppes and Mars. A substantial proportion of total world exports of chocolate
and sugar confectionery is supplied by Britain.
The industry comprises the curing of bacon and ham, the canning and preserving
of meat and fish, the manufacture of sausages and pies and the preparation of
extracts and pastes. In addition to the output of quick-frozen fish, small quantities
are also canned.
Fruit and vegetable products include canned, frozen and dried fruit and vegetables,
jam, marmalade, pickles and sauces. Other products of the food processing
industry include sugar, sugar preparations and honey, eggs, vegetable and animal
oils and fats, coffee, cocoa, tea and spices and cereal preparations.
Of prime importance among the alcoholic beverages produced in Britain, and in
the food and drink industry as a whole, is whisky. Scotch whisky accounts for
almost all whisky production in Britain. About four-fifths of annual sales are to
overseas buyers; the United States imports nearly a third of the distilled alcoholic
beverages exported from Britain. The rest of the European Community and Japan
are the other largest markets. The Distillers Company accounts for about half of
Scotch whisky output. Production of gin in Britain has risen steadily since the early
1950s. Some of the larger manufacturers also own distilleries abroad.
In the brewing and malting industry there are seven major brewery groups
whose products are sold nationally, and about 80 smaller enterprises who mainly
supply locally, or regionally, many of them because of a demand for traditionally
brewed beers. Firms have introduced new production methods, including
continuous brewing processes, and automated batch production plants are well
established. The main raw materials used are malt, hops and some sugar. British
malt, which is made almost entirely from home-grown barley, is used by brewers
throughout the world. In recent years the popularity of lager has increased
considerably.
Cider, perry and wine producers form the smallest sector of the drinks industry
and are located mostly in southern and western England. Made wine is produced
from imported grapes and juices.
The soft drinks industry has expanded markedly in the last decade. There are
some very large companies among about 20 producing brands which are marketed
216
Tobacco
TEXTILES AND
RELATED
INDUSTRIES
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
on a national scale, while other companies supply regional markets. There is some
specialisation among firms in the production of various types, such as carbonated
drinks, cola-based drinks, squashes and cordials, tonic waters and ‘mixers’, fruit
juices and health drinks.
The British tobacco industry manufactures almost all the cigarettes and tobacco
goods sold in Britain. Over 90 per cent of production is provided by three major
manufacturers (the Imperial Group, Gallaher and Carreras Rothmans). The
industry specialises in the production of high-quality cigarettes made from flue-
cured tobacco and achieves significant exports, mainly of cigarettes. Countries in
Europe, the Middle East and Africa are important markets for British cigarettes.
Britain imports raw tobacco in large amounts from the United States, India and
Canada.
1980
Labour"
’ooos
Sales*
£ ™
Exports
'£ m
Imports
£ ™
Total
of which:
man-made fibres
cotton
linen
wool
carpets
hosiery and knitwear
clothing
leather and leather goods
footwear
770
25
69
65
26
102
270
3i
67
10,821
723
1,069
IT53
581
i,33i
2,982
456
881
2,800
373
425
391
142
298
551
141
135
3,492
233
776
179
159
360
879
202
359
aEmployees in employment
^Manufacturers’ sales
The historical branches of the industry, based on the natural fibres of cotton and
wool, linen and jute, have retained their separate identities but the boundaries
between them are becoming blurred with the increasing use of man-made fibres.
The growth of man-made fibres has stimulated the development of new processes
and new types of yarn and cloth and has strongly influenced the structure of the
industry. A small number of large multi-fibre, multi-process groups have
emerged, although in many sectors there is still a preponderance of small
companies engaged in just one or two operations.
The textile and clothing industries in Britain, as in other northern European
countries, have been affected by low-cost imports from developing countries
during the 1970s, and latterly from the United States as well, where energy and
feedstock costs have been subject to price control and lower in consequence. Trade
in textiles and clothing is regulated by the Multi-Fibre Arrangement (MFA) of the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. The MFA allows a measure of restraint
on imports of textiles and clothing from low-cost countries into industrialised
countries.
British textile companies manufacture a wide variety of goods, including lace,
narrow fabrics and household textiles, such as blankets, sheets, towels, and
tablecloths. Rope, twine, nets and netting are manufactured by the cordage
industry, which is one of the largest in Europe. A recent development is the
production of non-woven fabric by the melded process, which dispenses with the
conventional weaving and knitting stages.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
217
Man-made
Fibres
Cotton
Linen
Wool
Carpets
Jute
Much of the early development of man-made fibres took place in Britain and
continuing extensive research has produced a wide variety of types with their own
special characteristics. The two main types are still those first developed—the
cellulosic fibres, such as rayon, and the synthetic fibres, such as nylon and polyester,
(a British invention) made wholly by chemical processes. Acrylic fibres, including
Courtelle, Acrilan and Orion are important products, as are the elastomeric or
spandex fibres which have inherent properties of stretch and recovery, anti-static
synthetic yarns embedded with carbon and various fire-resistant yarns. More
recently there has been a greater use of the polyolefins (polypropylene and
polyethylene) in the carpet, carpet backing and packaging fields and still more
recently in household textiles and clothing. Output in the man-made fibre
producing industry is concentrated in the hands of a few large companies.
Recent innovations in man-made fibres include a number with industrial
applications. Examples are carbon fibres, used in aerospace; melded fabrics
(bonded together without knitting or weaving) with heavy duty uses in civil
engineering; high-tenacity filament yarns for cables and stays; high-temperature
refractory fibres for furnaces; and charcoal cloth with highly effective air-filtering
properties.
During the nineteenth century cotton was Britain’s chief consumer goods industry
and cotton piece goods its largest export. Low-cost competition has cut
progressively into British markets and made necessary extensive reorganisation,
modernisation and the introduction of new techniques. Production includes single
and double cotton yarn, spun man-made fibre and mixture cloth.
The linen industry is centred in Northern Ireland, where the lighter types of fabrics
for apparel, furnishings and household textiles are produced. The heavyweight
canvas for sailcloth, tents, awnings and tarpaulins is mainly produced in Scotland.
Export sales of tops, yarns and fabrics of the wool textile industry in Britain have
reached more than three times the value of imports. The industry is one of the
largest in the world and includes the world’s biggest wool textile company,
Illingworth, Morris. There are two main branches, woollen and worsted. An
increasing amount of man-made fibre is now blended with wool. West Yorkshire
is the main producing area but Scotland and the west of England are also famous as
specialised producers of high quality yarn and cloth. Large quantities of raw wool
are scoured and cleaned in Britain to prepare it for spinning. The largest markets
for woollen and worsted fabrics are the rest of the European Community, the
United States and Japan.
Over 75 per cent of the output of the carpet and rug industry is made up of tufted
carpets, in the production of which the pile, usually with a high man-made fibre
content, is inserted into a pre-woven backing. Woven carpets, such as Axminster
and Wilton, account for most of the remainder of sales. There is a higher wool
content in woven types, although they too are making more use of man-made
fibres. The high quality and variety of design make Britain the world’s leading
producer of woven carpets.
Jute products are manufactured in the Dundee area. Jute yarn and the man-made
polypropylene yarn are used in the manufacturing of carpets, cordage and ropes
and woven into fabrics for a wide range of applications in the packaging,
upholstery, building and motor car industries. New uses for jute, for example as a
plastics reinforcement and for decorative wall coverings, have also been
developed.
218
Hosiery and
Knitwear
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The hosiery and knitwear industry comprises more than 1,000 companies situated
mainly in the East Midlands and Scotland, of which most are small to medium in
size. The industry produces fabrics, outerwear, underwear, tights, socks, stockings,
gloves and accessories.
Clothing The British clothing industry is one of the largest in Europe; it is highly labour
intensive with about 6,000 companies (predominantly small ones), accounting for
4 per cent of Britain’s total employment in manufacturing. The existence of the
Multi-Fibre Arrangement has encouraged investment within the industry and
exports have risen somewhat since I977> although import penetration has
continued to increase.
The British footwear manufacturing industry is made up predominantly of small
companies although there has been some rationalisation in recent years. Though
largely labour intensive, the industry has made use of technological advances and
supplies half the shoes sold in Britain. Import penetration, however, has continued
to increase. Leather tanning and the manufacture of leather goods are also long-
established industries; all types of leather (particularly for footwear, clothing and
gloves) and leather goods are produced.
Footwear and
Leather
OTHER
MANUFACTURING
1980
Labour11
’ooos
Sales*1
£ m
Exports
£ m
Imports
£ ™
Total
of which:
bricks, fireclay, refractory goods
and cement
pottery and glass
paper and board
paper and board converted
products
printing and publishing
rubber and rubber goods
furniture and timber
plastics products not elsewhere
specified and floor coverings etc.
toys, games and sports equipment
1,292 22,787
49
117
58
131
334
88
165
129
30
1,212
1,642
1,509
3,345
6,390
2,144
2,579
2,750
528
1,152
131
425
315
198
453
520
226
303
183
4,674
22
288
i,54i
143
266
307
1,178
326
244
‘'Employees in employment
^Manufacturers’ sales
Bricks, Fireclay Firms in the industry manufacture such items as bricks, roofing tiles, chimney pots,
and Refractory fireclay ware and heat-resisting products, including furnace and kiln linings.
Goods Brickmaking is one of Britain’s oldest industries, but most manufacture is now
based on highly mechanised systems. The London Brick Company supplies about
40 per cent of total brick deliveries. Refractory goods include firebricks, silica
bricks, magnesite bricks, chrome-magnesite bricks and alumina bricks.
Cement The cement industry is chiefly concerned with the manufacture of Portland
cement for the home market. Invented by Joseph Aspdin and patented in 1824, this
material and the methods of its production have been the subject of continuous
technical improvement and intensive research.
Glass-reinforced cement composites, a new variation, were invented in Britain
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
219
Pottery
Glass
Paper and
Board
Manufacture
and Conversion
Printing and
Publishing
in the mid-1970s and are manufactured under licence in some 40 other countries.
The capacity of the industry as a whole has substantially expanded in recent years.
The pottery industry, centred largely in Staffordshire, supplies almost all home
needs for domestic and industrial pottery. It uses largely indigenous clay from
Cornwall and Devon. There has been considerable re-equipment in the industry;
kilns fired by gas or electricity have replaced all the coal-fired kilns, and new
decorating techniques and automatic and semi-automatic machinery, such as
automatic glazing machines, have been introduced. Domestic pottery, including
china, earthenware and stoneware, accounts for two-thirds of the industry’s
output; the other main divisions are glazed tiles, sanitary ware and electrical ware,
and such specialised industrial products as acid-proof stoneware, porous ceramics
and laboratory porcelain. Production of tableware is concentrated in two major
groups. Britain is the world’s principal manufacturer of fine bone china, much of
which is exported; famous makes include Wedgwood, Spode, Royal Worcester,
Royal Doulton, Minton, Aynsley, Coalport and Royal Crown Derby.
Britain’s glass industry is one of the biggest in the world. Glass containers form the
largest part of the industry; another major section is devoted to the manufacture of
flat glass in its various forms, chiefly ‘float’ glass, a process developed in Britain by
Pilkington Brothers and licensed to glassmakers throughout the world. The use of
glass for internal decoration and as a finish for internal and external walls has
greatly increased in recent years. Large quantities of safety glass are produced for
the motor and other industries. Other products include tubular glass, mirrors,
lamp and bulb glass, scientific and medical glassware, glass fibres, and all types of
glass containers (mostly made automatically). A traditional product is hand-made
lead crystal glassware of very high quality.
There were about 130 paper and board mills in 1980, the largest eight accounting
for one third of total British production, which was 38 million tonnes. The largest
British groups are Reed International, Bowater Corporation and Wiggins Teape.
They hold considerable interests abroad, including pulp and paper producing mills
in the United States, Canada, other parts of the Commonwealth and Europe. The
main types of paper and board produced are printing and writing papers and
board, corrugated case materials and packaging boards. There has been a
significant trend towards waste-based packaging grades, in order to reduce the
industry’s reliance on imported woodpulp supplies. Domestically produced
woodpulp represents only a small percentage of raw material supplies but the use
of recycled waste paper is increasing; together they currently provide nearly 60 per
cent of the industry’s needs.
The packaging and converting industries manufacture a variety of products,
including cardboard boxes, cartons, fibreboard packaging and business stationery
products.
The printing and publishing industries produce a wide range of products,
including national and provincial newspapers, periodicals, books, business
stationery and greeting cards. Mergers have led to the formation of large groups in
the newspaper, magazine and book publishing sectors, but general printing,
engraving, bookbinding and a large part of publishing remain essentially industries
of small firms. The book publishing industry is a major exporter. Production
processes include high-speed printing, electronic engraving, advanced processes of
photographic reproduction and computer typesetting. Security printers (of, for
220
Rubber
Furniture,
Brushes and
Timber
Plastics
Products
Toys, Games
and Sports
Equipment
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
example, banknotes and postage stamps) have a high reputation and are important
exporters, the two major companies being De La Rue and Bradbury Wilkinson. |
The most important overseas markets for printed matter are the United States, the
Irish Republic and Australia.
Tyres and tubes represent around 40 per cent of the output of the industry, the
most important other goods being vehicle components and accessories, conveyor
belting, cables, industrial, hydraulic and marine hoses, latex foam products and
rubber footwear, gloves and clothing. Rubber is also used for inflatable life-rafts, 1
containers for fuel and other industrial liquids and seals for storage tanks and other
products where there are problems of air exclusion and vapour suppression. The 1
Dunlop Company is Britain’s leading rubber and tyre manufacturer. Tyre ;
manufacturers include several subsidiaries of United States and other overseas
companies. The industry’s consumption of rubber includes natural, synthetic and
recycled rubber.
The furniture industry comprises more than 1,000 companies mostly small- to
medium-sized with only a few of any significant size. A wide range of products are
manufactured, the greater part of production being accounted for by domestic
furniture and the remainder by office, contract, school and other furniture. The
industry makes wooden, metal and plastic furniture, upholstery, bedding and soft
furnishings. Exports have increased in recent years, rising from £69 million in
1975 to ^239 million in 1980. The major markets are the United States and the
Federal Republic of Germany.
The brush industry is located throughout Britain and includes highly
mechanised establishments as well as small craft units.
Domestic production of timber has been steadily increasing but the timber
industries are mainly dependent on imported supplies. A large proportion of
timber sales is dependent on the construction industry. Chipboard is the fastest
growing sector of the industry; other important sectors are hardwood and
plywood.
In addition to the plastics components and accessories supplied to many different
industries, the plastics products industry manufactures a wide range of building
materials, such as pipes, sheeting for roofs, sanitary ware, tanks and other products.
It also supplies flexible foams, used in the vehicle, furniture and other industries;
rigid foams; packaging products, including bottles, containers and bags, domestic
and industrial hollow-ware; many kinds of household goods; vinyl and other
floorcoverings; and artificial leathercloth.
There are about 500 manufacturers of a wide range of toys and games, only a few
of significant size. About a third of total production is exported, the major markets
being France, the Federal Republic of Germany and the United States. British
diecast toys, model construction kits and soft toys are well established in overseas
markets. The greatest expansion in the industry in recent years has been in
electronic toys and games.
There are about 150 manufacturers of sports equipment, many of which are
small companies with a high reputation for craftsmanship. British fishing tackle
and golf and tennis equipment have a world-wide reputation. The main export
markets are the United States and the rest of the European Community.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
221
Structure
Output
Housing
Civil
Engineering
Projects
Construction
The construction industry accounted for about 6 per cent of gross domestic
product in 1980. Some 60 per cent of output by value was new work and 40 per
cent was in repairs and maintenance. About 40 per cent of the work was in housing
and 60 per cent in other work. The value of total output rose from ^ 18,784 million
in 1979 to £22,030 million in 1980, but the volume of output declined owing to
the industrial recession. About 1-3 million people are employed in the industry,
accounting for nearly 6 per cent of total employment. There are also about 376,000
self-employed. Government sponsorship of the construction industry is the
responsibility of the Department of the Environment.
The industry includes firms engaged on the design, construction, alteration,
repair and maintenance of buildings, highways, airfields, drainage and sewerage
systems, docks, harbours and canals, sea defence works, offshore structures,
electrical wiring, heating and other installation work, and structural work
connected with power stations and telecommunications.
Construction work is carried out both by private contractors and by public
authorities which employ their own labour. In 1980 about 88 per cent of the work
was done by private firms. Although there were about 77,000 firms employing
two or more people, 92 per cent of them employed fewer than 25. Some large
firms are vertically integrated, owning quarries and workshops, mechanised plant
and standard builders’ equipment; some undertake responsibility for projects from
initial design to finished building. All but the smallest projects are generally carried
out under professional direction, either by architects or, in the case of the more
complicated civil engineering projects, by consulting engineers. The latter, acting
on behalf of a client, may advise on the feasibility of projects, draw up plans and
supervise the construction work.
The Property Services Agency (PSA), which is an integral part of the
Department of the Environment is responsible for the construction programmes
undertaken directly by the Government, including work for the armed forces both
in Britain and overseas.
A large proportion of public authority employees are engaged on repair and
maintenance work for local authorities. The total labour force includes about
60,000 trainees, whose normal apprenticeship period is three years.
The value of the work done in Britain in 1980 amounted to £22,030 million of
which £4,404 million represented new housing and £9,159 million other new
work; repair and maintenance accounted for the remaining £8,466 million.
During 1980 a total of 153,500 dwellings were started in Great Britain. Starts in the
public sector were 56,100 and those for private owners 97,400. In the course of the
same year 232,600 dwellings were completed, of which 106,700 were in the public
sector and 125,900 in the private sector. Industrialised building methods
employing prefabricated components are used in some of the work in both sectors.
Among important construction projects in hand or completed in Britain in 1980
were five nuclear power stations, a coal-fired power station, the Dinorwic
pumped-storage electricity station, the Thames Barrier, which will form part of
London s flood defences, the Humber Bridge, the Kielder dam and reservoir, the
Sullom Voe oil terminal, and roads, tunnels, bridges, hospitals and large-scale
housing developments.
222
Research and
Advisory
Services
Overseas
Construction
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Within the Department of the Environment, the Building Research Establishment
is concerned with all aspects of construction research and also provides an advisory
service. An Agrement Board, sponsored by the Department, tests and certifies
building products and methods.
In addition to research carried out within the major construction and building
materials firms, work is also undertaken by research associations, universities and
colleges of technology.
The National Building Agency is an independent body which encourages the
adoption of advanced methods of building, and provides technical advice and
services to government departments, local authorities and other clients.
The Association of Building Centres represents 12 building centres throughout
Britain most of which provide exhibition and information services on building
materials and products, building services and techniques.
Total overseas earnings of all sectors of the construction industry in 1979—80 were
estimated at about £2,740 million, some £40 million more than in the previous 12
months. British contractors earned £200 million from overseas customers and a
further £40 million from overseas branches and subsidiaries. The related
professions (consulting engineers, architects and surveyors) had earnings of £470
million, while exports of building materials, plant and machinery accounted for
some £2,030 million.
In 1979—80 British construction firms carried out work overseas valued at
£1,292 million. New contracts worth £1,302 million were won overseas.
Service Industries
There has been a steady rise in the proportion of total output contributed by the
service industries in Britain, and in the proportion of employees working in the
service sector. In 1980 services contributed about 60 per cent of gross domestic
product compared with some 55 per cent in 197° and 5° Per cent in i960, and in j
mid-1980 they accounted for 60 per cent of employees in employment compared
with 50 per cent in 1970 and 47 Per cent in i960. There has also been an increase in
service activities carried out within the productive sector; the proportion of
administrative, technical and clerical workers employed in manufacturing, for
example, rose from 21 per cent in i960 to 27 per cent in 1970 and 30 per cent in
1980. It is probable that this represents a growing contribution of management,
design, research and development, computing, marketing and distribution skills.
The increase in service activity has been accompanied by a rise in the proportion of
women in the working population, women tending to find employment more
readily in service activities than in production. Between 1970 and 1980 the number
of women in employment rose by 900,000 while the number of males fell by about
one million. In mid-1980 76 per cent of employed women were in service
industries compared with 48 per cent of males in employment. 1
The contribution of the various service sectors to gross domestic product can be
seen in Table 11. p 178. The main growth sector since 1970 has been financial and
business services, followed by public health and education services, miscellaneous
services, public administration and communications. The contribution of the
distributive trades to gross domestic product has changed little and that of
transport has declined. The rising contribution of the publicly provided health and
education services results in part from the recognition that investment in human
resources is of increasing importance to an industrialised society in an era of
technological advance. Within miscellaneous services, growth (measured by
employment) has occurred chiefly in hotels and catering, services associated with
Information technology
The infra-red sensor on the first flight model telephone calls and telex messages. They will
of one of the maritime communications also provide a global system of corn-
satellites (MARECS). When in space the munications between shore stations and ships
satellites will be relaying TV programmes and at sea.
TV video conferences, transmitting
information between computers and handling
Information
technology
Optical fibres, invented in Britain, are hair-
thin strands of glass capable of carrying large
numbers of telephone conversations or other
information in the form of laser light. When
the first phase of the optical communications
system being installed in Britain is completed
in 1982, it will be the world’s largest system
of its kind, employing 3,500 km (2,175 miles)
of fibres.
Above: Part of thpquipment for growing
the crystals used to detect light signals witl
the optical fibre network.
iiliis
Top left: The girl’s optical fibre cable can
carry more traffic than the conventional cable
being held by the man. Optical fibre cables
are cheap, light, easy to install and hard
wearing.
Below left: Laser-chip making in a gold-lined
furnace. Laser-chips provide the pulses of
light which transmit information along the
fibres.
Below: Fibres being coated with silicon resin
so that tiny cracks do not appear in the
surface.
Bottom: Machine for jointing and breaking
the fibres.
Information
technology
Right: This latest and smallest dish aerial for
siting on or near business premises is part of a
new service for subscribers, due to start in
1983, which will enable data, facsimile, and
telephone calls to be transmitted between
Britain and continental Europe by satellite.
Below: In contrast, this large dish aerial is part
of the Post Office’s first earth station at
Goonhilly Downs, Cornwall, which began
operations in 1963 as part of the initial
experiments in satellite communications;
there are now four dish aerials in operation at
Goonhilly.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
223
DISTRI¬
BUTION
RETAIL
TRADES
leisure activities and motor car servicing and distribution.
One detectable trend in recent decades is that consumers have exchanged certain
services (such as transport, laundries and cinemas) for goods (such as motor cars,
washing-machines and television sets) with which they can provide services for
themselves. In turn demand for the distribution, maintenance and repair of such
goods has generated fresh service activities. Increased consumer expenditure on the
running costs of motor vehicles has been one of the items mainly responsible for
the rise in consumer expenditure on services from 30 per cent of total consumer
expenditure in i960 to 38 per cent in 1980.
In general, technological innovation, particularly in electronics, is combining
with increased consumer spending to make possible the provision of new and
improved services, ranging from electronic accounting, stock-taking and ‘check¬
out’ operations in retail distribution outlets to the provision of credit through
cards, the expansion of information systems such as viewdata, and the renting of
electronic entertainment goods such as video cassette recorders.
Distribution, and certain business and other services are described below.
Services described elsewhere are education (Chapter 7), health (Chapter 6),
national and local government (Chapter 2), defence (Chapter 4), transport and
communications (Chapter 15) and services provided by financial institutions
(Chapter 18).
There were over 2-8 million employees in the distributive trades in mid-1979,
together with a large number of owners of businesses. The distributive trades
accounted for about 10 per cent of national income in 1980, retailing contributing
about three-fifths of this and wholesaling and dealing the remainder.
Turnover of the retail trades has been growing gradually in real terms for many
years. In 1980 retail sales were 74 per cent higher than in 1976, representing,
however, only a 9 per cent increase in volume. In 1979 there were an estimated
235,000 businesses in the retail trade in Great Britain with a turnover of more than
^ 10,000 (see Table 16); they had 351,000 outlets, of which about 59 per cent were
accounted for by single-outlet retailers. Their turnover was just over ^52,000
million in 1979 when they invested ^1,476 million. Over 2 4 million people
(including a large number of part-time staff) were engaged in retailing in 1979. As
the large multiple retailers (those with 10 or more outlets) have grown in size and
diversified their product ranges, there has been a decline in the number of retail
businesses and outlets, although there was a slight rise in 1979. The decline has been
particularly evident among small independent businesses.
The largest multiple retailers in the packaged grocery market are the retail co¬
operatives, followed by Tesco, Sainsbury, Asda, Fine Fare, Kwiksave and
International Stores. Retail co-operative societies are voluntary organisations
controlled by their members, membership being open to anyone paying a small
deposit on a minimum share; at the end of 1980 the 187 retail societies had 9-9
million members and 9,000 retail outlets. Turnover in 1980 amounted to ^3,950
million, 64 per cent of total retail trade. Retail co-operatives and the Co-operative
Wholesale Society (see p 226) are members of the Co-operative Union as are a
number of other co-operative bodies such as the Co-operative Bank. In 1980-81
Tesco had about 550 stores and sales were valued at £1,821 million. Sainsbury had
some 240 outlets and the company’s sales amounted to £1,589 million.
The leading specialist multiple stores are Marks and Spencer (with sales of
£1,870 million in 1980—81), Boots, F. W. Woolworth, W. H. Smith and British
Home Stores.
Department stores, which sell a very wide range of goods, account for about 5
224
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
per cent of retail turnover. The six largest groups are responsible for about 81 per
cent of turnover with House of Fraser, Debenham, thejohn Lewis partnership and
Lewis’s accounting for some 28, 18, 17 and 10 per cent respectively.
TABLE 16: Retail Trade in Great Britain 1979°
Number of
businesses
Number of
outlets
Number of
people
engaged
(thousand)
Turnover
(£ million)
Single-outlet retailers 207,530 207,530
Small multiple retailers 26,394 69,465
Large multiple retailers
(ten or more retail outlets) 1,250 74,192
of which, co-operative
societies 201 9,45°
888
358
1,182
149
16,498
7,364
28,203
3,404
Grocers and general food
retailers 4°,893
Other food retailers 46,269
Confectioners, tobacconists
and newsagents 37,322
Clothing, footwear and textile
retailers 34,486
Household goods retailers 37,016
Other non-food retailers 36,032
Mixed retail businesses 3,15 5
51,910
68,977
47,196
61,410
56,815
48,549
16,329
426
316
232
312
303
240
600
11,057
6,039
3,936
5,H9
7,782
4,396
13,736
Total retail trade
235,174
35M87
2,429
52,065
Source: British business.
a Figures cover businesses above the threshold of value-added tax (^10,000 at that time).
Discrepancies between totals and the sums of their constituent parts are due to rounding.
There are a number of discount stores operating on the principle of selling most
or all of their goods at a reduced price. Electrical goods, furniture, carpets and do-
it-yourself supplies are some of the main items sold by discount stores.
About 16 million people regularly shop by post. In 1979 mail order sales totalled
some ^2,200 million, representing 4 per cent of retail sales and 6-2 per cent of retail
sales excluding food shops. The leading items sold by mail order are clothing,
footwear, furniture, household textiles and radio, television and electrical goods.
Trends
Supermarkets,
Superstores and
Hypermarkets
One of the most significant trends in retailing in recent years has been the increase
in the proportion of turnover accounted for by large multiple retailers; they have
54 per cent of retail turnover. Other important trends have been the increase in
very large self-service stores selling a wide variety of products, diversification by
food multiples into selling a wider range of goods, the development of specially-
designed shopping precincts and an even stronger emphasis on price competition.
There are supermarkets in most towns and cities in Britain. The mam multiple
grocery companies have been steadily increasing the size of their supermarkets and
closing the smaller and less efficient ones. The trend to greater size has led to a
growing number of superstores and hypermarkets, single-level, self-service stores
offering a wider range of food and non-food merchandise and which have at least
2,500 square metres (26,900 square feet) and 5,000 square metres (53,800 square
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
225
Shopping Centres
Diversification
Promotions
Operations
WHOLESALE
TRADES
feet) respectively of selling space. They are designed primarily for shoppers with
cars and substantial free car-parking space is usually provided. In Britain the first
such store was opened in the mid-1960s and by December 1980 there were some
200 superstores and hypermarkets open, while planning permission for a further 71
superstores and hypermarkets had been granted. It is Government policy that these
stores should be located within urban areas, preferably within shopping centres,
where they are accessible to all shoppers including those without cars.
Britain has a variety of new purpose-built shopping centres. Among the largest are
those at Brent Cross in London, the Victoria Centre in Nottingham and the Eldon
Square development in Newcastle upon Tyne, while the centre in Milton Keynes
(Buckinghamshire) is one of the largest in Europe.
Many of the large multiple groups have diversified over the last few years to offer a
much bigger range of goods than previously. This has been especially noticeable
for the large food retailers, which often sell non-food products, such as beer, wines
and spirits, clothing and household appliances, as well as packaged groceries.
Another trend is that many superstores and large supermarkets offer fresh as well as
packaged food, often with special counters or areas for fresh meat, fish, vegetables
and bread baked on the premises.
Retailers are placing greater emphasis on price competition as a means of
promoting sales, while trading stamps, which were an important method of sales
promotion in the late 1960s and early 1970s, have become much less significant.
With the growth of payments by credit card, many of the large retailers have
issued their own credit cards for regular customers to use in their branches in an
attempt to increase sales, particularly of high-value goods.
Numerous improvements to speed up the flow of customers through supermarket
check-outs include conveyor belts for goods being handled beside the tills, change¬
giving machines and special check-outs for customers with a small number of
purchases. Store lay-outs have been improved, with wider aisles allowing more
room for shoppers and their trolleys. Laser-scanning electronic check-outs are
expected to have a major impact on retailing in the next few years. Under this
system, the package of each item is marked with a special bar-code which is read by
a low-power laser beam at the point of sale and the price is automatically retrieved
from a central computer. The customer is given a receipt showing the price and
identity of each item purchased, while the store’s stock records are altered
automatically. Substantial savings are expected from improved stock control and a
reduction of individual price marking in stores. Key Markets introduced the first
operational laser-scanning electronic check-out in Britain at Spalding
(Lincolnshire) in 1979- A number of leading retailers are experimenting with
electronic order and invoice systems in dealings with their suppliers, following a
legal change permitting tax invoices in forms other than paper.
In 1974 (when the most recent wholesaling census was conducted) there were some
80,000 businesses engaged in wholesaling and dealing. Turnover (including sales to
other wholesalers and dealers) amounted to £49,800 million and just over 1
million people were employed in this sector. The main areas in which wholesalers
are dominant are groceries and .provisions, petroleum products and ores and
metals. A number of the large retailers carry out the functions of the wholesaler by
having their own warehouses, and buying and distributive organisations.
Two large groups, Booker McConnell and Linfood, predominate in the
wholesale food trade. London’s wholesale markets play a significant part in the
distribution of foodstuffs. New Covent Garden is the main market for fruit and
226
BUSINESS
SERVICES
Advertising
Market
Research
Management
Consultancy
Computer
Services
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
vegetables, Smithfield for meat and Billingsgate for fish.
The co-operative movement in Britain has its own wholesale organisation, the
Co-operative Wholesale Society (CWS), to serve the needs of retail societies; its
turnover was .£1,807 million in 1980. Retail societies are encouraged to buy from
the CWS, which supplies about two-thirds of their requirements.
‘Cash and carry’ wholesaling is becoming increasingly important. .By bulk
purchasing and limiting their expenditure on premises and credit and delivery
facilities, these wholesalers can offer large discounts to their customers. There were
estimated to be about 600 ‘cash and carry’ depots in Britain in 1980.
In the grocery trade there are a number of voluntary groups which have been
formed by wholesalers with small retailers, whereby the retailers are encouraged
by discounts and other incentives to buy as much as possible from the wholesaler.
This has helped to preserve the existence of retail outlets for the wholesaler, and
also the traditional ‘corner shops’ and village stores, of value to local communities,
and has given small retailers the advantages of bulk buying and co-ordinated
distribution.
Business services include advertising, market research, management consultancy,
computer services, equipment leasing, conference centres and auction houses.
Most of these sectors have grown rapidly in recent years.
Advertising expenditure rose by 20 per cent in 1980 to £2,562 million, according
to the Advertising Association, though this represented a fall on the previous year
in real terms, owing to the recession. Advertising in the press accounted for 66 per
cent of the total, television for 27 per cent, posters for 4-5 per cent and commercial
radio for 2 per cent. Advertising campaigns are planned mainly by advertising
agencies, of which there are several hundred in Britain; in some cases they also
provide marketing, consumer research and other services. There were some 37,000
people employed in advertising and market research in mid-1979.
Sales by the 27 member companies of the Association of Market Survey
Organisations amounted to £58 million in 1980, 14 per cent more than in 1979,
and representing about four-fifths of all sales by the industry.
There are thought to be some 5,000 management consultants in Britain, of whom
2,000 are practising members of the Institute of Management Consultants. Among
the largest management consultancy companies are the 25 members of the
Management Consultants Association, whose turnover amounted to £62 million
in 1980. Revenue earned within Britain comprised £44 million, an increase of 16
per cent on the previous year, while overseas revenue amounted to £18 million.
The Association reports a growing demand for services supporting the application
of computer technology, particularly micro-processing, to all aspects of business.
Britain is acknowledged as a world leader in the provision of software and
computer services, and software developed in Britain has contributed to
developments in the applications of computers in numerous countries. The
industry comprises software houses, which provide professional services such as
consultancy and the writing of programs to meet the computing needs of their
clients, and computer bureaux, where the main emphasis is on processing
customers’ data. The revenue of the industry was £536 million in 1980, about
£106 million more than in the previous year. The industry has recorded an annual
average growth at constant (1975) prices of 14 per cent since I971- Some 26,800
people were employed full-time in computing services in 1980. About 160
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
227
Equipment
Leasing
Conference
Centres
Auction Houses
Other Business
Services
MISCEL¬
LANEOUS
SERVICES
Film and
Television
computer service companies are members of the Computing Services Association,
the leading trade association. Apart from subsidiaries of ICE many of the
companies are subsidiaries of firms engaged in activities such as banking, insurance,
manufacturing and distribution.
The leasing of capital equipment has grown rapidly from a low level at the star*- of
the 1970s. In 1975 total assets leased by service industries, at an estimated value of
£500 million, represented 5-7 per cent of all recorded capital expenditure. By 1980
the value of assets leased had risen to £2,500 million (at current prices) representing
12-5 per cent of total capital expenditure. A distinction is made between finance
leasing, in which the lessor looks for a satisfactory return from the first, and only,
lessee (who normally selects the goods to be purchased), and operating leasing, in
which the lessor looks for his returns over a longer period than the duration of his
contract with his first lessee; that is, taking into account the sale or re-leasing of the
returned asset. Motor cars and computers are the assets most common in operating
leasing. Leasing is distinct from hire or rental where equipment is normally
supplied on regular terms by a business specialising in a particular range of goods.
About three-quarters of equipment leasing in Britain is conducted through
companies belonging to the Equipment Leasing Association, which has about 57
members; they include clearing banks (the major force in leasing), independent
finance houses, merchant banks, insurance companies, overseas banks and some
industrial and commercial companies. In Britain there is no overlap between
equipment lessors and real estate lessors as there is in some other countries.
Britain’s conference industry is estimated to have earned some £500 million in
1979. There are between 55 and 60 towns and cities with significant conference
facilities, major centres being the National Exhibition Centre at Birmingham, the
Wembley Conference Centre in London, the Brighton Centre, and the new
centres at the Barbican in London and at Harrogate in North Yorkshire. The
Union of International Associations, based in Brussels, estimated that about 12 per
cent (some 580) of the world’s main international association meetings were held in
Britain in 1980, more than in any other country.
Britain’s chief auction houses are active in the international auction markets for
works of art, trading on the acknowledged expertise of British valuers and dealers.
The two largest houses, Sotheby’s and Christie’s, are established worldwide and
had turnover of £317 million and £177 million in 1980—81 respectively.
Other business services include land and estate companies, estate agents, and
typewriting, duplicating, document copying, translating and employment
agencies.
Some 107,000 people were employed in film, theatre, musical, broadcasting and
related services in June 1979, and 200,000 in services connected with sport,
recreation, gambling and betting.
Among major changes in the film and television industry in recent years, two main
trends have been the growth of the specialised film and television services sector on
the one hand, and the decline of the cinema sector, partly as a result of the growth
of public television services, on the other. Technical developments, notably in
electronic recording and replaying facilities, have been responsible for changes
both in the production and exhibition of film and television material. They have
also played a part in the growth of the specialised sector, in which relatively small
228
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Hotels and
Catering
Other Services
studios, mostly based in London, provide a wide range of film and television
services, including the making of advertising films, ‘special effects’ sequences for
feature and other films, documentary and educational programmes, and cartoon
films. In addition, new audio-visual technology is being adopted in industrial, ]
commercial, medical and scientific contexts for information, observation and
training purposes.
The Government does not invest directly in films but the National Film Finance
Corporation lends money for production and distribution of feature films from
capital advanced by the Government and private interests, and also provides loans
for scriptwriting and other pre-production costs.
A levy on cinema admissions, the Eady Levy, administered by the British Film
Fund Agency, has two purposes. Grants from the levy can be made to the
Children’s Film Foundation, the British Film Institute Production Board, the
National Film School and the National Film Finance Corporation. The rest of the
fund is distributed to makers of eligible films in proportion to the films’ takings.
The Department of Trade conducts an annual inquiry into the value of overseas
transactions relating to the production and exhibition of cinema and television
material. For many years the inquiry has shown a surplus of receipts over
expenditure. In 1980 receipts by film and television companies were ^163 million,
while expenditure was ^91 million, a surplus of million. Film companies’ |
receipts totalled ^112 million and television companies’ receipts ^51 million, the
North American market accounting for 52 and 59 per cent of revenue respectively.
Some 240 film companies, the 15 Independent Broadcasting Authority
programme contractors and the British Broadcasting Corporation were covered
in the 1980 inquiry.
The hotel and catering trades employed 923,000 people in 1979: 296,000 in hotels
and other residential establishments; 185,000 in restaurants, cafes and snack bars;
259,000 in public houses; 114,000 in clubs; and 69,000 by catering contractors. A
large number of self-employed people are also engaged in hotels and catering.
There were about 12,500 licensed hotels in Great Britain in 1977 with a total
turnover of £1,600 million. Hotels are concentrated in the main business centres,
notably London, and in seaside and other holiday resorts. Many licensed hotels as
well as most of the numerous guest houses are small, with fewer than 20 rooms,
although there are also several large groups of hotels. The biggest is Trusthouse
Forte Ltd, the world’s largest hotel, catering and leisure company, which runs over
800 hotels including some 220 in Britain. The total turnover of holiday camps and
camping and caravan sites was about £140 million in 1977- There were over 9,000
licensed restaurants (with a total turnover of about £75° million) in Great Britain
in 1977, and a further 31,000 unlicensed establishments (with a total turnover of
more than £850 million) including snack bars, cafes, fish and chip shops and other
establishments selling ‘take-away’ food. Britain has a very wide range of
restaurants of which a substantial number specialise in the dishes of other countries
such as Chinese, Italian, Indian and Greek foods. ‘Fast food catering, in which
establishments sell hot food such as hamburgers or chicken to be eaten either on the
premises or elsewhere, is becoming increasingly significant. Take-away meals now
account for more than one-third of all meals bought in restaurants and other
catering establishments. There are about 56,000 ‘pubs (public houses, which
mainly sell beer, wines and spirits for consumption on the premises) in Great
Britain, with a total turnover of over £3,000 million in 1977.
Injune 1979 some 480,000 people were employed in garages, petrol stations and by
motor repairers and distributors in Britain. In spite of the continuing increase in the
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
229
TRAVEL AND
TOURISM
number of road vehicles, the number of petrol stations is declining and at the end of
1980 there were some 25,500 (7 per cent fewer than in 1979), of which 34 per cent
were owned by oil companies. There were about 8,400 outlets selling diesel fuel.
Self-service stations are becoming increasingly important and in 1980 they
accounted for 24 per cent of petrol stations and more than half of petrol sales in
Britain. There are about 9,000 motor car retail outlets and 1,100 commercial
vehicle outlets.
Other services provided include hairdressing and manicure (97,000 employees
in June 1979), laundries (53,000), launderettes, dry cleaning, window cleaning,
boot and shoe repair, antique dealing, and funeral services.
The travel business is another growth sector and some 2,000 travel agencies with
about 4,500 offices (about 90 per cent of the total) belong to the Association of
British Travel Agents (ABTA). Many travel agents are small businesses but nearly
half of ABTA members have more than one office. There are a few large firms (of
which the biggest is Thomas Cook) with over 30 high street branches. There are
also some 450 tour operator members of ABTA, including the market leaders
British Airways (through its subsidiaries, Sovereign and Enterprise), Cosmos,
Horizon, Intasun and Thomson. Nearly three-quarters of the package holiday
market is accounted for by the 30 largest air travel organisers. ABTA operates
financial protection schemes to safeguard its members’ customers, maintains codes
of conduct drawn up with the Office of Fair Trading, and offers a free conciliation
service to help to resolve complaints against members and an independent
arbitration scheme for tour operators’ customers.
Overseas earnings from foreign travel increased by more than five times (at
current prices) in the 1970s. It is estimated that in 1980 some 12-4 million overseas
visitors to Britain (about the same number as the previous year) spent nearly
£3,000 million, compared with £2,800 million in 1979. British residents made
17-6 million trips abroad, and spent £2,800 million, giving a surplus on the travel
account of £200 million, compared with £688 million in 1979. About half of
overseas visitors to Britain came from other European Community countries, one-
sixth from North America and about one-eighth from elsewhere in western
Europe. There was an increase of two million visits abroad by British residents in
1980; the main destinations were the European Community (just over half of all
visits) and elsewhere in western Europe (just under one third). Official support for
the promotion of tourism within Britain is provided by the British Tourist
Authority and the tourist boards for England, Scotland, Wales and Northern
Ireland (see p 193). Registration schemes exist for tourist accommodation
throughout Britain and facilities offered by registered establishments are listed in
the boards’ accommodation guides. Information on tourist facilities and
accommodation is available from official information centres throughout Britain
and on the Prestel information service.
jj Energy and Natural
Resources
Britain has the largest energy resources of any country in the European
Community. Minerals as a whole make an important contribution to the
economy. The approximate value of minerals produced in 1979 was £10,220
million, of which crude oil accounted for 48 per cent, coal 33 per cent and natural
gas 7 per cent. The value of mineral production was 43 per cent higher at constant
prices than in 1970, virtually all of the increase being accounted for by oil and gas.
All minerals in Great Britain are privately owned, with the exception of gold,
silver, oil and natural gas (which are owned by the Crown) and coal and some
minerals associated with coal. On the United Kingdom Continental Shelf the right
to exploit all minerals except coal is vested in the Crown. The exclusive right to
extract coal, or license others to do so, both on land and under the sea, is vested in
the National Coal Board. Normally, ownership of minerals runs with the
ownership of the land surface but in some areas, particularly where mining has
taken place, these rights have become separated. Mining and quarrying, apart from
coal, are usually carried out by privately owned companies.
Water resources are normally sufficient for domestic and industrial
requirements; supplies are obtained from surface sources such as mountain lakes
and from underground sources by such means as wells and boreholes.
Energy
Four main primary sources of energy—petroleum, coal, natural gas and nuclear
power—are used in Britain, together with some water power; secondary sources
produced from these are electricity, coke and very small quantities of town gas.
During 1980 Britain became self-sufficient in energy in net terms as a result of the
continued growth in offshore oil production, and this position should be
maintained for a number of years. Coal and nuclear power are nevertheless likely
to have an increasingly important role in Britain’s primary energy supply
particularly in the long term. Estimated operating reserves of coal, Britain’s richest
natural resource, are 6,000 million tonnes, sufficient to support present rates of
extraction for 50 years; total coal resources are many times higher. A major capital
investment programme in the coal industry is in progress. Nuclear power
provided about 13 per cent of electricity available through the public supply
system in 1980 and the proportion will grow as further nuclear power stations now
under construction, or planned, are brought into service.
Privately owned companies predominate in offshore oil and gas production and
oil refining, while publicly owned bodies are responsible for most coal production,
gas distribution, and electricity generation and distribution. The publicly owned
fuel and power industries in Britain employ in total some 500,000 people, just over
2 per cent of the working population; their annual turnover is about £21,000
million and capital investment £2,700 million. In Great Britain the Secretary of
State for Energy is responsible for these industries, except for electricity in Scotland
which is the responsibility of the Secretary of State for Scotland.
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
231
Energy Policy
ENERGY
CONSUMP¬
TION
ENERGY
CONSERVA¬
TION
The Government’s energy strategy involves ensuring the security and availability
of energy supplies, using oil and gas reserves at an optimum rate, developing
competitive coal production, expanding the nuclear power programme,
supporting research into renewable sources of energy and encouraging measures
which result in lower energy consumption. Pricing that reflects the true long-term
costs of energy supplies is also central to the Government’s approach, both to
discourage the wasteful use of energy and to stimulate new methods of utilising
and saving it.
Britain is actively engaged in international collaboration on energy questions,
notably through its membership of the European Community and of the
International Energy Agency (IEA, a body with 21 member countries attached to
the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). Since its
establishment in 1974, the IE A has agreed a wide range of co-operative measures to
reduce member nations’ dependence on imported oil. The rapid increase of North
Sea oil production, together with the Government’s policies on coal, nuclear
power and energy conservation, has meant that, from being a net oil importer of
41 million tonnes of oil in 1978, Britain has been able to accept, as a contribution to
the European Community’s response to the world economic summit in Tokyo in
1979, a target for 1985 of net exports of 5 million tonnes of oil. The Government
also attaches considerable importance to a common understanding between
energy producers and energy consumers.
Inland primary energy consumption fell by 7-8 per cent in 1980 to 328 million
tonnes (see Table 17), the first fall in consumption since 1975, reflecting the
economic recession in Britain, energy conservation and mild weather in the early
part of the year. The changing pattern of consumption is illustrated in the diagram
on p 232, the most noticeable feature being the growing contribution of natural
gas. Energy consumption by final users in 1980 amounted to 56,547 million.
therms1 on a ‘heat supplied’ basis, of which industrial users consumed about 34 per
cent, domestic users 28 per cent, transport 25 per cent and public services 6 per cent.
TABLE 17: Inland Energy Consumption (in terms of primary sources)
million tonnes coal equivalent
1970 1975 1978 1979 1980
Oil
Coal
Natural gas
Nuclear energy
Hydro-electric power
Total
Source: Department of Energy
Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
Energy conservation has a central place in the Government’s energy strategy. It is
based on the rational pricing of energy and supported by a campaign of
information and advice to consumers including the encouragement of good
150-0
156-9
17-9
9‘5
2'3
136-5
120-0
55‘4
10-9
2-0
139-3
II9-9
65-1
U-4
2-1
139-0
129-6
71-3
13-8
2-2
I2I-4
120-9
70-4
13-3
2-0
336-7 324-8
339-8
355-9
328-0
1 1 therm = 105,506 kilojoules.
232
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Conservation
Measures
energy conservation practice throughout industry. The Secretary of State for
Energy is advised by an independent Advisory Council on Energy Conservation,
while studies on energy conservation and alternative sources of energy are
Primary Energy Consumption
1970
Coal 46.6%
Oil 44.6%
a
Nu<
S
I
Natural gas 5.3%
Nuclear energy 2.8%
l^j Hydro-electric power 0.7%
1980
undertaken by a number of organisations, notably the Energy Technology
Support Unit of the Department of Energy.
Several schemes to help industry and commerce to conserve energy are in
operation, including assistance towards the cost of consultants’ surveys, energy
audits in selected industries and financial assistance for research, development and
demonstration projects. Firms are encouraged to appoint energy managers (of
whom there are some 7,000) to draw up and be responsible for energy
conservation measures in factories and offices. Many firms have achieved
significant economies through measures such as better use of heating and lighting,
improved operational and maintenance techniques, and the installation of
draught-proofing and additional insulation. Following discussions with the
Government, the motor manufacturers are working towards a voluntary target of
a 10 per cent improvement between 1978 and 1985 in the average mileage per
gallon achieved by new cars sold in Britain. The Government believes that in
certain circumstances it is appropriate to give consumers a direct financial
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
233
OFFSHORE
OIL AND GAS
Offshore
Supplies
OIL
North Sea
Fields
inducement to adopt conservation measures and, for example, under the Homes
Insulation Act 1978, grants are available to householders for loft and water-tank
insulation. In some areas the Government sets compulsory standards such as the
maximum temperature in non-domestic buildings and the minimum insulation
standard of all new buildings. Under the Energy Conservation Act 1981 the
Government has powers to enable standards to be set for the efficiency of new
space and water heating appliances and of gas appliances, for industrial and
domestic uses. These powers will enable the Government to implement a number
of European Community directives on heat generators and gas appliances.
Britain’s energy position has been transformed by the discovery of substantial oil
and gas reserves (estimated to be worth some ,£400,000 million) offshore in the
United Kingdom Continental Shelf (UKCS). Seismic prospecting began in the
early 1960s and full-scale exploration activities in 1964. The total area covered by
production licences is some 65,000 square kilometres (25,000 square miles) out of a
total designated area of about 643,000 square kilometres (248,250 square miles),
over which Britain has exercised its rights to explore and exploit the seabed and
subsoil. Expenditure on offshore and onshore exploration and development
amounts to over £(25,000 million (at 1980 prices) so far. Expenditure in 1980 was
estimated at about £2,800 million.
The Department of Energy’s Offshore Supplies Office seeks to ensure that British
industry can compete effectively for orders for offshore equipment by helping
firms to identify the needs of offshore operators, assisting operators to identify
British suppliers of offshore equipment and services, and promoting new ventures
to increase British involvement in the industry. British companies increased their
share of the offshore market, worth £2,380 million in 1980, from between 25 and
30 per cent in 1973 to 71 per cent in 1980 and are increasingly involved in supplying
other offshore markets.
During most of the twentieth century Britain has been almost wholly dependent
for its oil supplies on imports, the only indigenous supplies coming from a small
number of land-based oilfields. However, the first discovery of oil in the UKCS
was made in 1969 and the first oil was brought ashore in 1975. Output of crude oil
from the UKCS is now about i-6 million barrels (220,000 tonnes) a day. (For
estimates of the additional benefits of North Sea oil and gas to the British
Economy, see p 174.)
Some 17 fields in the UKCS are producing oil: Brent and Forties, two of the
largest offshore oilfields in the world; Argyll; Auk; Beryl; Buchan; Claymore;
Dunlin; Heather; Montrose; Murchison; Ninian; Piper; South Cormorant;
Statfjord; Tartan; and Thistle. A further nine fields are under development while
more than 40 further significant finds that have been made may prove to be
commercial after further appraisal. Production from most large fields is controlled
from production platforms of either steel or concrete which have been built to
withstand severe weather including gusts of wind of up to 257 km/h (160 mph) and
waves of 30 metres (100 feet).
Britain’s primary oil production, including condensates and petroleum gases,
amounted to more than 80 million tonnes in 1980 (see Table 18), 3 per cent more
than in 1979. Output and consumption are finely balanced, with production
regularly exceeding consumption except during the winter.
234
Structure of the
Oil Industry
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Production is expected to continue to rise, reaching between 80 million and 95
million tonnes in 1981, and between 90 million and 120 million tonnes in 1984.
Output should be at its highest levels from the mid-1980s, but is expected to begin
to decline in the 1990s, although Britain should be a significant producer on a
smaller scale until well into the twenty-first century. The Government’s view is
that it is in the national interest to prolong high levels of UKCS production to the
end of the twentieth century. This requires the deferment of some oil production
from the late 1980s and increased exploration, which the Government is
encouraging. Remaining proven reserves of oil in the UKCS amount to about
1,125 rnillion tonnes while the total remaining reserves of the UKCS could be as
high as 4,075 million tonnes.
TABLE 18: Oil Statistics
million tonnes
1970 1975 1978 1979 1980
Oil production11
land 01 o-i o-i o-i 0-2
offshore — 15 53‘9 77'8 80-3
Refinery output 94-7 86-6 89-2 90-6 79-2
Deliveries of petroleum products
for inland consumption 91-2 82-8 84-1 84-6 71-2
Exports (including re-exports):
crude petroleum i-i o-8 23-1 38-8 38-5
refined petroleum products
and process oils 17-3 I4'3 I4'3 I4'4 I(5 i
Imports:
crude petroleum ioo-8 87-2 65-5 57-9 44 8
refined petroleum products
and process oils 23-1 16-0 14-7 16-0 141
Sources: Department of Energy and Board of Customs and Excise
“’Crude oil plus condensates and petroleum gases derived at onshore treatment plants.
The two leading British oil companies are British Petroleum (BP) and Shell
Transport and Trading, which are the two largest industrial companies in Britain
in terms of turnover. Sales by BP (in which the Government has a 39 per cent
stake) averaged 3-1 million barrels a day of crude oil and petroleum products in
1980, and its gross income was .£25,800 million. It has about 118,200 employees, of
whom 39,500 are employed in Britain.
The British National Oil Corporation, a public corporation set up under the
Petroleum and Submarine Pipe-lines Act 1975, is engaged in two main activities:
as an oil trader on a large scale; and as a substantial enterprise engaged in North Sea
exploration, development and production. It is the largest single trader in UKCS
oil, mainly by virtue of its right, through agreements with other oil companies, to
buy 51 per cent of most of the oil produced on the UKCS, while substantial
quantities of oil are also traded as a result of its equity interests, purchases from third
parties and its activities as agent for the Government in marketing oil received as
royalty payments in kind. The Government has announced plans for a bond, the
return to be linked to the value of the Corporation’s North Sea oil, and also intends
to introduce legislation permitting the sale of equity shares in the Corporation s
oil-producing business. The oil trading activities will remain as a wholly
government-owned operation.
There are several other large oil companies operating in Britain or engaged in
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
235
Land-based
Fields
Refineries
Consumption
International
Trade
Oil Pipelines
work on the UKCS. In addition, there are about 30 independent oil exploration
companies with interests in North Sea developments.
Onshore production of crude oil in Britain is much less significant than offshore
production, amounting in 1980 to about 237,400 tonnes. However, production is
growing substantially as output builds up from Britain’s largest onshore field, at
Wytch Farm (Dorset), which started production in 1979. Eleven other onshore
fields are in operation, notably Bothamsall and Egmanton in Nottinghamshire,
Gainsborough in Lincolnshire and Kimmeridge in Dorset.
In 1981 the crude distillation capacity of Britain’s oil refineries amounted to 130-1
million tonnes a year. All but three of the 20 refineries in operation have a
distillation capacity of over 1 million tonnes a year and are shown on the map on
p 236. Three have a crude distillation capacity of over 10 million tonnes a year:
Stanlow, in Cheshire (16-8 million tonnes); Fawley, near Southampton (14 million
tonnes); and Kent (10-4 million tonnes). Existing refineries are being adapted to the
changing pattern of demand by the construction of new upgrading facilities which
are leading to a higher output of motor spirit and naphtha at the expense of fuel oil.
Deliveries of petroleum products for inland consumption (excluding refinery
consumption) in 1980 totalled 71-2 million tonnes including 19-2 million tonnes of
fuel oil, 19-1 million tonnes of motor spirit, 17-6 million tonnes of gas and diesel oil
(including derv fuel used in road vehicles), and 6-8 million tonnes of kerosene.
Deliveries were 15 -8 per cent less than in 1979, with consumption of all the main
petroleum products, except motor spirit, declining substantially.
With the growth in offshore oil production, the volume of imports of crude oil has
fallen considerably to about two-fifths of the level of the peak year of 1973.
Imports were valued at ^4,292 million in 1980 when the main sources were Saudi
Arabia (which supplied about 39 per cent by value), Kuwait (13 per cent), Iraq (12
per cent) and Norway (7 per cent). The tonnage imported is expected to continue
to decline, although heavy crude oil will still be imported for particular uses as not
all the petroleum products required in Britain can be made from the high-quality
oil produced in the UKCS.
The value of exports of crude oil (which account for about half of UKCS
output) amounted to £4,220 million in 1980 and XT986 million of petroleum
products were also exported. Most oil exports are sent to other countries in
Western Europe.
Oil pipelines brought ashore about 87 per cent of offshore oil in 1980. About 750
miles (1,200 kilometres) of submarine pipeline have been built to bring ashore oil
from a number of North Sea oilfields (see map). Major crude oil onshore pipelines
in operation from harbours, land terminals or offshore moorings to refineries
include those connecting Finnart to Grangemouth, Angle Bay (Milford Haven) to
Llandarcy, Tranmere to Stanlow, Amlwch (Gwynedd) to Stanlow, and Cruden
Bay to Grangemouth. Onshore pipelines also carry refined products to major
marketing areas; for example, a 300-mile (480-kilometre) pipeline runs from
Milford Haven to the Midlands and Manchester.
Research into petroleum technology is carried out mainly by the leading oil
companies, which have extensive research and development programmes in
support of oil exploration and production and on new and improved fuels. All
aspects of production are covered, including the design of production facilities and
Research
50
100 miles
—r~
50
100
“1
150 kilometres
Offshore oilfields in production
or under development
Other named offshore oil finds
Onshore oil finds
Oil refineries (over 1 million
tonnes annual capacity)
Crude oil pipelines
Norway
Magnus
Cormorant N—n '
TernAN#
Cormorant S
ClairA
Sullom Voe
Shetland
Islands
Thistle
Murchison
1— Statfjord
Dunlin
Brent
Hutton
  Ninian
Heather
Beryl B
■sO
Orkney
Islands %^Flotta
Beryl1
ACrawford
Brae »
Piper Aliffany
Claymore W7 Aj0ni/Thelma
Tartan—^AndrewA 'Maureen
eatrice #
_ Buchan -^Forties
Brucei
Islands
Lomond
St Fergus
Amethyst
iwest Sole
Theddl-
bas
Norway
100 miles
—i 1 1
50 100 150 kilometres
Natural gasfields
■ Natural gas pipelines
Gas condensate fields
Terminals
Terminal for
liquefied gas
from Algeria
Frigg
Shetland
Islands
Pipelines for gas
from oilfields
Orkney
Morecambe
Border of UK
Continental
Shelf
m^Canvey Island
London
238
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
GAS
Structure
Production
enhanced oil recovery techniques. Research centres are situated at Sunbury-on-
Thames (BP), Ellesmere Port in Cheshire and Sittingbourne in Kent (Shell), and
Abingdon in Oxfordshire (Esso). The main government research and
development effort in offshore technology is undertaken by the Department of
Energy with the advice of the Offshore Energy Technology Board. In 1981-82 the
Department expects to spend some £22 million in support of offshore technology.
Public supply of manufactured gas in Britain began in the early nineteenth century
in Westminster in central London. For many years gas was produced from coal but
during the 1960s, when growing supplies of oil were being imported, there was a
switch to producing town gas from oil-based feedstocks. However, a more
significant change began in the late 1960s following the first commercial natural
gas discovery in the UKCS in 1965 and the start of offshore gas production in 1967.
Supplies of offshore natural gas grew rapidly and natural gas has now replaced
town gas as the source of gas for the public supply system in Great Britain.
Originally used almost exclusively for lighting, gas is now primarily used for
domestic cooking and heating and for industrial and commercial purposes.
The Gas Act 1948 brought the industry in Great Britain under public ownership
and control in 1949. As a result of the change to natural gas necessitating more
centralised control of production and transmission, the British Gas Corporation
was set up in 1973 under the Gas Act 1972 to replace the Gas Council and area gas
boards. In 1980—81 the turnover of the Corporation and its subsidiary companies
amounted to £4,295 million, of which sales of gas accounted for £3,724 million.
After interest payments and taxation there was a profit of £156 million. Recently
the Corporation has been wholly self-financing. It has repaid all its long-term debt
to the Government and is depositing its cash surpluses with the National Loans
Fund. The Corporation has a large investment programme, amounting to nearly
£4,500 million in the five years from 1981-82, for new production, transmission
and storage facilities. Capital expenditure on projects to increase the availability of
gas has been brought forward to help to meet the growth in demand. The
Corporation has about 106,000 employees.
Natural gas is not available in Northern Ireland and the industry there, which is
controlled by nine municipal undertakings and four private sector companies, uses
town gas produced from oil feedstocks. In 1979 the Government decided that the
large-scale expenditure required for a natural gas pipeline from Great Britain to
Northern Ireland could not be justified and that it could not subsidise the industry’s
operations. Accordingly, most of the gas undertakings have decided that without
government support they would be unable to continue and began a phased run¬
down of the industry. However, there is a possibility of obtaining natural gas from
the Irish Republic’s Kinsale field, and this is being examined to see whether it
would be financially viable for the industry.
In 1980 home-produced natural gas accounted for about 78 per cent of total natural
gas supplies, the remainder coming from Norway and Algeria. Output of natural
gas from the UKCS amounted to 37,290 million cubic metres (mcm), of which
1,325 mcm were used for drilling, production and pumping operations offshore
and 148 mcm supplied direct to the petrochemical industry, leaving 35,817 mcm
available for the public supply gas industry. Production comes mainly from seven
major gasfields: Leman Bank, Indefatigable, Hewett, Viking, Frigg (UK), West
Sole and Rough. In addition, a growing amount of gas produced in association
with oil in oilfields is being brought ashore, particularly from the Piper field. The
British Gas Corporation is undertaking a major investment programme to develop
Transmission
and Storage
Consumption
Research
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES 239
the Morecambe field in the Irish Sea, and the first supplies should be brought
ashore in 1984.
Indigenous offshore natural gas supplies are expected to be sufficient to meet the
major part of British requirements into the twenty-first century. Total proven gas
reserves remaining in known discoveries in the UKCS at the end of 1980
amounted to 739,000 mcm and total possible reserves in known discoveries
amounted to i-6 million mcm.
The national high pressure pipeline system of some 3,500 miles (5,600 kilometres)
provides for the distribution of natural gas. It is supplied by feeder mains from four
North Sea shore terminals and from the Canvey Island terminal which receives
tankers carrying liquefied gas imported from Algeria. Three new pipelines have
been built to carry gas from St Fergus (Grampian) to central Scotland and northern
England, while work on a fourth pipeline began in 1980 and should be completed
in 1982. In the northern North Sea two 225-mile (362-kilometre) pipelines have
been laid between the Frigg field and St Fergus, while the longest offshore pipeline
in the UKCS has been laid for 281 miles (452 kilometres) between the Brent field
and St Fergus. Proposals for further pipelines to bring ashore associated gas from a
number of fields in the central and northern North Sea are being examined by
offshore operators. The gas brought ashore is likely to be separated into natural gas
suitable for distribution through the national pipeline system and gas liquids such
as ethane which are expected to provide an important new feedstock for the petro¬
chemical industry.
V arious methods of storage of natural gas to meet peak load conditions are being
developed including additional storage facilities for liquefied natural gas. The
British Gas Corporation has acquired the partially depleted Rough gasfield and
intends to use it to store natural gas. This is the first time an offshore gasfield will be
used for this purpose.
Sales of gas by the public supply industry in Britain totalled 16,630 million therms
in 1980. About half of all gas sold by the British Gas Corporation to its 15-5 million
consumers is for industrial and commercial purposes, most of the remainder being
for household use. Gas is used extensively in industries requiring the control of
temperatures to a fine degree of accuracy such as the pottery industry and certain
processes for making iron and steel products. In 1980, 5,990 million therms of gas
were sold to industry in Britain, 140 million therms to public supply and transport
power stations and 2,061 million therms to commercial users. The domestic load
includes gas for cookers, space heaters, water heaters and refrigerators, but an
increasingly large part of domestic demand is for gas for central heating. In 1980,
8,439 million therms were sold to domestic users.
The British Gas Corporation conducts research at five research stations into all
aspects of gas supply and use. Its total expenditure on research and development
and on technical service and testing amounted to £51 million in 1980—81. Work
on processes for the manufacture of substitute natural gas (SNG) from either oil or
coal is one of the Corporation’s main research projects and it has a 20-year
programme, expected to cost some ^300 million, to enable it to produce
commercial quantities of SNG when this is required to augment supplies of natural
gas. A demonstration coal gasification plant has been built at the Westfield
Development Centre in Fife and a prototype plant to make SNG from oil is
planned at Killingholme (Humberside) and should be in operation by 1982.
COAL
Coalmining in Britain can be traced back to the thirteenth century. It played a
240
The National
Coal Board
Production and
Productivity
Capital
Investment
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
crucial part in the industrial revolution of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries
and in its peak year, 1913, the industry produced 292 million tonnes of coal,
exported 96 million tonnes and employed over a million workers. In 1947 the coal
mines passed into public ownership by means of the Coal Industry Nationalisation
Act 1946, which set up the National Coal Board (NCB) as a statutory corporation
to manage the industry.
The NCB has, with limited exceptions, exclusive rights over the extraction of coal
in Great Britain, but is empowered to license private operators to work small
mines and opencast sites. It also has powers to work other minerals, where
discoveries are made in the course of searching for, or working, coal; and to engage
in certain petrochemical activities beneficial to the future of the coal industry.
Retail sales remain largely in private hands, although the NCB makes bulk sales to
large industrial consumers.
In 1980-81 the NCB’s income was X4>635 million including sales of coal of
,£3,608 million. Although the NCB made a trading profit of million, it
recorded a net loss of ,£37-8 million after taking account of interest payments and
other items.
At the end of March 1981 there were 211 NCB collieries in operation grouped into
12 areas. The main coal-bearing areas are shown on the map on p 241 and the main
trends in the coal industry are shown in Table 19. In 1980—81 output of 128-4
million tonnes comprised 110-3 million tonnes from the NCB’s deep mines, 15-7
million tonnes from opencast mines and 2-4 million tonnes from licensed mines
and other sources. Britain’s coal industry remains the largest in Western Europe
and is one of the world’s most technologically advanced. Substantial progress has
been made in techniques for mining coal. Developments are concentrated on the
introduction of computerised automatic monitoring and remote control of
machines, together with the installation of heavy-duty equipment, such as
powered roof supports, power loaders and armoured flexible conveyors, capable
of sustained high performance with minimum maintenance. Productivity in terms
of output per manshift rose to 2-32 tonnes in 1980—81, the most productive fields
being in north Nottinghamshire and north Derbyshire with overall output per
manshift of over 3 tonnes.
TABLE 19: Coal Statistics
year ended March
Unit 1971 1976 1979 1980 1981
Output
of which, opencast
Output per manshift":
underground
overall
Inland consumption
Average labour force"
Collieries in operation"
million tonnes
million tonnes
tonnes
tonnes
million tonnes
’000
number
147-5
8-5
2-92
2-24
150-6
287-2
292
126-9
10-7
2-91
2-28
122-3
247-1
241
121- 5
13-8
2-86
2-24
122- 5
234-9
223
125-1
13-4
2-95*
2-3if
128-4
232-5
219
128-4
15-7
2-94
2-32
120-3
229-8
211
Sources: Department of Energy and NCB
a NCB mines only.
^ Figures for this and the following year are not directly comparable with those for earlier years.
The NCB’s capital expenditure amounted to ,£756 million in 1980-81. By far the
largest NCB project is the new mining complex at Selby in North Yorkshire
»Glasgow Edinburgh/
k V 1
^ % Newcastle (
# ^ upon Tyne #
•Carlisle
Durham
'orkington
Leeds
P\S t # Doncaster
0); Sheffield ^
Manchester V'.'.'Nottingham
Birmingham
London
Bristol
Dover
Shetland
Islands
Orkney
Islands
80 miles
•Mil
40
80 100 kilometres
20
60
11 Coalfields
Potential coalfields
242
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
(which will be one of the world’s most advanced deep mines) where production
should build up to the full rate of 10 million tonnes a year by the late 1980s.
Although many good seams of coal have now been worked out due to the early
development of the industry, total coal reserves in Britain are estimated at 190,000
million tonnes, of which about 45,000 million tonnes (sufficient for at least 300
years at present rates of consumption) are considered to be recoverable using
established technology.
Consumption In 1980—81 internal consumption of coal was 120-3 million tonnes of which 73 per
cent was by power stations, 9 per cent by coke ovens and 7 per cent by domestic
users. With an increasing proportion of coal being used by power stations for
electricity generation, NCB sales of coal to them totalled 83 million tonnes in
1980—81. Sales to industry are expected to grow in the long term with increased
application of new coal-utilising technologies and in March 1981 the Government
announced a ^S0 million grant scheme to encourage industry to switch from oil-
fired to coal-fired boilers.
Exports of coal in 1980—81 were 4-8 million tonnes, almost all of which went to
Western European countries, while imports amounted to 71 million tonnes.
Research In 1980-81 the NCB spent ^51 million on research. It has two main research
establishments: the Coal Research Establishment (CRE) at Stoke Orchard
(Gloucestershire), concerned with the combustion and utilisation of coal; and the ;
Mining Research and Development Establishment at Stanhope Bretby
(Staffordshire), for work on mining methods and equipment, particularly
improving the performance and reliability of existing equipment and developing
systems for remote and automatic control. Two CRE processes for converting
coal to liquid fuels and chemical feedstocks have been developed on a small scale.
Design studies for a larger-scale pilot plant, which would process 25 tonnes a day,
have been completed and construction is expected to begin in early 1982.
Agreements to exchange technical information have been signed by the NCB
with several countries. Britain is responsible through an NCB subsidiary for
managing a programme of international coal research projects on behalf of the
International Energy Agency. Five collaborative coal research projects, including a
£50 million project to develop pressurised fluidised bed combustion (a method of
steam-raising for power generation), are based in Britain.
ELECTRICITY The first public supply of electricity in Britain was in 1881, at Godaiming (Surrey).
In 1948 all municipal and private undertakings in Great Britain were acquired
under the Electricity Act 1947 and vested in the British Electricity Authority and
14 regional boards, except in the north of Scotland where they became the
responsibility of the North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board (NSHEB), which
had been set up in 1943. Two subsequent Acts (1954 and 1957) effected a measure of
decentralisation and established the present structure of public corporations.
Electricity from the public supply system is available to all premises in Britain
except for very remote rural households. The public supply industry employs
about 180,000 people and invests some 1,200 million a year. The main
transmission system (national grid) in England and Wales is the largest fully
interconnected power network under unified control in the western world.
The Electricity Council is the central co-ordinating body of the supply industry in
England and Wales. It has a general responsibility for promoting the development
and maintenance of an efficient, co-ordinated and economical system of electricity
supply. Electricity is generated and transmitted by the Central Electricity
Structure
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
243
Consumption
Generation
Generating Board (CEGB), which is responsible for the operation and
maintenance of power stations and the national grid. Twelve area electricity
boards are responsible for distribution and for the retail sale of electricity. In
1980-81 the income of the electricity supply industry in England and Wales was
.£7,511 million and its operating profit was £303 million, although after interest
payments there was a net loss of £272 million.
In Scotland two boards, the NSHEB and the South of Scotland Electricity
Board (SSEB), generate, distribute and sell electricity. The boundary separating
their areas runs from Dumbarton on the Firth of Clyde to Newburgh on the Firth
of Tay (see map p 244). In 1980-81 the income of the SSEB and the NSHEB was
£625 million and £243 million respectively and their net profits were £16-5
million and £11-2 million.
In Northern Ireland generation, transmission and distribution are carried out by
the publicly owned Northern Ireland Electricity Service.
Sales of electricity in 1980 amounted to 229,910 gigawatt hours (GWh). Industry
took 37 9 per cent of the total, domestic users 37-5 per cent and commercial and
other users the remainder. About one-fifth of domestic sales is for space heating,
one-quarter for water heating and one-tenth for cooking. Electricity is used in
industry mainly for motive power, melting, heating and lighting. The electricity
industry supplies 23-1 million consumers of whom 20-5 million are in England and
Wales, i-6 million are supplied by the SSEB, 543,000 by the NSHEB and 528,000
by the Northern Ireland Electricity Service.
Generation by the public supply electricity industry in Britain amounted to
266,380 GWh in 1980. Conventional steam power stations provided 85 6 per cent
of the total, nuclear stations 12-6 per cent and gas turbine, hydro-electric and diesel
plant i-8 per cent. Public supply power stations in Britain consumed 115 million
tonnes of coal equivalent in 1980 of which coal accounted for 78 per cent and oil
10 per cent. The output capacity of the 217 generating stations of the electricity
boards in Britain at the end of 1980 totalled 68,311 megawatts (MW) including
56,581 MW run by the CEGB, 7,826 MW by the SSEB, 2,094 MW by the
NSHEB and 1,770 MW by the Northern Ireland Electricity Service. An analysis of
electricity generation by and output capacity of the public supply system in Britain
is given in Table 20.
Generation of electricity outside the public supply system is relatively small
(18,550 GWh in 1980). The major sources outside the fuel industries are the
chemical, engineering, paper, and iron and steel industries and the nuclear power
plants of the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority (UKAEA) and British
Nuclear Fuels Ltd (BNFL). In 1980 these nuclear plants supplied 3,060 GWh of
electricity to the public supply system.
New large-scale power stations are based on units of 500 MW and 660 MW.
Station capacities have increased and there are 11 stations each with a capacity of
2,000 MW including Kingsnorth (Kent), Europe’s largest mixed-fuel station
burning either coal or oil, while Britain’s largest power station is at Longannet
(Fife), a 2,400 MW station. The larger units have a higher thermal efficiency (the
ratio of the net electrical energy output to the heat energy input) than earlier units
and their introduction, coupled with the closure of less efficient plant, has resulted
in a gradual rise in overall thermal efficiency, leading to substantial savings in fuel
consumption. Average thermal efficiency of conventional steam stations in
England and Wales rose from 20-91 per cent in 1947-48 to 32-18 per cent in
1980—81 when the CEGB’s 20 most efficient stations had an average thermal
efficiency of 33-90 per cent.
^Ffestiniog.
*T rawsfyndd
★
Rheidol
I
r
\
v4
Abe rt haw
B
Berkeley
Oldbury
Hinkley Pt.
A
Hinkley Pt. B
Winfrith.
Fawley
Didcot —
Littlebrook D /. iU,
KmgsnorthJ
Dungeness BO
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
245
Nuclear Power
Nuclear Power
Programme
TABLE 20: Generation by and Capacity of Public Supply Power Stations
Electricity generated
(GWh)
Per cent Output
capacity"
1970
1975
1980
1980 (MW)
Nuclear plant
Other steam plant
Gas turbines and
oil engines
Pumped-storagc plant
Other hydro-electric plant
21,870 26,518 33,462
199,868 219,692 227,973
1,50
1,125
3,856
699
1,153
3,201
45i
1,188
3,309
12-6
85-6
0-2
0-4
1-2
5,767
56,677
3,523
1,060
1,284
Total
228,236 251,263 266,383
100 68,311
Electricity supplied (net)6 210,904 233,236 247,667
Source: Department of Energy
"At 31 December 1980.
b Electricity generated less electricity used at power stations (including electricity used for pumping at
pumped-storage stations).
About 17,000 MW of plant are under construction including a 2,000 MW coal-
fired extension to the Drax station (North Yorkshire) and five nuclear power
stations (see below). Work is also in progress on the construction of a pumped-
storage station at Dinorwic (Gwynedd), which will be the largest of its type in
Europe when completed in 1983 and will have an average generated output of
1,680 MW. (In pumped-storage schemes electricity generated in off-peak periods
is used to pump water to high-level reservoirs from which it descends to drive
turbines, rapidly providing a large supply of electricity at peak periods or to meet
sudden increases in demand.) In 1980 the Government inaugurated a programme
to test the feasibility of combined heat and power and district heating in particular
locations in Britain; detailed feasibility work is in progress in nine areas.
Britain has been developing nuclear power for several decades and in 1956 the
world’s first large-scale nuclear power station, at Calder Hall (Cumbria), began to
supply electricity to the national grid. The Government believes that nuclear
power has a vital role in helping to meet Britain’s long-term energy requirements.
There are 11 nuclear power stations in operation controlled by the electricity
authorities, while four other stations also feed electricity to the national grid: the
two original Magnox stations (both with a capacity of about 200 MW) operated
by BNFL at Calder Hall and Chapelcross (Dumfries and Galloway); and two
experimental or prototype stations run by the UKAEA, at Winfrith (Dorset) and
Dounreay in Highland (the site of the Prototype Fast Reactor).
Under the first commercial programme, nine Magnox stations with a total gross
capacity of about 4,000 MW were commissioned between 1962 and 1971. They
range in size from Bradwell (Essex) with a capacity of 257 MW to the most recent,
Wylfa (Gwynedd), which has a capacity of 990 MW. The second main
programme was based on the Advanced Gas-cooled Reactor (AGR) and the first
two commercial AGRs, 1,320 MW stations at Hinkley Point B (Somerset) and
Hunterston B (Strathclyde), began operating in 1976. Three AGRs (Dungeness B,
246
British Nuclear
Fuels Ltd
Research
Nuclear Research
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Kent, 1,200 MW; Hartlepool, Cleveland, 1,320 MW; and Heysham, Lancashire,
1,320 MW) are under construction and the first units should be commissioned later
in 1981 or 1982. When these stations are fully operational, nuclear power stations
are expected to provide nearly 20 per cent of electricity generated in Britain. Initial
work on two more AGRs, a 1,320 MW extension at Heysham and a 1,320 MW
station at Torness (Lothian), has also started. It is intended that the next reactor
order will be for a pressurised water reactor (PWR) system (the main type in use
overseas), subject to a full public inquiry and to the necessary consents and safety
clearances being obtained; it is proposed that the PWR, a 1,200 MW station,
would be sited at Sizewell (Suffolk). Government policy on fast reactor
development, including whether or not to proceed with a full-scale commercial
demonstration fast reactor, is under review. Any decision to proceed would be
subject to a full public inquiry.
BNFL provides nuclear fuel services covering the design and development of
plant, uranium processing, uranium enrichment, fuel element fabrication,
transport and reprocessing of spent fuel, and the manufacture of specialised fuel
element components. All of BNFL’s shares are held by the UK ALA on behalf of
the Government. BNFL is organised into three divisions covering uranium
enrichment, based at Capenhurst (Cheshire); fuel manufacture at Springfields
(Lancashire); and reprocessing at Sellafield (Cumbria) where valuable unused
uranium, plutonium and radioactive wastes are separated from irradiated fuel. The
company is engaged on a large-scale investment programme costing more than
£3,000 million over the next ten years. This includes the refurbishing and
construction of facilities for storing and reprocessing spent fuel from Magnox
power stations, the construction of further centrifuge enrichment plant at
Capenhurst, the construction of a new thermal oxide reprocessing plant
(THORP) at Sellafield which will deal with spent fuel from Britain’s AGRs and
will also reprocess spent fuel for a number of overseas customers, and the
construction of a plant for vitrifying highly radioactive waste.
The Electricity Council draws up a general programme of research, some of it
direct research carried out by the Council and electricity boards and some of it in
co-operation with selected industrial research associations and through research
contracts placed with universities and other organisations. Much of the work is
done in collaboration with the SSEB, the NSHEB and the Northern Ireland
Electricity Service which contribute towards its cost (£79 million in 1980-81).
Collaboration on research between the supply industry and the plant
manufacturers is co-ordinated by the Power Engineering Research Steering
Committee. The research establishments run by the CEGB comprise the Central
Electricity Research Laboratories at Leatherhead (Surrey), the Berkeley Nuclear
Laboratories in Gloucestershire and the Marchwood Engineering Laboratories on
Southampton Water. Research on distribution technology and electricity
utilisation is undertaken at the Electricity Council Research Centre at Capenhurst
(Cheshire) and by the area boards.
Research on nuclear energy in support of the British nuclear power programme
and for overseas organisations is carried out by the UKAEA. Its work is
undertaken at the Atomic Energy Research Establishment at Harwell
(Oxfordshire), the Culham Laboratory in Oxfordshire, the Atomic Energy
Establishment at Winfrith (Dorset), the Risley (Cheshire) and Dounreay Nuclear
Power Development Establishments, and a number of other UKAEA
establishments. Work connected with the development of the fast reactor and its
fuel cycle represents the largest single programme of the UKAEA.
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
247
RENEWABLE
SOURCES OF
ENERGY
Co-operation in nuclear energy between Britain and other countries takes place
within a framework of intergovernmental agreements and membership of bodies
such as the International Atomic Energy Agency, and through direct links on
research between the UKAEA and equivalent organisations overseas. Britain takes
part in the co-operative research programmes of the European Atomic Energy
Community (Euratom) including one on establishing the feasibility of achieving
controlled thermonuclear fusion. A major component of this programme is the
Joint European Torus (JET) project which is being built at Culham.
Research is in progress on assessing the potential contribution of alternative
sources of energy and the ways in which they may be harnessed. These include sea-
wave, wind, tidal and geothermal (from hot dry rocks) energy for electricity
generation; solar and geothermal (from deep aquifers) energy for low-grade heat
for domestic and industrial uses; and the conversion of biomass (plant tissue) to
fuels. Development in Britain is at an early stage and they are not expected to make
a major contribution to energy supplies in the next few years, although they may
have a greater role in the long term as offshore oil and gas production declines.
Wave energy has considerable potential as an energy source because of Britain’s
long coastline and favourable geographical location. Work is in progress on a
number of types of wave energy device and includes one-tenth scale trials, full-
scale component development, test tank experiments and the study of problems
common to all the devices. Recently a new generation of designs has been
developed.
The Department of Energy and an industrial consortium are working on a
project to establish the technical and economic potential for generating electricity
from wind power. This will involve the construction of Britain’s first large-scale
wind power generator, a 3 MW machine which is expected to be in operation at
Burgar Hill (Orkney) by 1983-84. A smaller machine with a capacity of 250
kilowatts is expected to enter service on the same site in October 1981 and to
provide useful data for the larger machine.
The solar heating programme is intended to identify its potential contribution
and to stimulate the development of cost-effective solar heating technologies,
particularly on water and space heating in houses (the areas of greatest potential
return). Work is also in progress on assessing the potential of biomass as a source of
solid, liquid and gaseous fuels. Where appropriate, demonstration facilities are
being developed and there is considerable collaboration between the Department
of Energy and industry on promising conversion processes.
Research on geothermal energy involves collection of data in the areas
considered to have the most suitable conditions and assessment of the markets for
the relatively low-grade heat produced. The first exploratory borehole was drilled
near Southampton in 1979—80, and a second is being drilled at Larne in Northern
Ireland. The Department of Energy is providing financial support for a project at
the Camborne School of Mines (Cornwall) to improve ways of extracting heat
from underground rock.
Studies have been made of a project for harnessing the tides in the Severn
Estuary, one of the world’s most suitable sites for tidal power, and the Government
is considering the report of an independent committee (which found that it would
be technically feasible) before deciding whether to proceed with the project.
Non-fuel Minerals
Although much of Britain’s requirements of industrial raw materials is met by
imports, non-fuel minerals produced in Britain make an important contribution to
248 BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
SOME MINERALS PRODUCED IN BRITAIN
jCelestite
j Gypsum, anhydrite
Fluorspar
Salt
The maps above are based on county or regional boundaries and not those for geological outcrops
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
249
Exploration
Production
the economy. Output of non-fuel minerals in 1979 totalled 321 million tonnes,
valued at _£ 1,224 million. The total number of employees in the industry was
39,700 in 1979. The geographical locations of some of the more important
minerals produced in Britain are shown on the maps on p 248.
Exploring for and exploiting indigenous mineral resources to meet the needs of
industry are being encouraged by the Government to minimise dependence on
imports. The Mineral Exploration and Investment Grants Act 1972 provides for
financial assistance of up to 35 per cent of the cost of searching for mineral deposits
in Great Britain and on the UKCS and evaluating them for commercial purposes.
Minerals included in the scheme are the ores of non-ferrous metals, fluorspar,
barium minerals and potash. A similar scheme was introduced in Northern Ireland
in 1979. The Institute of Geological Sciences is carrying out a programme for the
Department of Industry aimed at identifying areas with the potential for economic
extraction of minerals. It also has a programme for the Department of the
Environment to assess resources of sand and gravel, and limestone.
The tonnage extracted of some of the main non-fuel minerals produced in Britain
is given in Table 21. In terms of value, production of sand and gravel was estimated
at £346 million in 1979, limestone million, igneous rock ^170 million, clays
^135 million, sandstone £65 million, non-ferrous ores £36 million, chalk £25
million, gypsum and anhydrite ^17 million, iron ore £13 million and fluorspar
£10 million.
TABLE 21: Production of Some of the Main Non-fuel Minerals
million tonnes
1969 1974 1978 1979
Common sand and gravel
Special sands
Igneous rock
Limestone and dolomite
Chalk
Sandstone
Gypsum
Salt including salt in brine
Common clay and shale
China clay, ball clay and potters’ clay
Fireclay
Iron ore
115-5
5-6
35-8
83-9
i8-3
16-5
2-8
8-7
37'i
3 9
I-?
12-3
120-3
60
43-1
102-5
20-5
14-7
3‘5
8-4
30-9
4’3
I-?
3-6
110-2
6-2
35-3
88-8
16-7
13-4
3- 2
7‘3
25'5a
4- 2
i-4‘
4-2
ui-5
5-8
36-2
92-2
16-3
I3'5
3-5
7-8
21-6''
4’4
1-7
4’3
Source: United Kingdom Mineral Statistics 1980
a Production in Great Britain.
Britain is a major world producer of several important industrial minerals
including china clay, ball clay, fuller’s earth and gypsum, and also produces
significant amounts of limestone, dolomite, chalk, fluorspar, potash, salt, industrial
sands, fireclay, common clay and shale, barytes, talc and celestite, mostly for home
consumption. Small amounts of diatomite, slate, calcspar, chert and flint,
anhydrite and china stone are also produced. In 1979 the production of metal from
non-ferrous ores totalled 8,100 tonnes, mainly lead-in-ore (mostly from northern
England) and tin-in-ore, mostly from Cornwall. Small amounts of copper and
zinc are produced in association with the tin. Britain’s only tungsten mine, near
250
England and
Wales
Water Authorities
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Penrith (Cumbria), was reopened in 1977 and its capacity increased in 1978, while
the development of a large tungsten deposit at Hemerdon (near Plymouth) is
under investigation.
Production of sand, gravel and crushed rock (from limestone, igneous rock and
sandstone) as aggregates for use in construction constitutes over half, by value, of
Britain’s output of non-fuel minerals. Britain is the world’s second largest
producer of marine-dredged sand and gravel (18 million tonnes in 1979).
Water
Britain’s water resources are normally sufficient for domestic and industrial
requirements. Supplies are obtained partly from surface sources such as mountain ,
lakes, streams impounded in upland gathering grounds and river intakes (one-third
comes from rivers), and partly from underground sources by means of wells, adits 3
and boreholes. Water consumption in Britain continues to increase and in 1979
amounted to about 19-1 million cubic metres a day (mcmd), comprising 18-4
mcmd of potable (drinkable) water and 0-7 mcmd of non-potable water. Average
daily consumption per head was 343 litres, ranging from 436 litres in Northern
Ireland to 328 litres in England and Wales. About 99 per cent of the population in
Great Britain and 90 per cent in Northern Ireland are connected to the public water
supply system.
In general, householders pay for their domestic water supply, sewerage and
sewage disposal services through charges based on the rateable value of their
property, whereas industrial users are charged for their water supply according to
actual metered consumption.
Responsibility for promoting a national policy for water in England and Wales
rests with the Secretaries of State for the Environment and for Wales and the
Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food who, under the Water Act I973> must
secure the conservation, augmentation, distribution and proper use of water
resources and the provision of water supplies; the provision of sewerage and
sewage disposal services; the restoration and maintenance of the wholesomeness of
rivers and other inland waters; the use of inland waters for navigation and
recreation; the provision of land drainage; and the protection and development of
fisheries.
The National Water Council advises and assists ministers and water authorities, f
It consists of a chairman appointed by the Secretaries of State, the chairmen of the
water authorities, and ten other members with special relevant knowledge, of
whom eight are appointed by the Secretaries of State and two by the Minister of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
Nine regional water authorities in England and the Welsh Water Authority in
Wales are responsible for the management of water services; the development of
water resources; water distribution and supply; the prevention of pollution (see
p 167); sewerage and sewage treatment; river management; land drainage, sea
defences; recreation; and freshwater fisheries. Each water authority has a
membership consisting of a chairman and several members appointed by the
Secretary of State for the Environment (or, in the case of the Welsh Authority, by
the Secretary of State for Wales), a few members appointed by the Minister of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (for the English authorities only) and a majority of
members appointed by the county and district councils within the area of the
authority. District councils usually act as agents of water authorities for the design,
construction, operation and maintenance of public sewers in their areas.
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
Statutory Water
Companies
Supplies
Scotland
Northern
Ireland
Development
Projects
Research
251
There are 29 statutory water supply companies, accounting for about one-quarter
of total supplies, operating under the Water Act 1973. Special arrangements
govern the relationship of statutory water companies to the water authorities.
Some 12,916 million cubic metres of water were abstracted in England and Wales
in 1979 of which public water supplies accounted for 5,846 million cubic metres.
The Central Electricity Generating Board took 4,661 million cubic metres,
primarily for cooling in connection with electricity generation, other industry
2,320 million cubic metres and the remainder was used in agriculture. Water
authorities’ estimated revenue for 1981-82 is some £2,000 million.
Water authorities have powers to restrict consumption when there are severe
water shortages. Under the Drought Act 1976, passed in the driest period of
weather since records began in 1727, they can limit or prohibit the use of water
and, if necessary, restrict domestic water supplies.
In Scotland responsibility for public water supply, sewerage and sewage disposal
rests with the nine regional and three islands councils. Additionally the Central
Scotland Water Development Board, established under the Water (Scotland) Act
1967, is primarily responsible for developing large water sources and supplying
water in bulk to its five constituent member authorities, the regional councils in
Central Scotland.
Scotland has a relative abundance of unpolluted water from upland sources.
About 840 million cubic metres of water were abstracted in Scotland in 1979 for
public water supplies. The Secretary of State for Scotland is responsible for the
promotion of the conservation of water resources and the provision by water
authorities of adequate water supplies, and also has a duty to promote the
cleanliness of rivers and other inland waters and the tidal waters of Scotland.
The Water Service of the Northern Ireland Department of the Environment is
responsible for water supply and sewerage in Northern Ireland. The Department is
also responsible for the conservation, cleanliness and planned development of
Northern Ireland’s water resources. Northern Ireland has abundant potential
supplies of water for both domestic and industrial use. Supplies average about 151
million gallons (686 million litres) of water a day.
Investment is taking place in projects intended to ensure that there is an adequate
water supply to meet the expected rise in demand. Recent projects have included
the Kielder Reservoir in Northumberland, one of the largest man-made reservoirs
in Europe. In 1980—81 capital expenditure on water supply, sewerage and sewage
disposal amounted to some £450 million in England and Wales, about £85
million in Scotland and £27 million in Northern Ireland.
The central research organisation for the water industry in Britain is the Water
Research Centre. Its membership includes water undertakings, consulting
engineers, manufacturers and overseas organisations. It has three laboratories: at
Stevenage (Hertfordshire), which deals with water treatment; Medmenham
(Buckinghamshire), which is concerned with environmental protection (including
water quality and pollution); and at Swindon (Wiltshire), which is concerned with
instrumentation, water mains and sewers. Other organisations conducting
research include the Hydraulics Research Station at Wallingford (Oxfordshire),
which investigates problems and carries out research in civil engineering
hydraulics; the Meteorological Office, which is concerned with rainfall; and the
Natural Environment Research Council which has a number of laboratories
including the Institute of Hydrology and the Institute of Geological Sciences.
<4 Agriculture, Fisheries
and Forestry
Agriculture
Agriculture, one of Britain’s most important industries, supplies nearly 60 per cent
of the country’s food, directly employs 651,000 people, and uses almost 80 per cent
of the land area. In 1980, exports of agricultural produce and machinery, fertilisers
and food products amounted to ^3,890 million. With a long tradition of efficient
farming based upon technological progress and modern research, Britain
pioneered modern farming methods as early as the eighteenth century. The price
support system of the European Community’s Common Agricultural Policy
applies in Britain.
Land Use Nearly four-fifths of the land area is used for agriculture, the rest being mountain
and forest or put to urban and other uses. Although the area for farming is
declining by about 20,000 hectares (49,420 acres) a year to meet the needs of
housing, industry and transport, the land in urban use is less than a tenth of the
agricultural land. There are 12 million hectares (30 million acres) under crops and
grass. In hill country, where the area of cultivated land is often small, large areas are
used for rough grazing. Soils vary from the thin poor ones of highland Britain to
the rich fertile soils of low-lying areas like the fenlands of eastern England. The
cool temperate climate and the even distribution of rainfall ensure a long growing
season; streams rarely dry up and grassland is green throughout the year.
Farms There are about 243,500 farming units, of which about a half are able to provide
full-time employment for at least one person and account for over 90 per cent of
total output. About 30,000 large farms (those capable of providing full-time
employment for at least four people) account for about half of total output. In
Wales and Northern Ireland output from small-scale holdings is more significant
than in the rest of Britain. The average total area of full-time holdings in Britain
(including rough grazings in sole occupation) is about 116 hectares (287 acres).
In England, Scotland and Wales, some 66 per cent of holdings are wholly or
mainly owner-occupied. Nearly all farms in Northern Ireland are owner-
occupied.
Costs,
Productivity
and Capital
Investment
Feedingstuffs amount to about one-third of agriculture’s total cost, and wages and
machinery (including depreciation) to about one-fifth each. The labour force has
continued to decline because of increased mechanisation on larger farms, and
labour productivity rose by over 150 per cent between i960 and 1980. Capital
investment has increased and, in terms of capital per person employed, is almost the
same as manufacturing industry (in 1979, ^8,478 for agriculture and ^^>799 f°r
manufacturing); compared with 60 per cent of that for manufacturing in i960.
Total farming income in 1979 was 1,145 million.
Mechanisation There are over half a million tractors and some 58,000 combine harvesters. A wide
variety of machines for harvesting and preservation of grass are employed
including some 113,000 balers. Horticultural products such as blackcurrants and
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
253
Agricultural
Credit
PRODUCTION
Livestock
brussels sprouts are frequently harvested by machine. Milking machines are used
on the vast majority%of dairy farms. The most expensive machinery can be shared
through machinery syndicates. Over 90 per cent of farms have electricity, the
remainder having their own generators.
In England and Wales, mortgage loans for the purchase or improvement of
agricultural land and buildings are available from the Agricultural Mortgage
Corporation Ltd, a company which has some government financial backing but
raises its funds on the London capital market. The Scottish Agricultural Securities
Corporation Ltd fulfils a similar role in Scotland.
In any part of Britain, the Agricultural Credit Corporation Ltd may provide
guarantees for bank loans; and it may receive government help if necessary.
Britain produces nearly 60 per cent of its total food requirements compared with
some 46 per cent in i960, and about 75 per cent of that which can be grown in
Britain, compared with 60 per cent in i960.
Home production of the principal foods is shown as a percentage by weight of
total supplies (that is, output plus imports less exports) in Table 22.
TABLE 22: British Production as a Percentage of Total Supplies
Food product 1969-71 1980
average (provisional)
Meat 72 84
Eggs 99 99
Milk for human consumption (as liquid) 100 100
Cheese 44 72
Butter 12 58
Sugar (as refined) 34 47
Wheat 46 85
Potatoes for human consumption 92 91
Source: Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food
Despite falling manpower, crop production and yields per hectare have risen.
Between i960 and 1980 the output of wheat and barley a hectare increased by some
50 per cent and 40 per cent respectively, due largely to the introduction of new
varieties. The yield of potatoes a hectare rose by 37 per cent.
There has been a substantial growth in the number of beef cattle and a less
marked increase in dairy cattle, sheep and poultry.
Three-fifths of full-time farms are devoted mainly to dairying or beef cattle and
sheep. Sheep and cattle are reared in the hill and moorland areas of Scotland,
Wales, Northern Ireland and northern and south-western England. Beef fattening
occurs partly in better grassland areas, as does dairying, and partly in yards on
arable farms. British livestock breeders have created many of the cattle, sheep and
pig breeds with world-wide reputations, for example the Hereford and Aberdeen
Angus beef breeds, the Jersey, Guernsey and Ayrshire dairy breeds, Large White
pigs and a number of sheep breeds. Because of developments in artificial
insemination and embryo transfers, Britain is able to export semen and embryos
from high quality donor animals.
Table 23 shows the number of livestock and output of livestock products in
Britain.
254
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
TABLE 23 : Livestock and Livestock Products
Average
1969-71
1978
1979
1980
Cattle and calves (’000 head)
Sheep and lambs (’ooo head)
Pigs (’000 head)
Poultry (’ooo head)
Milk (million litres)
Eggs (million dozen)
Beef and veal (’ooo tonnes)
Mutton and lamb (’ooo tonnes)
Pork (’ooo tonnes)
Bacon and ham (’ooo tonnes)
Poultry meat (’ooo tonnes)
12,622
26,293
8,213
136,889
12,328
1,243
957
225
634
258
580
13,670
29,772
7,728
137,973
15,262
1,192
1,048
238
634
217
729
13,589
29,946
7,864
135,345
15,280
1,185
1,082
240
13,426
3L446
7,815
135,105
15,334
1,104
1,088
284
688
208
747
Dairy and Beef
Cattle
Sheep
Pigs
Poultry
Most dairy cattle in England and Wales and a significant proportion in Scotland
and Northern Ireland are bred by artificial insemination. The average size of dairy
herds in Britain increased from 20 in i960 to 51 in 1980, while average yields of
milk per dairy cow increased from 3,429 litres (754 gallons) to 4,723 litres (1,039
gallons), a rise of 38 per cent. Average consumption of liquid milk per head in 1980
by domestic households was about 123 litres (27 gallons).
Freedom from tuberculosis has reduced herd wastage, and a campaign to
eradicate brucellosis is well advanced. Milk production has been stimulated by
advances in grassland management, new methods of grass conservation and
programmes of controlled use of concentrated feedingstuffs.
About two-thirds of home-fed beef production derives from the national dairy
herd, in which the Friesian breed is predominant. While pure-bred Friesians make
a substantial contribution to Britain’s beef supplies, many other dairy cows are
crossed with beef bulls for beef production.
Britain has a long tradition of sheep production, with more than 40 breeds and
many crosses between these breeds. Research has provided vaccine and sera
protection against nearly all the epidemic diseases.
In hill areas, where winters are usually severe, hardy native breeds are used for
the rearing of lambs. Most of the lambs are transferred each autumn to lowland
farms for fattening, while some ewes are taken to farms at intermediate altitudes
for mating with rams of a larger and more rapidly maturing breed; then, the cross¬
bred female progeny pass on to the milder lowland conditions, where they are
often crossed again with Down rams for fat lamb production. Although lamb
production is the main source of income for sheep farmers, wool is also important.
Pig production is carried on in most areas but is particularly important in eastern
and southern England, north-east Scotland and Northern Ireland. There is an
increasing concentration into specialist units and larger herds. Artificial
insemination is available nationally.
The expansion of the poultry industry has been helped by better husbandry and by
genetic improvements in stock. Since 1971 poultrymeat production has increased
by a quarter and was an estimated 750,000 tonnes in 1980. Some three-quarters of
broilers are in flocks of 50,000 birds or more. In 1980 egg production was an
estimated 1,105 million dozen, the average yield per bird being about 250 eggs a
year. About three-quarters of laying birds are in flocks of 10,000 or more. Britain
remains broadly self-sufficient in poultrymeat and eggs.
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
255
Grassland
Crops
Cereals
Fodder Crops
Grass supplies 60 to 80 per cent of feed requirements of cattle and sheep; its
production has been enhanced by the increased use of fertilisers, irrigation, new
methods of grazing control, and improved herbage conservation for winter feed
and irrigation. Rough grazings are used for extensively grazed sheep and cattle,
producing young animals for fattening elsewhere.
The farms devoted primarily to arable crops are found mainly in the eastern parts
of England and Scotland. Large-scale potato and vegetable production is
undertaken in the fens (in south Lincolnshire and Cambridgeshire), the alluvial
areas around the rivers Thames and Humber and the peaty lands in south
Lancashire. Early potatoes are an important crop in south-west Wales, Kent and
south-west England. High-grade seed potatoes are grown in Scotland and
Northern Ireland.
Table 24 gives figures on the area, harvest and yield of the main crops.
TABLE 24: Main Crops
Wheat: area (’000 hectares)
harvest (’000 tonnes)
yield (tonnes per hectare)
Barley: area (’000 hectares)
harvest (’000 tonnes)
yield (tonnes per hectare)
Oats: area (’ooo hectares)
harvest (’000 tonnes)
yield (tonnes per hectare)
Potatoes: area (’000 hectares)
harvest (’ooo tonnes)
yield (tonnes per hectare)
Oilseed Rape: area (’ooo hectares)
harvest (’ooo tonnes)
yield (tonnes per hectare)
Sugar beet: area (’ooo hectares)
production (’ooo tonnes refined
basis)
Average 1978 1979 1980
1969-71
981 1,258
4,138 6,613
4-22 5-26
2,318
8,251
3-56
374
1,295
3 46
259 215
7,030 7,331
27-1
5
9
1 92
188
L372
7T75
5-23
1,441
8,145
565
2,352 2,347 2,338
9,848 9,613 10,350
4-09
419
180
706
3-92
136
542
3-99
204
6,485
3409 31-79
64
154
2-40
210
74
198
2-67
214
4'43
148
645
4-36
206
7,109
34-5
92
300
3-26
210
951 1,022 1,154 1,106
About half the wheat crop is normally used for flour milling, the remainder mainly
for animal feed. There has been a rapid increase in the oilseed rape crop; the seed is
crushed to obtain vegetable oil and the solid matter left is used for animal feed.
Between 15 and 25 per cent of the barley crop is used for malting and distilling, and
most of the remainder as feed for livestock.
The universal use of combine harvesters has necessitated the installation of
drying and storage facilities on many farms. Such facilities are used on a co¬
operative basis.
The area of traditional fodder crops (field beans, maize and kale) has declined since
i960, farmers having provided winter feed more economically by increased grass
production and improved methods of conservation.
256
Sugar
Horticulture
EXPORTS
MARKETING
AND CO¬
OPERATION
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Sugar from home-grown sugar beet provides about 50 per cent of requirements,
most of the remainder being refined from raw sugar imported from developing
countries under the Lome Convention (see p 72).
In 1980 the land utilised for horticulture was 289,600 hectares (715,620 acres). Fruit
(including dessert apples, pears, cherries, plums, strawberries, blackcurrants and
gooseberries) accounted for 64,000 hectares (158,000 acres), vegetables grown in
the open, excluding potatoes, for 210,200 hectares (519,400 acres), and flowers,
bulbs and nursery stock for 11,300 hectares (28,000 acres) and protected crops
(those grown under glass or plastic) 4,100 hectares (10,130 acres).
Field vegetables account for some 43 per cent of horticultural output and are
widely grown throughout the country; some 20 per cent of the crop is processed.
Most horticultural enterprises are increasing output per unit area with the help of
improved planting material, new techniques and the widespread use of machinery.
Most glasshouses (used for growing tomatoes, cucumbers and lettuce) have been
re-equipped since the mid-1960s with the aid of government grants. Widespread
use is made of automatic control of heating and ventilation, and semi-automatic
control of watering. Experiments are being made to promote energy efficient
glasshouses through the use of thermal screens and other methods. Low-cost plastic
tunnels extend the season for crops like lettuce, celery and strawberries.
Under the European Community’s Common Agricultural Policy (see p 257), a
wide range of horticultural produce is subject to common quality standards.
The Government is seeking to encourage the growth of exports related to
agriculture, which amounted to X3>^9° million in 1980. The British Agricultural
Export Council, which represents the agricultural and horticultural supply
industries, provides British pavilions at the world’s major agricultural exhibitions,
identifies suppliers for customers, and organises programmes of visits and meetings
for overseas customers. Products and services offered by the Council’s members
include all types of machinery, seeds, fertilisers, chemicals, feedingstuffs, livestock
and semen, veterinary preparations and equipment, and consultancy. There is also
a British Food Export Council. One of the world’s largest agricultural events is
the annual Royal International Agricultural Show held at Stoneleigh in
Warwickshire. Virtually every British agricultural machinery manufacturer is
represented at the Show which is also the most important pedigree livestock event
in Britain. The Show’s specialised sections cover livestock improvement, farm
mechanisation, electronics, arable cropping, horticulture, forestry, research and
farming in tropical areas. The Royal Smithfield Show, concerned with
agricultural machinery and meat livestock, is held each year in London.
Agricultural products are marketed by private traders, producers’ co-operatives
and marketing boards, the latter being producers’ organisations (each including a
minority of independent members appointed by agriculture ministers) with
certain statutory powers to regulate the marketing of milk, hops, wool and
potatoes. Most boards buy from producers or control contracts between first
buyers; the Potato Marketing Board, however, maintains only a broad control
over marketing conditions leaving producers free to deal individually with buyers.
For home-grown cereals, meat and livestock, and eggs, there are marketing
organisations representing producer, distributor and independent interests.
Further attention is being given to the marketing of British agricultural produce
in order to ensure that it reaches customers in the best possible condition. A special
panel has been appointed to advise the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food
on marketing and there is a stronger emphasis on the role of co-operatives. Recent
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
257
initiatives include efforts by growers to improve the marketing of onions, carrots
and dessert apples.
Besides marketing there are agricultural co-operatives concerned with
production, services, and the supply of farmers’ requirements. There are, in
addition, machinery syndicates. The Government provides grants for co-operative
production and marketing of agricultural and horticultural produce on the
recommendation of the Central Council for Agricultural and Horticultural Co¬
operation, a statutory body.
ROLE OF THE Four government departments are responsible for the implementation of
GOVERNMENT agricultural policy—the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food in England,
the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland, the Welsh Office
Agriculture Department and the Northern Ireland Department of Agriculture.
Common
Agricultural
Policy
Price Support
Price Guarantees
Market arrangements under the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) of the
European Community are administered by the Intervention Board for
Agricultural Produce, which is responsible to the Agriculture Ministers.
Under the CAP, producers’ returns for most of the main commodities are
supported by a combination of charges on imports into the Community and
internal support prices which are maintained by intervention buying when
necessary. In addition, export refunds enable Community exporters to sell on
world markets when world prices are below Community price levels. There is also
provision for certain direct payments to producers, including beef and sheepmeat
premiums. CAP support price levels, as well as rates of levy and subsidy, are set in
European Currency Units (see p 182) and are converted into the currencies of the
member states at fixed rates of exchange (commonly called ‘green rates’) which do
not vary automatically in line with changes in real exchange rates. The green rates
can thus be out of line with the market rate of exchange between each currency and
the European Currency Unit, giving rise to different real support price levels
in the different member states. Monetary compensatory amounts, based on the
percentage difference between the green and market rates of each currency, are
applied to prevent distortions in trade. They operate as import subsidies and export
levies for countries whose currencies’ market rates are below the green rates, and as
import levies and export subsidies in the opposite case.
The level of support prices under the CAP is reviewed each year. The
Government is seeking significant improvements in the operation of the CAP; it
believes that support prices should be set at levels which do not produce unwanted
surpluses but offer security to reasonably efficient producers. The storage and
disposal of the surpluses adds significantly to Community expenditure.
The Community’s agricultural expenditure is channelled through the European
Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund. The Fund’s guarantee section finances
market support arrangements, while the guidance section provides funds for
structural reform (for example contributions to capital and production grants—see
below). The CAP absorbs over 70 per cent of the Community’s budget; most of
this is attributable to the cost of storage and disposal of agricultural surpluses,
particularly milk products.
Potatoes and wool are not covered by the CAP. Price guarantees for potatoes are
operated through the Potato Marketing Board, and for wool through the British
Wool Marketing Board.
Other Grants and Producers also receive support through certain capital and production grants, some
Subsidies based on Community decisions. Grants are available to assist the development
plans and capital investment of farmers and horticulturists, and there is special
258
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Cost of Support
Smallholdings
and Crofts
Tenancy
Legislation
Safety at Work
Advisory
Services
Animal Welfare
financial help for hill farmers in the form of compensatory allowances for cattle
and sheep. Community assistance may also be made to help improve facilities for
the marketing and processing of agricultural products.
Expenditure in Britain in 1980-81 on price guarantees, grants and subsidies and on
Common Agricultural Policy market regulation was an estimated ,£410 million
and £567 million respectively. About £543 million was reimbursed from the
Community budget.
Local authorities provide nearly 7,660 smallholdings in England and over 990 in
Wales. In England the Government has some 530 lettable holdings. Both may
make loans of up to 75 per cent of required working capital to their tenants. Land
settlement in Scotland has always been carried out by the Government, which
owns and maintains about 154,000 hectares (380,000 acres) of land settlement
estates, comprising some 2,600 crofts and holdings.
Within the crofting areas of Scotland (in Strathclyde, Highland, Western Isles,
Orkney Islands and Shetland Islands) much of the land is held by crofters, tenants
whose holdings are generally either rented at a cost of not more than ,£IC)0 a year
or have an area not exceeding 30 hectares (75 acres). Crofting is administered by
the Crofters Commission, and benefits from government grants for land
improvement and some other agricultural work.
A code of landlord-tenant relationships protects the interests and rights of
landlords and tenants. Rent is a matter for negotiation between landlord and
tenant and may be varied by agreement or, failing agreement, by arbitration. Most
agricultural tenants have the right to contest a notice to quit, which then lapses
unless the landlord obtains consent to its operation from an independent body (in
England and Wales the Agricultural Land Tribunal and in Scotland the Scottish
Land Court). On termination of tenancy, the tenant is entitled to compensation in
accordance with a special code. There are provisions for succession of a close
relative on the death of a tenant.
Practically all farms in Northern Ireland are owner-occupied, but, under a
system known as ‘conacre’, farmers not wishing to farm all their land let it annually
to others. About 20 per cent of agricultural land is so let, and is used for grazing and
potato growing.
The Agricultural Inspectorate of the Health and Safety Executive is responsible for
enforcing regulations relating to the health and safety of workers in agriculture.
These cover such matters as the guarding of field and stationary machinery, work
places, the fitting of safety cabs to tractors, and the use of chemicals.
Free and impartial professional, scientific and technical advice is given to farmers,
growers and landowners in England and Wales by the Government s Agricultural
Development and Advisory Service, in Scotland by three agricultural colleges and
in Northern Ireland by the advisory service, agricultural colleges, research centres
and the specialist divisions of the Department of Agriculture. The purpose of the
advisory services is to exploit and develop new technology, to identify problems
requiring investigation and research, and to contribute to possible solutions.
It is an offence to cause unnecessary pain or distress to livestock on commercial
farms. Regulations control such operations as castration and tail docking, and
require owners of intensive units to arrange for the daily inspection of their stock
and the equipment on which it depends. Compliance is monitored by veterinary
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
259
CONTROL OF
DISEASES AND
PESTS
Animals
Plants
Pests and
Storage
Pesticides
Veterinary
Medicinal
Products
officers of the Agricultural Development and Advisory Service. Other regulations
protect the welfare of farm animals in transit and at markets.
The Farm Animal Welfare Council, an independent body set up by the
Government, keeps under review the welfare of farm animals on agricultural land,
at markets, in transit and at the place of slaughter.
England, Scotland and Wales are free from many serious animal diseases. Foot-
and-mouth disease and swine fever are combated by a slaughter policy applied to
all infected animals and those exposed to infection, and by control over animal
movements during outbreaks. Rigorous measures are taken to eradicate sheep
scab. The incidence of bovine tuberculosis is very low; cattle (except for certain
categories) are tested at regular intervals, and reactors to the test are slaughtered,
compensation being paid to the owners. Compulsory eradication of brucellosis on
an area basis began in 1972 and by March 1981 some 99-5 per cent of all herds were
declared free of the disease. Newcastle disease (fowl pest) is at a low level because of
eradication measures; under new regulations it is being combated by a slaughter
policy.
Strict controls are exercised on the import of animals, meat and meat products,
live poultry and other captive birds, and poultry meat, so as to prevent the
introduction of animal or poultry diseases. Special measures apply to non-farm
animals, which are subject to import licence and six months’ quarantine as a
precaution against the introduction of rabies, and there are severe penalties for
anyone breaking the law. There has been no case of rabies in Britain since 1970.
Northern Ireland has been kept free from the major animal diseases, including
rabies and swine vesicular disease, and in 1971 was declared brucellosis-free.
Professional advice and action on the control of animal disease and the welfare of
farm livestock is the responsibility of the State Veterinary Service which in
England and Wales has extensive laboratory facilities and investigation centres
performing specialist work and advising private practitioners. In Scotland three
agricultural colleges provide the laboratory service, and in Northern Ireland the
Department of Agriculture has its own veterinary service, supplemented by a
central veterinary laboratory.
The agricultural departments are responsible for limiting the spread of plant pests
and diseases present in Britain and for preventing the introduction of new ones.
They also issue the health certificates required by other countries to accompany
plant material imported from Britain. Certification schemes are operated to
encourage the development of healthy, vigorous and true-to-type planting stocks.
The Government’s Agricultural Science Services undertake research and provide
advice on harmful mammals and birds and on insects, mites and moulds associated
with grain and other stored food products.
Pesticides must be cleared for safety under the Pesticides Safety Precautions
Scheme. Clearance for a product is not given unless the Government, advised by
an expert committee, is satisfied that a product can be used without risk to people,
livestock and domestic animals, and with minimal risk to wildlife, provided
recommended precautions are taken.
The manufacture, sale and supply of veterinary medicinal products is prohibited
except under licence. Licences are issued by the agriculture ministers, who are
advised on safety, quality and efficacy by the Veterinary Products Committee
comprising independent experts.
260
EDUCATION
AND
TRAINING
AGRICUL¬
TURAL
RESEARCH
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
University and other degree and postgraduate courses provide training in the
scientific and technological aspects of agriculture and horticulture, the emphasis
being on science and economics. There are also degree and postgraduate courses in
veterinary medicine. Science-based sandwich courses, leading to a Higher
National Diploma and available at agricultural colleges, are designed for students
wishing to enter farming or horticulture with a good knowledge of the manageriaL
and technological aspects of the industry. The three-year Ordinary National
Diploma, also organised on a sandwich basis, is a general course in agriculture with
some colleges offering special subjects such as arable farming, livestock production,
dairy farming and farm mechanisation. In addition there are one-year full-time
National Certificate courses providing a basic education in agriculture or
horticulture, and a one- or two-year part-time practical course in the basic
principles of agriculture, horticulture or forestry followed by more specialised
study. In Scotland new courses have replaced the Higher and Ordinary National
Diplomas.
In Great Britain the Agricultural Training Board runs an apprenticeship and
craft training scheme for young people entering agriculture and horticulture,
which includes release to attend part-time courses. Shorter courses in craft skills
training are available for others working in agriculture and horticulture. In
Northern Ireland agricultural training courses are the responsibility of the
Department of Agriculture.
Agricultural research is carried out mainly by the Agricultural Research Council,
the Government and private industry. Advice from the agricultural and food
industries is obtained through a joint consultative organisation.
The Council is an autonomous body conducting its own research and
supporting research in universities and elsewhere. It has eight institutes dealing
with topics such as animal breeding, animal diseases, animal physiology and crop
growth. Recent achievements include the development of high yield varieties of
wheat, and of a disease-free range of root stocks on which fruit trees can be grafted.
In addition, the Council is responsible for 15 independent state-aided research
institutes and has four units associated with universities. In Scotland there are seven
independent institutions financed by the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries
which is advised by the Council.
Applied and basic research is carried out by the Agricultural Development and
Advisory Service. At its Central Veterinary Laboratory, investigations are
undertaken into most diseases affecting farm livestock and into the making and
supply of certain biological products. There is also a laboratory concerned with
plant health, the detection of pesticide residues in treated crops and crop products,
and the formulation of pesticides. Other laboratories do research work on insects,
mites and fungi affecting food storage and on harmful mammals and birds; they
are also concerned with the safe use of pesticides. Research in Scotland and
Northern Ireland is promoted by the agricultural departments. The Ministry of
Agriculture’s Chief Scientific Officer (Food) and the Food Science Division
provide advice on scientific and technical aspects of food, particular attention
being paid to safety, quality and nutritional value.
Fisheries
Britain is one of Europe’s most important fishing nations. The fishing industry
provides about 70 per cent of British fish supplies, and is an important source of
employment and income in a number of ports. In 1980 there were 16,700
fishermen in regular employment and about 6,600 occasionally employed. It is
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
26l
Fish Caught
The Fishing
Fleet
Administration
Aid for the
Industry
estimated that for every fisherman there are between three and five jobs in
associated trades. The maintenance of fishing opportunities through conservation
of stocks and the preservation of British fishermen’s access to traditional grounds
are prime Government concerns.
Demersal fish caught on or near the bottom of the sea account for about 51 per cent
by weight of the total British catch, pelagic fish caught near the surface for 40 per
cent and shellfish for 9 per cent. In 1980 landings of all types of fish (excluding
salmon and trout) by British fishing vessels totalled 759,050 tonnes. Cod accounted
for 31 per cent of the total value of demersal and pelagic fish landed while haddock
(18 per cent), mackerel (13 per cent) and plaice (7 per cent) were the other most
important sources of earnings to the industry. Home production of fish meal in
1980 was about 57,000 tonnes and fish oil production about 14,000 tonnes.
The British fish farming industry is a substantial and expanding business mainly
concerned with the production of salmon and trout although shellfish and eel
farming are growing. Estimated production in 1980 was 6,000 tonnes of trout and
700 tonnes of salmon.
Experiments are being carried out in the catching and processing, for human
consumption and for animal feed, of previously under-exploited fish (for example,
blue whiting and scad), of which there are large stocks around the British Isles.
Imports of fresh, frozen, cured and canned fish and shellfish in 1980 totalled
441,760 tonnes, those of fish meal 214,560 tonnes and those of fish oils 238,510
tonnes. Exports and re-exports of fish and fish products amounted to 376,200
tonnes. Following a British initiative, member states of the European Community
have agreed to ban from January 1982 the import of primary whale products in
order to help to conserve whale populations.
Some 90 per cent of the British catch is taken by the 6,500 vessels of the inshore fleet
employing a variety of catching methods. The deep-sea fleet, comprising 250
larger vessels, has been reduced in number as fishing opportunities and the
profitability of operations in distant waters have declined. Recently mackerel
stock off the west coast has provided an alternative fishery for the larger vessels.
The European Community provides funds for the construction and modernisation
of fishing vessels.
The agriculture departments are responsible for the administration of legislation
concerning the fishing industry and for fisheries research. The safety and welfare of
crews of fishing vessels and other matters common to shipping generally are
provided for under legislation administered by the Department of Trade.
The White Fish Authority and the Herring Industry Board, which provide
grants and loans to the industry, are being replaced by the Sea Fish Industry
Authority in October 1981. Financial aid is available for the purchase of new
fishing vessels, vessel improvements, the provision and improvement of processing
plants, cold stores and ice plants and towards the formation of fishermen’s
co-operatives. Other functions include research and development, training,
dissemination of information, publicity and promotion and the provision of
consultancy services, including those to developing countries.
In 1980-81, because of increased operating costs, falling prices and the absence of
an agreed European Community common fisheries policy, the Government gave
an extra X1?'1 million in aid to the industry bringing total government aid to
X37'6 million. A further £25 million was announced in March 1981 to add to the
£,19-7 million budgeted for 1981—82.
262
Fishery Limits
Common
Fisheries Policy
Marketing
Policy
Fisheries
Research
Freshwater
Fisheries
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Since 1977 Britain’s fishery limits, like those of other Community member states
outside the Mediterranean, have extended to 200 miles (or, where the distance
between two countries’ coasts is less than 400 miles, up to the median line or agreed
boundary between the two countries).
Community countries, and non-Community countries having temporary
agreements with the Community, have the right to fish up to Britain’s 12-mile
limit. Designated Community countries may also fish in certain areas of Britain’s
6 to 12 mile zone. The only non-Community country which may fish in this zone
is Norway, which has very restricted rights in some areas off the Scottish coast.
No foreign vessels may fish within Britain’s 6-mile limit.
The Community has negotiated exchanges of fishing rights within member states
waters for reciprocal rights within the waters of several non-member countries.
In 1981 reciprocal agreements were in force with Norway and Spain, and
arrangements were agreed with the Faroe Islands and Sweden. Non-reciprocal
agreements were in force with Senegal and Guinea-Bissau and a framework
agreement was reached with Canada. Quotas were also established in United
States and International waters in the north-west Atlantic.
With the extension of fishery limits to 200 miles, new arrangements became
necessary to control Community fishing in the greatly extended area. Britain has a
particularly strong interest in such control, since about 60 per cent of the total catch
within the 200 mile limits of member states is taken in British waters, while the loss
of fishing opportunities in distant waters (such as Iceland) has reduced the British
industry’s total catch more than that of other Community states. As a result,
Britain is looking for adequate access arrangements and a fair share of the quotas
proposed for the fish stocks around its coasts and in other countries’ waters.
There is also a need for effective and enforceable conservation measures within
the waters of member states. The Government is continuing to work towards a
common fisheries policy which meets these needs. However in the absence of an
agreed Community policy, it has introduced a number of conservation measures
where these have proved necessary. A series of measures on fish conservation was
adopted on a permanent basis in September 1981.
The Community’s fishing industry is also subject to a common organisation of
the market which aims at assisting in the adaptation of supplies to marketing
requirements, while ensuring, as far as possible, a reasonable return to producers,
by means of the establishment of a grading and price system and rules on
competition. Provision is also made for the protection of the Community market
against disruption by imports from non-member countries. Market organisation is
largely in the hands of the industry itself through producers’ organisations. Intra-
Community fish trade is tariff-free and there is a common external tariff.
The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has a research directorate
comprising laboratories dealing with marine and freshwater fisheries, marine
pollution, fish farming, and diseases. Technological developments in fish
processing are investigated by a research station at Torry, Aberdeen. There are also
five seagoing research vessels. In Scotland the Department of Agriculture and
Fisheries maintains laboratories on marine and freshwater fisheries research as well
as four seagoing vessels. The two research programmes are co-ordinated.
Department of Agriculture laboratories in Northern Ireland monitor marine and
freshwater fisheries.
The most valuable freshwater fish are salmon and sea-trout. Sea fishing for salmon
is prohibited in waters outside a limit of six miles from the coasts of the British Isles.
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
263
The Forestry
Commission
and Forestry
Policy
Private
Forestry
Forestry
Education and
Research
Within six miles, drift netting and certain other methods are prohibited off the
coast of Scotland but are permitted under licence off England, Wales and Northern
Ireland. In Scotland, salmon fishing is a private right. In England and Wales, water
authority licences are required for coastal and estuary netting.
Forestry
Woodland covers an estimated 2-i million hectares (5-2 million acres), about 9 per
cent of the total land area; 43 per cent is in England, 43 per cent in Scotland, 11 per
cent in Wales and the remainder in Northern Ireland. The Government supports
the continued expansion of forestry in order to reduce dependence on imports.
The area of productive forest in Great Britain is 1,749,000 hectares (4,322,000
acres), 51 per cent of which is managed by the Forestry Commission (see below).
The annual rate of expansion is currently 15,800 hectares (39,000 acres) by the
Commission, mainly in Scotland, and some 8,600 hectares (21,200 acres) by
private woodland owners. The Commission’s programme includes considerable
planting in upland areas, and consists mainly of conifers because of the difficult site
conditions encountered.
Total employment in state and private forests in Great Britain was estimated at
19,000 in 1980.
Except during the two world wars, when felling was abnormally heavy, home
woodlands have until recent years made only a limited contribution to the nation’s
consumption of wood and wood products, as less than half of the Commission’s
woodlands are yet in production. Britain imports over 90 per cent of its needs.
The Forestry Commission is the national forestry authority in Great Britain. The
Commissioners comply with directions given by the Minister of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food and the Secretaries of State for Scotland and Wales. In pursuing
timber production, forestry policy also takes into account amenity, environmental
and employment criteria, and the Commission’s activities include wildlife con¬
servation, the landscaping of plantations, and the provision of facilities for
recreation. The Commission has also encouraged the setting up of some 20 major
new timber-using industries.
The Government is proposing to give the Commission greater commercial
freedom to sell some of its land and plantations thereby reducing its call on public
funds. However, the Commission will be in control of the disposals programme,
the scale and location of which will be at its discretion. The Commission is financed
partly by the Government and partly by receipts from sales of produce, rentals and
other sources. Income from timber is expected to increase as production doubles in
the next 20 years, probably leading to a reduction in grant-in-aid.
Private woods comprise 56 per cent of the total forest area in Great Britain; a
substantial number are in ownerships of under 100 hectares (250 acres) in extent.
Effective management is encouraged by grants administered by the Forestry
Commission, in return for which owners accept an obligation to manage their
woodlands in accordance with sound forestry practice.
Degree courses in forestry and associated studies are provided at three universities
and there are supervisory, craft and managerial level courses. The Forestry
Training Council, set up by the Forestry Commission, assists the development of
systematic training and the co-ordination of training in the state and private
sectors. The Furniture and Timber Industry Training Board is concerned with
training for private-sector employees in the home timber trade.
264
Forestry in
Northern
Ireland
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Forestry research, including that on ‘Dutch’ elm disease, is carried out by the
Forestry Commission at its two research stations. Aid is also given for forestry
research work in universities and other institutions, including the Commonwealth
Forestry Institute in Oxford. A laboratory at Princes Risborough in
Buckinghamshire conducts research into the quality and uses of home-grown
timber.
The Department of Agriculture may acquire land for afforestation and give
financial and technical assistance for private planting. It has introduced measures to
control felling, fires near plantations and damage by certain animals. Financial
provision is made annually by Parliament.
The state forest area has grown steadily since 1945- By 1981 59>50° hectares
(145,800 acres) of plantable land had been acquired, of which 54,000 hectares
(133,400 acres) were planted. There were about 13,000 hectares (32,100 acres) of
privately owned forest. Some 600 people work in state and private forests.
jjj Transport and
Communications
The application of technological developments to Britain’s transport and
communications network is continually increasing the speed and convenience of
its operations. Major improvements in the movement of passengers and freight
have resulted from the construction of a network of motorways, the extension of
fast inter-city rail services (such as those operated by high speed trains), the
modernisation of many ports (those being used in North Sea oil and gas activities
having re-equipped rapidly to handle tankers and supply boats), the increased use
of containers and other modern methods in shipping, the use by airlines of larger or
speedier aircraft (including the Concorde supersonic aircraft) and expansion
schemes at many airports. Communications are benefiting from developments in
microelectronics, computer and satellite technology, and advances in materials, for
example, the invention of optical fibres used in telecommunications.
Large sectors of transport and communications operations are publicly owned,
but in pursuing its policy of reducing state intervention as much as possible, the
Government is arranging for the introduction of private capital into a number of
them.
Inland Transport
Passenger and freight traffic is carried mainly by road. At the end of 1980 there
were 19-2 million vehicles licensed for use on the roads of Great Britain, 3-1 per
cent more than a year earlier. Of these 151 million were motor cars, i-8 million
road goods vehicles, 1-4 million motorcycles, scooters and mopeds, and 110,000
public road passenger vehicles (including taxis). Private ownership of cars has been
growing rapidly for many years and the car is the most popular form of travel.
Buses and coaches account for about 11 per cent of passenger mileage within Great
Britain, rail for 7 per cent and air o-6 per cent. Road haulage has a dominant
position in the movement of inland freight, accounting for about 85 per cent of
tonnage carried and for some three-quarters of tonne-kilometres. Railways and, to
a lesser extent, pipelines and inland waterways are important in carrying certain
types of freight, particularly bulk goods. The railways and much of the bus
industry are publicly owned, but road haulage is almost entirely in the hands of
private enterprise.
Transport policy rests on the fundamental aims of promoting economic growth
and higher national prosperity, and ensuring a reasonable level of personal
mobility, while improving safety, particularly on the roads, minimising damage to
the environment and using energy economically. Britain is taking an active part in
the development of a common transport policy by the European Community.
Motor vehicle traffic in Great Britain rose in 1980 by 3-4 per cent to a record
285,220 million vehicle-kilometres, of which cars and taxis accounted for 81 per
cent. Improvements are continually being made in the network of trunk roads
(which form a basic network linking major centres of population, industrial areas
ROADS
266
Administration
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and ports) to accommodate the growth in traffic. A number of motorways (roads
specially designed for high speed traffic) have been built, while other
improvements, such as the construction of by-passes, have helped to make
travelling easier and faster, particularly over long distances and between cities.
Congestion on inter-urban roads has been reduced or eliminated and many towns
and villages have been relieved of heavy through traffic. Although motorways
account for less than 1 per cent of road mileage, they carry 10 per cent of traffic
including over one-fifth of heavy goods vehicle traffic. In 1980 the road network
totalled over 225,540 miles (362,980 kilometres), of which nearly 1,670 miles
(2,680 kilometres) were motorways. Motorways and other major roads are shown
on the map at the end of the book.
TABLE 25: Road Mileage
Public
roads‘,
Trunk
roads"
(including
motorways)
Trunk motorways*
in usec under
construction
England
Scotland
Wales
Northern Ireland
160,745
30,726
19,473
14,600
6,210
1,988
1,070
398
i,37i
135
66
70
39
Britain
225,544
9,666
1,642
47
Sources: Department of Transport, Northern Ireland Department of the Environment, Scottish Development
Department and Welsh Office
a As at April 1980.
b As at April 1981.
c In addition, there were 61 miles (98 kilometres) of local authority motorway in use in England and 14
miles (22 kilometres) in Scotland.
The main aims of the Government’s programme to improve trunk roads are to
meet the needs of industry and to keep heavy lorry traffic away from towns and
villages. In England the main priorities are the M25 London orbital route and
certain routes to serve industry and the major ports. In Wales the priorities are to
complete the M4 motorway across south Wales, reconstruct the coast road in
north Wales and improve roads which are important for industrial redevelopment.
Most of the remaining links in the motorway/dual carriageway network in central
Scotland have been completed. Accordingly, the programme is being directed
mainly to the improvement of other strategic routes, particularly those to the
north and north-east which are important for North Sea oil-related activities and
some of the west-coast routes, and also to the construction of more by-passes. In
Northern Ireland the emphasis is on building new links to the motorway network,
constructing more by-passes, and improving roads in the Belfast area and other
urban areas. Priority for new roads in urban areas of Great Britain is being given to
those designed to meet the needs of industry and commerce, serve new industrial
or housing estates, provide links to the national trunk road network or to
complement traffic management schemes.
Responsibility for trunk motorways and other trunk roads in Great Britain rests in
England with the Secretary of State for Transport, in Scotland with the Secretary
of State for Scotland and in Wales with the Secretary of State for Wales. The costs
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
267
Road Safety
of construction, improvement and maintenance are paid for by central
Government. The highway authority for non-trunk roads in England and Wales
is, in general, the county council in whose area the roads lie, and in Scotland the
regional or islands council. The Government is in the process of transferring to
local authorities the responsibility for those trunk roads which have lost their
importance as major through routes following the completion of nearby
motorways. In Northern Ireland the Northern Ireland Department of the
Environment is responsible for public roads and their maintenance and
construction.
Research into all aspects of road construction, traffic engineering and safety, and
into problems associated with transport is carried out by the Transport and Road
Research Laboratory, jointly responsible to the Department of Transport and the
Department of the Environment.
Great Britain’s accident record is considerably better than that of most other
countries even though it has one of the highest densities of road traffic in the world.
In 1980, 6,000 people were killed on the roads, about 79,000 seriously injured and
242,000 slightly injured. A comprehensive framework of legislation embodied in
the Road Traffic Acts and summarised in the Highway Code (which sets out the
standard of conduct for road users) has contributed to the decline in casualty rates.
Other factors have been better road design and construction, segregating vehicles
from pedestrians, and campaigns conducted nationally by government
departments and the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents and locally by
local authorities to persuade people to take greater care on the roads. In recent years
major publicity campaigns have been undertaken to increase the wearing of seat
belts, to reduce casualties to child pedestrians and to riders of motorcycles, and to
reduce the incidence of drinking and driving.
Comprehensive regulations govern the design of vehicles, their use on the roads,
and the maintenance and testing of their mechanical condition. Under a national
‘type approval’ scheme, all new cars must be of a type that has been certified as
meeting the required standards. In Great Britain private cars and light vans which
are three or more years old must be tested annually at private garages authorised as
test stations. (In Northern Ireland private cars seven or more years old are tested at
official vehicle inspection centres.) Heavy goods vehicles are subject to annual tests
carried out at Department of Transport testing stations.
Minimum ages are laid down for driving: 16 for driving invalid carriages and
mopeds; 17 for cars and other passenger vehicles with nine or fewer seats
(including that of the driver), motorcycles and goods vehicles not over 3-5 tonnes
maximum permissible weight; 18 for goods vehicles over 3-5 but not over 7-5
tonnes; and 21 for passenger vehicles with over nine seats and goods vehicles over
7-5 tonnes. All drivers of motor vehicles are required to pass the driving test before
being granted a full licence to drive. Until they pass the test they must hold a
‘provisional’ licence, display ‘L’ (learner) plates on their vehicle and be
accompanied while driving (with certain exceptions) by a qualified driver. There
are national speed limits of 70 mph (113 km/h) on motorways and other dual
carriageway roads, and 60 mph (97 km/h) on single carriageway roads, while in
built-up areas a general limit of 30 mph (48 km/h) applies. To meet local needs the
urban limit can be raised and the other limits lowered on specific stretches of road.
A wide range of other measures directed primarily towards road safety include
legislation and publicity to discourage drinking and driving, computer-controlled
warning signals on most busy motorways to inform motorists of advisory speed
limits in adverse conditions and of lane closures, and regulations governing the
carriage of dangerous goods by road. The Transport Act 1981 contains a number
268
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
of provisions designed to improve road safety. Measures to increase the
effectiveness of the law on drinking and driving include the virtual replacement of
blood testing by breath testing; the statutory limit of breath alcohol concentration
for drivers is 35 microgrammes of alcohol in 100 millilitres of breath. Provisions to
improve the safety of motorcyclists include the restriction of learner drivers to the
less powerful machines, a new two-part competence test and a limit on the
duration of the motorcycle provisional licence. The totting-up procedure of
licence endorsements for driving offences has been replaced by a more
discriminating system whereby drivers are given penalty points, varying in
number according to the severity of the offence, and are liable to disqualification
from driving for a period if they incur a set number of points within three years.
The Act also provides for the compulsory wearing of seat belts.
Traffic in Traffic management schemes are being operated in many city and town centres to
Towns minimise congestion and its environmental effects, and to improve road safety.
They may include one-way systems, streets reserved for pedestrians, bus priority
measures, parking controls and limited road construction. In most town centres
parking is restricted and waiting limits apply. Major city centres often have
controlled parking zones, where payment is required for on-street parking. Many
towns have shopping precincts, some of them enclosed, which are specially
designed for pedestrians and from which motor vehicles are excluded.
Urban traffic control systems, which link traffic signals and some traffic signs to
a central computer, represent an important addition to local authorities ability to
control traffic. A new method for large towns and cities of continuously adapting
traffic signal response to the flow of traffic is being used in Coventry. It will also be -
used in replacing a number of signals in London s urban traffic control system
which, with some 1,200 sets of traffic signals, is the largest traffic management
scheme in Britain and one of the largest in the world. A compact form of urban
traffic control, sponsored by the Department of Transport and suitable for use in
smaller towns, is operating in Torbay and Hull.
ROAD Road haulage traffic in terms of tonne-kilometres has, in general, increased and
HAULAGE reached about 93,100 million tonne-kilometres in 1980. Actual goods vehicle
traffic has, however, grown much less because of a move towards larger and more
efficient vehicles carrying heavier loads—about 67 per cent of the traffic, in terms
of tonne-kilometres, is carried in vehicles of over 28 tonnes gross laden weight.
Much of the traffic is moved over short distances, with more than three-fifths of
the tonnage being carried on hauls of 5° kilometres (31 miles) or less. Public
haulage (private road hauliers carrying other firms’ goods) accounts for 61 per cent
of freight carried in Great Britain in terms of tonne-kilometres. The growth in
road haulage has been concentrated on long-distance traffic, particularly
international road haulage. However, there have been environmental problems
caused by lorries through intrusion, noise and the emission of fumes. An
independent inquiry on the effects of the lorry on people and the environment has
recommended a number of measures to bring large cost savings and give greatly
increased protection to the environment and the public; they include an increase in
the maximum permitted weight of goods vehicles (regulations on axle weights
would reduce damage to roads) together with higher safety standards and higher
taxes on the heaviest lorries.
Structure of the Road haulage is predominantly an industry of small, privately owned businesses.
Industry Many of the 126,300 holders of an operator’s licence in 1980 had only one vehicle
and the average size of a vehicle fleet is only about four. The biggest operator in
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
269
Licensing and
Other Controls
PASSENGER
SERVICES
Buses and
Coaches
Services
Great Britain is the National Freight Company (NFC). Under the Transport Act
1980 the status of the NFC was changed from a public corporation into a limited
company with shares owned by the Government as a first step in its transfer to
private ownership. In Northern Ireland the biggest operator is Northern Ireland
Carriers Ltd, ownedjointly by the Northern Ireland Transport Holding Company
and the NFC.
Those operating goods vehicles over 3-5 tonnes gross weight (with certain special
exemptions) require an operator’s licence, obtained on showing good repute and
ability to maintain vehicles properly and control loading and drivers’ hours.
Licences are divided into restricted licences for firms carrying their own goods and
standard licences, sub-divided into ‘national only’ and ‘international’, for hauliers
operating for hire or reward. (In Northern Ireland operators carrying their own
goods do not require a licence.) Proof of professional competence is required to
obtain a standard licence.
Regulations lay down limits on the hours worked by drivers of goods vehicles,
and there are also minimum rest periods. The European Community regulation
requiring the use of the tachograph (a device which automatically records a
vehicle’s speed and distance covered, driving time and stopping periods) in most
goods vehicles over 3-5 tonnes gross weight in Great Britain is due to be phased in
by December 1981. International road haulage is governed mainly by bilateral
agreements, which are in force with 25 other European countries.
Bus and urban railway services in Britain are provided mainly by publicly owned
operators, coach services partly by publicly owned bodies, and taxis and hire cars
almost entirely by privately owned businesses.
In the public sector in Great Britain 17,000 vehicles are operated by the National
Bus Company (which operates in England and Wales through 35 locally based
subsidiaries and has a network of long-distance coach services), 3,800 by the
Scottish Transport Group (which operates the main bus services in Scotland
outside the major cities and also runs ferries to the islands off the west coast of
Scotland), 10,700 by the seven passenger transport executives (responsible for the
day-to-day management and operations of local transport in Strathclyde and the
metropolitan counties of Greater Manchester, Merseyside, West Midlands, Tyne
and Wear, South Yorkshire and West Yorkshire), 6,000 by the London Transport
Executive and 5,800 by other local authority undertakings. There are some 5,500
privately owned undertakings (of which the majority have fewer than five
vehicles) comprising about 28,600 vehicles; only a small proportion of these
operators are concerned with scheduled bus services. Double-deck buses are an
important feature of urban passenger transport in Britain and there are nearly
26,000 in operation. In addition, there are 47,000 single-deck buses and coaches,
and nearly 80 trams (at Blackpool and Llandudno which have Britain’s only
remaining tramway systems).
In Northern Ireland almost all road passenger services are provided by
subsidiaries of the Northern Ireland Transport Holding Company. Citybus Ltd
operates services in the city of Belfast and Ulsterbus Ltd operates most of the
services in the rest of Northern Ireland. These companies have 330 and 930 vehicles
respectively.
There has been a long-term decline in the use of bus and coach services (except in
the area of contract and private hire), mainly because of the growth in ownership
of private cars, and in 1980 some 6,800 million passenger road journeys were made
270
Taxis
Urban
Railways
RAILWAYS
Operations
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
in Great Britain, 26 per cent fewer than in 1970. Bus operators have taken action to
contain costs and to improve productivity by introducing larger buses, increasing
the proportion of bus services operated by one man and reducing or rationalising
services. Many uneconomic bus services have been withdrawn, particularly in the
rural areas. However, in some rural areas new ‘postbus’ services (Post Office
minibuses carrying mail and passengers), community-run minibus services or
social car-sharing schemes have been introduced.
One of the aims of the Transport Act 1980, which contained the biggest series of
reforms in road passenger transport for 50 years, was the encouragement of
competition and new types of service. It removed restrictions on operating long¬
distance express coach services and excursions and tours, allowing free competition
between operators. The result has been reductions in long-distance coach fares and
a sharp rise in the number of services and of passengers carried.
Great Britain is divided into 11 traffic areas, each with a body of traffic
commissioners responsible for licensing operators of buses and coaches to ensure
their suitability for carrying the public safely. In addition, local bus services cannot
be provided except under road service licences. The commissioners are required to
grant applications for licences unless satisfied that to do so would be against the
public interest.
County councils (regional and islands councils in Scotland) have responsibilities
to co-ordinate public transport and power to pay revenue support.
There are about 35,000 licensed taxis and 70,000 licensed taxi drivers in Great
Britain, mainly in urban areas; London has some 12,500 and 17,000 respectively. In
London and a number of other cities taxis must be purpose-built to conform to
very strict requirements and drivers must have passed a test of their knowledge of
the area. Hire cars with drivers may be booked only through the operator and not
hired on the street; in some areas hire cars are licensed.
There are underground railway services in three British cities: London, Glasgow
and Liverpool. London Transport has 4,350 railway cars and serves 278 stations,
while its trains operate over 260 miles (418 kilometres) of railway, of which about
100 miles (161 kilometres) are underground.
Urban rail projects are proceeding in several areas. A light rapid transit system
under construction on Tyneside involves the electrification of two suburban
railway lines, linked by new tunnels under Newcastle upon Tyne and Gateshead,
and a new bridge over the Tyne. The first section was opened in 1980 and the
remainder of the system, which will eventually be 34 miles (55 kilometres) long
with over 40 stations, will be brought into operation by 1983- The project is the
largest provincial urban transport scheme to have been undertaken in Britain in the
twentieth century.
Railways were pioneered in Britain, and the Stockton and Darlington Railway,
opened in 1825, was the first passenger public railway in the world to be worked by
steam power. Under the Transport Act 1947 the four large railway companies in
Great Britain were brought under public ownership and in 1963 the British
Railways Board was set up to manage railway affairs and subsidiary activities. In
Northern Ireland the Northern Ireland Railways Company Ltd, a subsidiary of
the Northern Ireland Transport Holding Company, operates the railway service
on some 200 miles (322 kilometres) of track.
British Rail’s operating statistics are shown in Table 26. In 1980 the Board’s
turnover, including financial support and income from other activities but
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
271
Passenger
Services
excluding internal transactions, was ,£2,645 million and there was a net deficit of
^76-9 million. Financial support for British Rail includes compensation for the
financial burden of operating the rail passenger system as a public service and
grants for level crossings. In 1980 the British Railways Board received ^634
million from the Government and the passenger transport executives in respect of
the public service obligation. At the end of 1980 the British Railways Board
employed 239,700 people.
TABLE 26: Railway Statistics
1975
1978
1979
1980
Passenger journeys (million) na
Passenger-miles (million) 18,800
Freight train traffic (million tonnes) 175
Freight train traffic (million net tonne-miles) 12,984
Assets (at end of year):
Locomotives 3,860
HST power cars and passenger carriages 10
APT power cars and passenger carriages —
Other coaching vehicles 22,892
Freight vehicles 216,367
Stations 2,873
Route open for traffic (miles) 11,258
734
19,100
171
12,416
3,580
530
8
21,031
150,371
2,837
11,123
748
19,900
169
12,361
3,571
669
20
20,963
07,589
2,821
11,020
760
19,700
153
10,961
3,379
772
36
20,408
119,507
2,787
10,964
Source: British Railways Board
na = not available.
The passenger network (see map, p 272) comprises a fast inter-city network,
linking the main centres of Great Britain; local stopping services; and commuter
services in and around the large conurbations, especially London and south-east
England. The introduction of faster trains, together with the raising of standards of
track and signalling, has brought significant reductions in journey time on many
routes. Inter-city rail services in Great Britain are among the best in the world in
speed, frequency and comfort. Two major projects, the High Speed Train (HST)
and the Advanced Passenger Train (APT), have been designed to raise speeds using
existing track. British Rail introduced the world’s fastest diesel rail service, known
as Inter-City 125 and operated by HSTs tfavelling at maximum sustained speeds of
125 mph (201 km/h), in 1976 on the route from London to Bristol and south
Wales. Similar services were introduced on the London-Edinburgh route in 1978
and on the London-Plymouth—Penzance route in 1979. HSTs are due to enter
service in 1981-82 on the route linking Edinburgh, Newcastle upon Tyne,
Birmingham and south-west England or south Wales. The first of three pre-
production electric APTs, also capable of speeds of 125 mph (201 km/h) but with
the ability to take curves up to 40 per cent faster than conventional trains, is
expected to be introduced on the London—Glasgow route in 1981—82 covering the
400-mile (644-kilometre) journey in 4 hours 15 minutes.
Electrification is continuing, the latest project being a £jI4° million scheme, to
be completed in 1982, to electrify the line between London and Bedford. The
Government has invited British Rail to draw up a ten-year programme of schemes
for electrifying potentially profitable main line routes, following a review by the
Department of Transport and British Rail. In addition, it has asked British Rail to
submit new commercial plans for the freight and inter-city passenger businesses.
Approval by the Department of Transport of particular electrification projects will
► 1 Inverness
j Londonderl
c'
v/’1
Holyhead<
Barrow V
Blackpool
Liverpool
we*
■^StoP
ijafford)
Sh rewspu.ry^|k..N^1(j i lciocoiw (Norwich!
erh^hnpton Rugby ^Peterborough
^•-Btrminghanr JP • Northa^iptrfn
WorcesterrffCov®\'y ^ > « l®wich
Graptham ^King’s Lynn
eicestV
>CP\lteii
Gloucester
"Swindon
Southampton^
Bournemouth
^brpgc
^Ichister!
Harwich
Weymouth
Folkestone
, ^Hastings
I | Eastbourne
Newhaven
■ Worthing
Portsmouth
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
273
Freight
Other
Activities
Channel Tunnel
Private
Railways
depend on the profitability of the investment and on the achievement of
improvements in efficiency.
British Rail is looking at ways of reducing costs on its local passenger services. It
has proposed a demonstration project to explore the scope for reducing operating
costs on local services by using automatic level crossings, simplified signalling and
lightweight rolling stock.
The most important freight commodities handled in 1980 were coal and coke (94'1
million tonnes), earth and stones (14-6 million tonnes), petroleum products (13-7
million tonnes) and iron and steel (12-9 million tonnes). British Rail is
concentrating on traffic particularly suitable for carriage by rail, especially long¬
distance and bulk trainload traffic.
Increased efficiency is being obtained as new types of wagon are introduced with
larger capacities and which are capable of higher speeds. A network of scheduled
‘Speedlink’ high-speed freight services using these new wagons is being established
between the major industrial centres. In mid-1981 there were 60 Speedlink trains
running each day and the number will be increased to about 80 by 1982. A
computer-based total operations processing system, which monitors all
consignments and freight train and wagon movements in Great Britain, has
reduced costs by allowing the more intensive use of rolling stock and the
withdrawal of many obsolete wagons.
To encourage the use of railways for the carriage of freight, grants of up to 50
per cent are available towards the cost of construction or modernisation of
privately owned rail freight facilities where there are significant environmental
benefits by the removal of heavy goods vehicle traffic from the roads.
British Rail has a group of other companies, of which British Rail Engineering Ltd
(BREL) has the largest number of employees, about 36,600 at 13 engineering
plants. BREL mainly constructs locomotives, coaches, wagons and containers for
British Rail, and undertakes heavy maintenance, overhauls and work for export.
The Railway Technical Centre at Derby is the largest in the world; its most
important achievement has been the development of the APT. Transmark
provides consultancy services overseas on railway and associated operations.
Ownership of the main non-railway businesses (Sealink UK Ltd, see p 277, British
Rail Hovercraft Ltd see p 277 and British Transport Hotels Ltd) and of a portfolio
of property not needed for the railway business is to be transferred to British Rail
Investments Ltd, a holding company set up to implement the policy agreed with
the Government of introducing private capital into the major non-railway
operations. Under the Transport Act 1981 the British Railways Board is given
power to dispose of its interest in the businesses and their future investment will
eventually be financed by private capital. In connection with this policy, control of
Travellers-Fare, which is responsible for catering facilities at stations and on trains
(and provides meals and snacks on more trains than any other railway company in
Europe), is being returned from British Transport Hotels Ltd to the British
Railways Board.
Some eight proposals for a fixed link across the English Channel between Britain
and France, varying from bridges to bored tunnels, including one for a single-track
rail-only tunnel submitted by the British Railways Board and Societe Nationale
des Chemins de Fer Franfais (SNCF), are being considered by the Government.
There are a number of small privately owned passenger-carrying railways in Great
Britain, mostly operated on a voluntary basis and providing limited services for
2?4
INLAND
WATERWAYS
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
tourists and railway enthusiasts; the principal aim of many of these railways is the
preservation of steam traction.
The inland waterways of Britain are experiencing a considerable revival of interest
in their use for recreation, freight-carrying and for their contribution to the
environment. They play an important part in land drainage and water supply. Of
the 2,000 miles (3,219 kilometres) of canal and river navigations controlled by the
publicly owned British Waterways Board, some 340 miles (547 kilometres) are
maintained as commercial waterways for use by freight-carrying vessels. Freight
traffic carried on the Board’s waterways amounted to 77-5 million tonne-
kilometres in 1980 and the tonnage carried was 4 9 million tonnes. In addition,
some freight is carried on about 600 miles (966 kilometres) of inland waterways
owned by other bodies. The Board also operates docks, warehouses and inland
freight terminals, and has two barge fleets, although most of the traffic on its
waterways is conveyed by independent carriers. In 1980 the Board’s turnover
amounted to ^14-5 million, and it received government grants of ^23-5 million
to maintain its waterways to statutory standards. Completion of the Board’s ^I4‘2
million scheme to improve the Sheffield and South Yorkshire Navigation between
Doncaster and Rotherham is expected in 1983. When completed, the
improvements will raise the barge capacity above Doncaster from 90 tonnes with
the result that 700-tonne barges will be able to navigate as far as the Rotherham
area.
Ports
There are some 200 port authorities or public wharf operators in Britain, and about
800 other undertakings engaged in operations such as stevedoring, towage,
warehousing and lighterage. Port authorities are of four main types: nationalised
bodies, public trusts, local authorities and statutory companies.
The Transport Act 1981 provides for the introduction of private capital into
Britain’s main nationalised port undertaking, the British Transport Docks Board,
which controls about a fifth of total port capacity including Southampton, Hull,
Grimsby/Immingham, Newport, Cardiff and Swansea. It creates a new holding
company which will control a reconstituted Board, to be known as Associated
British Ports, as a wholly owned subsidiary. Shares in the company will be offered
for sale, with the Government retaining 351 per cent stake. In 1980 total cargo
handled at the Board’s docks was 71-7 million tonnes. The Board’s revenue totalled
^140-7 million, and it achieved a net pre-tax profit of XII-5 million. Capital
expenditure amounted to £j9'9 million. The British Railways Board s subsidiary
Sealink UK Ltd (see p 277) also controls certain ports (Fishguard, Folkestone,
Holyhead, Newhaven, Parkeston Quay at Harwich, and Stranraer) which are
largely used for its shipping services. The British Waterways Board owns
Sharpness (Gloucester) and Weston Point in Runcorn. Major ports controlled by
public trusts include London, Milford Haven, Tees and Hartlepool, Medway,
Forth and Clyde. Local authorities own about one-third of Britain’s ports,
including Bristol, Portsmouth and the new oil ports in Orkney and Shetland. Port
undertakings owned by statutory companies include Felixstowe, Manchester and
Liverpool. Many private ports deal with the traffic of individual industrial firms in
commodities such as china clay and petroleum.
Port authorities, in the main, operate with statutory powers and responsibilities
set out in private Acts of Parliament. Most are members of the British Ports
Association which aims to further the common interests of port authorities in their
relations with the Government, shipowners and traders.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
275
Port Traffic
Development
In 1980 traffic through the ports of Great Britain amounted to 415 million tonnes
comprising 138 million tonnes of imports, 117 million tonnes of exports and 165
million tonnes of coastal traffic (mostly petroleum and coal). About 66 per cent of
the traffic was in fuels, mainly petroleum and petroleum products.
Britain’s main ports, in terms of total tonnage handled, are given in Table 27.
Offshore oil developments have had a substantial effect on port traffic by greatly
increasing the flow through certain North Sea ports, such as Tees and Hartlepool
and the Forth ports, creating new oil ports at Flotta in Orkney and Sullom Voe in
Shetland, and reducing oil traffic at traditional oil importing terminals such as
Milford Haven and the Clyde. There has also been a decline in the volume of
conventional cargo handled by traditional ports, such as London, Liverpool and
Manchester, and a growth in traffic through smaller ports including Dover,
Felixstowe and Harwich, partly due to containerisation and the use of roll-on/roll¬
off facilities. While non-fuel traffic has been growing only slowly, container and
roll-on traffic has trebled since 1970 to 41 million tonnes in 1980 and now accounts
for almost one-third of non-fuel traffic. The leading ports for this type of traffic are
Dover, Felixstowe, Southampton, London and Liverpool.
TABLE 27: Traffic through the Principal Ports of Great Britain11
million tonnes
1970
1975
1978 1979 1980
London
Milford Haven
Tees and Hartlepool
Forth
Grimsby and Immingham
Southampton
Shetland
Medway
Orkney
Liverpool
Manchester
57-0
4i-3
22-6
8-3
22’9
27-6
26-7
29'3
I5’5
4I-5
41-8
20-1
8-4
21-3
24-5
21'4
23-7
141
41-7
40-0
30-7
28-5
25-1
20-0
i-6
20-3
15-6
14-8
13-0
40-2
38-9
37-i
28-8
24-7
22-6
20-4
18-6
17-8
I3‘I
11'9
394
38-7
37'7
28-5
21 • 1
21-8
28-9
16- 9
17- 6
I3'0
110
Source: Department of Transport
"Belfast is the main port in Northern Ireland and it handled 6 2 million tonnes in 1980.
Note: Foreign and coastal traffic only.
Modernisation of Britain’s ports has been carried out primarily to accommodate
the increase in the proportion of goods carried in container ships and roll-on
vessels, and the changing nature and direction of Britain’s trade. Most current
developments are concerned with specific energy or industrial needs or to
accommodate specialised container or roll-on services rather than with general
purpose port facilities. Recent major schemes have included a £27 million scheme
to provide two deep-water container berths at Felixstowe, which became
operational in April 1981, and a £12 million scheme for two roll-on berths, with
multi-level access, at Dover, completed in 1980. At Portsmouth a ^15 million
scheme is in progress to add two new ferry berths by 1983, doubling the port’s
cross-Channel capacity.
The first purpose-built terminal for oil from the British sector of the North Sea
was completed at Hound Point on the Forth in 1975 and other terminals have been
built on the Tees, at Flotta and Sullom Voe. Sullom Voe is expected to become the
276
THE
MERCHANT
FLEET
Ownership
SERVICES
Cargo Services
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
largest oil port in Europe in the early 1980s. Of the four jetties completed, three are
able to handle oil tankers of up to 300,000 deadweight tons. With the growth of the
offshore oil and gas industry, facilities for handling products for the petrochemical
industry are planned. A natural gas liquids terminal is being built in the Firth of
Forth and other major developments are being considered. Other developments
related to offshore oil and gas include the construction of supply bases for offshore
vessels at a number of ports mostly on the east coast, including Great Yarmouth,
Leith, Dundee, Montrose, Aberdeen, Peterhead, and Lerwick in Shetland.
Shipping
The British merchant fleet in mid-1980 at 27-1 million gross tons1 (43-8 million
deadweight tons) was the fourth largest after those of Liberia, Japan and Greece.
The oil tanker fleet (13-2 million gross tons) was the third largest and the fleet of
fully cellular container ships (1-7 million gross tons) was the second largest. The
fleet reached its peak of 33-2 million gross tons in 1975, but has declined since then,
mainly owing to the world recession in shipping and increasing international
competition, especially from ships operating under ‘flags of convenience’. A large
tonnage of ships, particularly of tankers, has been scrapped or sold. Nevertheless,
the British fleet is still relatively modern and technically advanced.
In July 1980, 36-3 million deadweight tons of trading vessels of 100 gross tons and
over were both owned and registered in Britain: 23 million tons usually employed
as tankers, 9-1 million tons as tramps and 4-2 million tons as cargo or passenger
liners or cellular container ships. The merchant fleet figure of 43-8 million
deadweight tons also includes non-trading vessels, such as fishing vessels, tugs and
dredgers, and shipping registered in Britain but owned in other Commonwealth
countries.
Virtually all of the British merchant fleet is privately owned. Nearly two-thirds of
the tanker fleet belongs to the oil companies, although there are a few independent
tanker operators. British liner tonnage is dominated by a relatively small number
of large groups, the largest liner company being the Peninsular and Oriental Steam
Navigation Company (P & O). Some shipowners have delegated the management
of their fleets to specialist ship management companies. Several companies are
participating in consortia, particularly where heavy investment is required, as with
container and bulk cargo vessels. Chartering of ships of all nationalities takes place
on the Baltic Exchange, the largest market of its type in the world. The
representative body for shipowners (excluding owners of fishing vessels) is the
General Council of British Shipping .
About 94 per cent of Britain’s overseas trade by weight, about three-quarters by
value, is carried by sea, while the proportion of passengers travelling to or from
Britain by sea is about one-third, compared with about one-half in the early 1960s.
In 1980 British seaborne trade amounted to 232 million tonnes (valued at over
'One gross ton = 100 cubic feet (2-83 cubic metres). One deadweight ton = 1 tonne (1,000
kilogrammes or 2,205 lb). Gross tonnage indicates the total capacity of the enclosed space on a ship.
Deadweight tonnage denotes the maximum load which a vessel can carry before submerging the load-
line.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
277
£75,150 million) or 755,950 million tonne-miles (1-2 million million tonne-
kilometres). Ships registered in Britain carried 34 per cent by weight, 28 per cent in
terms of tonne-miles and 40 per cent by value. Tanker cargoes accounted for
nearly half this trade by weight, but only about 16 per cent by value, and foodstuffs
and manufactured goods accounted for over three-quarters by value.
Container and roll-on/roll-off vessels are responsible for a growing proportion
of general cargo trade. Many of the deep-sea liner services from Britain are
operated by container ships. Roll-on services, accommodating passengers and
their cars and, in some cases, commercial vehicles are increasing in number,
particularly between Britain and the continent of Europe. Several freight-only
roll-on services operate to the Irish Republic, the continent of Europe, and to more
distant countries, especially in the Middle East, North Africa and West Africa.
British shipping companies operating liner services have associated with each
other and with the companies of other countries operating on the same routes in a
series of‘conferences’ designed to secure standardisation and stability of rates, and
to maintain frequency and regularity of services. The essential principle of a
conference is the establishment of a common tariff of freight rates to be applied by
each member line. There are about 100 conferences dealing with trade to and from
Britain.
Passenger Almost all of the 23-6 million passengers who arrived at or departed from British
Services ports in 1980 travelled to or from the continent of Europe or the Irish Republic,
services on other routes having been withdrawn as a result of the growth of air
services. Remaining long-distance passenger ships are used for cruising and in 1980
some 90,000 passengers embarked on pleasure cruises from British ports. Services
from British ports are shown on the map at the end of the book.
Cross-Channel traffic accounts for a substantial proportion of traffic to the
continent of Europe. Sealink UK Ltd, a subsidiary of the British Railways Board,
is the largest short-sea ferry operator in Europe. The company and its continental
partners (SNCF of France, Regie des Transports Maritimes Beiges and
Stoomvaart Maatschappij Zeeland of the Netherlands) operate about 60 ships on
short-sea routes. Sealink UK Ltd and the other major British operators, including
Townsend Thoresen and P & O’s Normandy Ferries, are or have been investing
heavily in new ships, resulting in a substantial increase in cross-Channel ferry
capacity. Growing competition between the operators has led to reductions in
fares on many routes.
Cross-Channel hovercraft services are provided by two operators which are
planning to merge their activities: Seaspeed (run by British Rail Flovercraft Ltd in
conjunction with SNCF) with routes between Dover and Boulogne, and Dover
and Calais; and Floverlloyd Ltd between Ramsgate and Calais. A hovercraft
crossing takes about one-third of the time taken by ships and hovercraft carry over
one-quarter of the traffic on the short-sea crossings to the continent of Europe.
Seaspeed operates the world’s largest hovercraft, two British Flovercraft
Corporation SR.N Super 4s which have been structurally enlarged so that each
accommodates 424 passengers and 55 cars.
Passenger and freight ferry services are also operated to many of the offshore
islands, such as the Isle of Wight, Orkney, Shetland and a number of other Scottish
islands.
ROLE OF THE The Department of Trade is the government department responsible for most
GOVERNMENT matters connected with merchant shipping, including general policy towards the
industry and Britain’s relations with other governments and international
organisations on shipping matters. The general policy is one of minimum
278
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
SAFETY AT
SEA
intervention by the Government, while encouraging free and fair competition.
Under the Merchant Shipping Acts the Department does, however, administer
many regulations for marine safety and welfare, and for preventing and cleaning
up pollution from ships. For instance, it certifies the load-line (or Plimsoll line) that
shows that a ship is not overloaded; ensures that standards of safety are observed in
ship construction; ensures the provision of adequate life-saving, fire-fighting and
radio equipment; and deals with the discipline, professional standards, health and
accommodation of seamen. The Acts also contain certain reserve powers for
protecting shipping and trading interests from measures adopted or proposed by
overseas governments.
Outside London the Department’s responsibilities for the enforcement of
marine safety are carried out from marine survey offices and mercantile marine
offices located at various ports. In the offices of the Registrar General of Shipping
and Seamen, at Cardiff, a record is kept of all ships registered in Britain and its
dependencies.
Britain’s merchant fleet is one of the safest in the world; it has a consistently lower
record of ship losses than the world average.
The Coastguard Service, administered by the Department of Trade, is
responsible for initiating and co-ordinating civil marine search and rescue action in
the United Kingdom Search and Rescue Region (SRR). This is divided into six
coastguard SRRs, each controlled by a maritime rescue co-ordination centre
(MRCC) supported by sub-centres, all of which maintain continuous
telecommunications watch on marine distress frequencies. In addition, at times of
casualty risk a watch is kept at some 250 other stations around the coast. The
Coastguard Service is able to call upon the lifeboats of the Royal National Life¬
boat Institution (a voluntary body which operates 258 offshore and inshore
lifeboats). Ministry of Defence aircraft (including helicopters), a long-range
civilian helicopter based at Sumburgh (Shetland), and any other ships or aircraft
available to assist in search or rescue action. In 1980 the Coastguard Service took
action in 3,930 incidents (including cliff rescues) in which over 7,070 people were
assisted.
The lighthouse authorities (for England and Wales the Corporation of Trinity
House, for Scotland the Northern Lighthouse Board and for Ireland the
Commissioners of Irish Lights) control about 350 lighthouses, many minor lights
and buoys, and a number of lightships, some of which are being replaced by
unattended sea marks or by light towers. In Britain there are 47 pilotage authorities
for the 87 pilotage districts and about 1,500 licensed pilots. Trinity House is the
largest pilotage authority, licensing some 700 pilots in 41 districts in England and
Wales. In some cases the harbour authority or local council is the pilotage
authority.
Compliance with traffic separation schemes around the shores of Britain is
mandatory for all vessels of countries party to the 1972 International Collision
Regulations. The most important scheme affecting British waters is in the Dover
Strait, the world’s busiest seaway. It consists of traffic lanes for shipping passing
through the strait and inshore traffic zones for use by local shipping. The number
of collisions in the strait has fallen considerably since the scheme was introduced.
Britain and France operate radar surveillance of the strait to keep watch on ships
not conforming to the scheme and, through the Channel Navigation Information
Service, broadcast navigational information to ships in the Dover Strait. The
MRCC at Dover, which monitors ships passing through the strait, has a data
processing system for detecting and tracking vessels automatically, making it
probably the most advanced maritime centre of its kind in the world.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
279
Role of the
Government
Civil Aviation
Authority
Air Traffic
Civil Aviation
Britain’s substantial civil air transport industry is continuing to develop to meet the
generally increasing demand for air travel, particularly international travel. Airline
services are operated by British Airways and by a number of independent airlines.
Their fleets contain some of the most modern types of equipment including wide¬
bodied aircraft and the Concorde supersonic aircraft with which British Airways
inaugurated in 1976, jointly with Air France, the world’s first scheduled supersonic
passenger services. Many airports are being substantially modernised and
extended.
The Secretary of State for Trade is responsible for international matters (including
negotiation of air service agreements with more than 100 other countries, the
licensing and control of public transport operations into Britain by overseas
operators and British participation in the activities of international aviation
bodies), airports policy, amenity matters (such as aircraft noise), aviation security
policy and investigation of accidents.
The Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) is an independent statutory body,
responsible for the economic, technical and operational regulation of the industry.
It is also responsible for the aerodrome navigation services at certain British
airports and, jointly with the Ministry of Defence, for the provision by the
National Air Traffic Services of air navigation services. The CAA also operates
eight aerodromes in Scotland. Members of the CAA are appointed by the
Secretary of State for Trade.
Under the Civil Aviation Act 1980 the Authority’s primary objectives are to
ensure that British airlines provide air services to satisfy all major categories of
public demand at the lowest charges consistent with a high standard of safety and
an economic return for efficient operators, and to further the reasonable interests of
air transport users. Other duties are to ensure that British airlines compete
effectively on international routes, to secure the most efficient use of airports in
Britain and to have regard to the need to minimise the adverse effects of civil
aviation on the environment. In 1980-81 the Government paid a grant of ^35'9
million to the CAA to cover its loss-making operations: the operation of its
Scottish aerodromes, which received a subsidy of ^2-7 million from the Scottish
Office; and the provision of air navigation services in British airspace, for which a
grant of /)33’2 million was paid (and for which grants will continue to be paid
until the arrangements for providing the services can be altered by international
agreement).
In 1980 a total of some 42-8 million passengers travelled by air (international
terminal passengers) to or from Britain, 2-3 per cent more than in 1979. British
airlines have helped to pioneer new services and low fares, for example. Laker
Airways’ Skytrain services from London (Gatwick) to New York, Los Angeles,
Miami and Tampa, while a number of airlines are proposing new services
combined with low fares to the continent of Europe. Total capacity offered on all
services by British airlines amounted to 13,210 million capacity-tonne-kilometres
in 1980, 3 -6 per cent more than in 1979. British Airways accounts for some 80 per
cent of scheduled services flown by British airlines, whereas the charter market is
dominated by independent companies.
In 1980 the value of Britain’s overseas trade carried by air was some 18,200
million and the proportions carried by air amounted to approximately 18 per cent
of the value of exports and of imports. Air freight is important for the carriage of
280
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
British Airways
Airline Operations
Independent
Airlines
goods with a high value-to-weight ratio, especially where speed of movement is
essential. Precious stones, live animals, medicinal and pharmaceutical products,
clothing, leather and skins, and scientific instruments are major categories where a
relatively high proportion of exports is sent by air.
British Airways is one of the world’s leading airlines, and in terms of international
passengers carried and of international passenger-kilometres flown it is the largest
in the world. During 1980-81 British Airways’ turnover was £2,061 million
(including £1,750 million from airline operations) and it recorded a net loss of
£145 million. The Civil Aviation Act 1980 makes legislative provision for the
Government’s intention to change British Airways from a nationalised industry to
a private sector company. At the appropriate time the Government will effect this
change and it intends to sell a substantial minority of shares in the new company to
private investors.
British Airways’ route network, covering some 571,000 kilometres (354,800 miles)
of unduplicated route, is among the largest in the world. The airline serves nearly
170 destinations in 80 countries and in 1980—81 carried some 15-9 million
passengers on scheduled services. International scheduled services are operated to
the rest of Europe, the Middle East, the Far East, Australasia, East and South Africa,
and North America. Within Britain it runs 1,400 services a week to 16 towns and
cities. Scheduled Concorde services are operated from London (Heathrow) to
New York and to Washington, covering these routes in about half the time taken
by subsonic aircraft.
Other activities carried out include helicopter services, engine overhaul work,
airport technical services and investments in a number of hotel companies and air
companies in other countries.
British Airways operated 210 aircraft and helicopters in May 1981 (see diagram,
p 281). A large investment programme is under way to replace the older aircraft,
and major orders for new aircraft include 19 Boeing 757s, 3 Boeing Vertol
helicopters and 2 Westland 30 helicopters.
The independent airlines carry 6 million passengers a year on scheduled services
and 11 5 million on charter flights. The main independent scheduled airline is
British Caledonian Airways, which operates a fleet of 30 aircraft and carried 1-7
million scheduled service passengers in 1980. Its scheduled services are primarily to
the continent of Europe; North, West and Central Africa; South America; the
United States; and the Middle East and Hong Kong. Other operators of scheduled
passenger services include Air UK, British Midland Airways, Dan-Air Services
and Laker Airways. Britannia Airways, Dan-Air Services, Monarch Airlines and
Laker Airways are the leading independent airlines operating charter passenger
services.
Helicopters are engaged on a variety of work, but are mainly employed on the
large-scale operations connected with the development of Britain’s offshore oil and
gas resources. Bristow Helicopters, which operates a fleet of more than 50
helicopters in Britain, is the world’s largest helicopter contracting business. There
are a small number of scheduled helicopter passenger services in Britain, including
a link between Heathrow and Gatwick airports, and routes between Penzance and
the Isles of Scilly, and Glasgow and Fort William. Light aircraft and helicopters are
also involved in other activities, such as charter operations, search and rescue
services, crop-spraying, and aerial survey and photography.
Safety
The CAA is responsible for air safety, both airworthiness and operational safety.
Air Traffic
Control and
Navigation
Services
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 28l
Aircraft and Helicopters Operated by British Airways in May 1981
Other aircraft Other helicopters
7 Viscounts 2 Sikorsky S76s
2 HS 748s 3 Boeing Vertols
1 Jet Ranger
2 Bell 212s
Its Operations Division deals with the preparation and application of safety
requirements concerning airline operations, flight crew licensing and training,
aerodromes, and fire and rescue services. The Airworthiness Division is responsible
for the airworthiness standards of aircraft registered in Britain, the licensing of
aircraft maintenance engineers and the approval of work schedules to which
British transport aircraft are maintained. The CAA is advised in its airworthiness
duties by the Airworthiness Requirements Board.
Every company operating aircraft used for public transport must possess an Air
Operator’s Certificate which is granted by the CAA when it is satisfied that the
operator is competent to secure the safe operation of its aircraft. The CAA’s flight
operations inspectors (who are experienced airline pilots) check that satisfactory
operating standards are maintained.
Each member of the flight crew of a British registered aircraft must hold the
appropriate official licence issued by the CAA. Except for pilots with acceptable
military or other qualifying experience, all applicants for a first professional pilot’s
licence must have undertaken a full-time course of ground and flying instruction at
a training organisation approved by the CAA.
Responsibility for civil and military air traffic control over Britain and the
surrounding seas rests with the National Air Traffic Services (NATS). The
Controller of the NATS reports to both the CAA and the Ministry of Defence.
The function of the NATS is to secure the safe, orderly and expeditious flow of air
traffic within British airspace. It also provides air traffic services for aircraft flying
over the north-eastern quarter of the North Atlantic. At some 20 civil aerodromes,
including most of the major British airports, the NATS provides the navigation
282
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Airports
Ownership and
Control
Development
services necessary for the operation of aircraft taking off and landing, and
integrates them into the flow of traffic within British airspace. To provide its
services, the NATS uses radar, some 100 navigational beacons, landing aids,
air/ground communications and an extensive telecommunications network.
Of the 120 licensed civil aerodromes in Britain, about one-quarter each handles
more than 100,000 passengers a year. In 1980 Britain’s civil airports handled a total
of 58-9 million passengers (57-8 million terminal passengers and i-i million in
transit), 1-2 per cent more than in 1979, and 744,200 tonnes of freight. London’s
Heathrow airport is the world’s busiest airport for international travel, and is
Britain’s most important airport for passengers and air freight, handling 27-8
million passengers and nearly 470,000 tonnes of freight in 1980. Gatwick, the
second major airport in the London area, handled 9 8 million passengers in 1980.
Other leading airports were Manchester, Glasgow, Luton, Birmingham, Belfast,
Aberdeen and Edinburgh.
The British Airports Authority (BAA), a statutory body, owns and manages seven
airports—Heathrow, Gatwick and Stansted in south-east England, and Glasgow,
Edinburgh, Prestwick and Aberdeen in Scotland—which handle about 78 per cent
of air passengers and 84 per cent of air cargo traffic in Britain. In 1980—81 the
BAA’s income was X254 million and it recorded a pre-tax profit of ^36 3 million.
Sumburgh airport and seven small aerodromes in the Highlands and Islands of
Scotland are controlled by the CAA and Belfast’s airport (Aldergrove) is managed
by Northern Ireland Airports Ltd, a subsidiary of the Northern Ireland Transport
Holding Company. Most of the other public airports are controlled by local
authorities. Except for those controlled by the CAA, all airports and all but a few
minor private aerodromes must be licensed by the CAA. Stringent requirements,
such as the provision of adequate fire-fighting, medical and rescue services, suitable
runways, and of air traffic control services and visual aids, must be satisfied before a
licence is granted. Strict aviation security measures are in force at airports.
The Government’s policy is that the growing demand for air transport facilities in
south-east England should be met by the provision of additional capacity at
existing airports, especially Heathrow, Gatwick and Stansted. It is also
encouraging the maximum use of other main regional airports.
A fourth major terminal to be built at Heathrow will raise the airport’s capacity
from 30 million to 38 million passengers a year and should be completed in 1985.
At Gatwick a ^j100 million redevelopment programme has been completed,
increasing the airport’s annual capacity to some 16 million passengers. A public
inquiry has been held into the BAA’s plans for a second passenger terminal which,
if approved, would be in operation by the mid-1980s and would ultimately
increase Gatwick’s capacity to about 25 million passengers a year. The BAA is
proposing to build a new terminal and associated facilities at Stansted which would
increase the airport’s capacity to 15 million passengers a year. Its planning
application is being examined at a public inquiry.
Work is in progress to develop facilities at several of Britain’s other airports. A
five-year development scheme, costing some £17 million, started in 1977 for the
expansion of Aldergrove. A new terminal complex, which will be able to handle
up to 3 million passengers a year, is to be built at Birmingham airport at a cost of
some £50 million. It is expected to be open in 1984. Offshore oil and gas activities
have stimulated expansion schemes at airports in north-east Britain, such as at
Aberdeen where a new terminal was opened in 1977 and which has become one of
the world’s biggest heliports. At Sumburgh in Shetland the CAA has invested ^3°
million in developments including a new terminal for oil-related traffic.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
283
BRITISH
TELECOM
Telephone
Services
Exchanges
Overseas Services
Communications
A new framework for the structure of communications services is being
established under the British Telecommunications Act 1981. This includes
provisions for the separation of the Post Office into two corporations, one for
postal and banking services and the other for telecommunications, both of which
will be responsible to the Secretary of State for Industry.
Britain has the world’s fourth largest public telecommunications business. There
are some 28 million telephones, 18 million exchange connections, 90,000 telex
connections and 81,000 data transmission terminals (more than in any country
except the United States). British Telecommunications (known as British
Telecom), established under the British Telecommunications Act 1981 to operate
telecommunications and data processing services, employs 246,700 people, has
assets of £16,000 million, and runs eight factories and a fleet of nearly 55,000
telecommunications vehicles. The Government has begun to relax the statutory
monopoly in telecommunications in the interests of encouraging competition, and
is to allow private sector firms to supply, install and maintain equipment attached
to the telecommunications network with the exception of a customer’s first
telephone and the maintenance of certain private branch exchanges. The
Government also intends to allow free competition in the provision of a wide
range of added value services offered via the public network such as computer and
word processing bureaux, message handling systems and information retrieval
systems.
In 1980-81 some 20,428 million telephone calls were made in Britain comprising
16,840 million local calls, 3,335 million trunk calls and 253 million international
calls. Customers dial virtually all local and trunk telephone calls, and about 90 per
cent of international calls. Over 98-6 per cent of Britain’s telephone customers can
dial direct to 106 countries.
Several specialised services are available by telephone, including the ‘999’
emergency dialling service enabling customers to be connected rapidly and free of
charge to the police, ambulance or fire services. British Telecom provides a
number of‘Guidelines’ services, the most popular being the Speaking Clock which
received over 400 million calls in 1980-81. Other services include Dial a Disc,
weather forecasts, cricket scores, racing results and a service for visitors and
tourists.
Over 1,300 electronic exchanges are in use and some 540 more have been ordered.
They are more reliable than conventional electro-mechanical exchanges as they
have very few moving parts and so require less maintenance. Most electronic
exchanges are of the TXE2 type, with a capacity of up to 7,000 lines. Larger TXE4
exchanges, with a capacity of up to 40,000 lines, have been brought into service
since 1976, and the first of an improved version, the TXE4A, was brought into
service in February 1981. A series of new switching and associated systems for
telephone exchanges, known as System X, using microelectronics technology,
integrated digital transmission and switching, stored program (software) control
and common channel signalling, has been developed. The first System X
exchange, a junction tandem exchange in the City of London, entered service in
1980 and the first local exchange, at Woodbridge (Suffolk), began operating in
mid-1981.
The demand for international calls is doubling every four or five years and British
Telecom has increased the amount of equipment in its international exchanges
284
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Prestel
Data
Communi¬
cations
substantially and raised the number of cable and satellite circuits linking Britain
with other countries from nearly 3,000 in 1970 to 44,000 in mid-1981. Nearly 70
per cent of the intercontinental telephone traffic to or from Britain is carried by
satellite. Three aerials at the Goonhilly earth station in Cornwall provide
commercial telecommunications services via high-capacity geostationary satellites
positioned over the Atlantic Ocean. Another aerial is sending test speech and
television signals to the European Space Agency’s orbital test satellite, as the first
step in the European Communications Satellite project (the responsibility of
Eutelsat, an organisation formed by the telecommunication administrations of 20
European countries) intended to provide high-capacity links across Europe and the
Mediterranean. Britain has the second largest interest in Intelsat, the world space
communications satellite network; an equal largest shareholding in Eutelsat; and
the third largest share in the International Maritime Satellite Organisation
(INMARSAT), which came into existence in 1979 and will provide satellite
capacity to improve maritime communications. A second earth station at Madley
near Hereford, which has three aerials, is helping British Telecom to cope with the
growth in international traffic. Between them the earth stations operate about
5,000 circuits via four satellites to over 80 countries.
There are 29 submarine cables from Britain to the continent of Europe, the Irish
Republic and the Faroe Islands, and three cables from Britain to North America.
British Telecom’s ‘Prestef, the world’s first public viewdata service, was
inaugurated in 1979. It enables information and messages to be transmitted
through the telephone network from a computer for display on a suitably
equipped television set in words, figures and simple graphics. About 185,000
‘pages’ of information are being provided from over 550 sources. Information is
available on a wide range of subjects but with special emphasis on the needs of
selected business sectors such as travel agents, investment managers, farmers and
lawyers. Prestel has nearly 12,000 sets attached to its network and is the largest
information service of its kind in the world. Prestel’s ‘Gateway’ facility, which will
connect private computer databases to the Prestel database and allow a wide range
of services (such as booking holidays, travel tickets or placing an immediate order
with a mail order company), will come into operation in 1982. Prestel software has
been sold to telecommunications authorities in a number of countries. In July 1981
British Telecom opened Prestel to overseas access as the first international public
viewdata service. Although direct access is available from anywhere in the world,
local support and marketing are limited initially to Australia, the Federal Republic
of Germany, Hong Kong, the Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland and the United
States. (‘Teletext’ information services transmitted by broadcasting instead of the
telephone network are operated by the British Broadcasting Corporation and the
Independent Broadcasting Authority, see p 368.)
British Telecom’s Datel services provide for transmission of information for
computers and other automatic processors at speeds from 50 bits a second to 72,000
bits a second, including an internationally compatible service at speeds up to 2,400
bits a second. The services consist of a suitable telegraph or telephone line and,
when necessary, a modem (which converts digital signals into voice frequencies for
transmission). In 1980 British Telecom started a commercial packet switching
service for computer data, and in summer 1981 this was extended to all the main
centres in Britain. A packet switching service is also available for computer
communications with other European Community countries, Australia, Canada,
Hong Kong, Spain, Switzerland and the United States, and is to be extended to
seven other countries by mid-1982.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
285
Telex
Telegrams
Developments
THE POST
OFFICE
The telex service is fully automatic. Demand for inland and international telex
services is growing and the number of connections has more than doubled since
1971. Customers can dial direct to 167 countries and over 99 per cent of all
international calls are dialled direct. Britain’s first computer-controlled telex
exchange handling international automatic calls was installed in London in 1978
and a second is due to be brought into operation later in 1981.
International telegrams are transmitted through a computer-controlled Telegram
Retransmission Centre in London. It is one of the largest in the world, and has
direct access via satellite, cable and radio circuits to over 87 terminals in 75
countries.
British Telecom is developing several new telecommunications services. A
radiopaging service operating in the major cities, providing direct dialling access
over the public telephone network to small lightweight portable receivers, will be
extended to the whole of Britain by mid-1982. An international facsimile service,
known as ‘Bureaufax’ was inaugurated for a one-year trial period in November
1980, providing high-speed facsimile links from a number of cities to 15 other
countries.
Optical fibres (very thin strands of glass capable of carrying large numbers of
telephone calls simultaneously) are already installed in the telephone cable network
on an experimental basis. They are being brought into service and are expected to
result in substantial savings as they are smaller than conventional cables and require
less amplifying equipment to boost long-distance calls. Work on laying the first
optical fibre cables is in progress and by the end of 1982 the network, of over 3,500
kilometres (2,200 miles), will be the most comprehensive of its kind in the world.
British Telecom has an extensive research and development programme,
amounting to some XI35 million a year, mostly carried out at its research centre at
Martlesham Heath (Suffolk).
The Post Office, founded in 1635, pioneered postal services and was the first to
issue adhesive postage stamps as proof of advance payment for mail. The Royal
Mail provides deliveries to 22 million addresses and handles more than 35 million
letters and parcels each working day (10,000 million items a year). Mail is collected
from over 100,000 posting boxes, as well as from post offices and large postal users.
The Post Office has a monopoly on the conveyance of letters, but under the British
Telecommunications Act 1981 the Secretary of State for Industry has the power to
suspend the monopoly in certain areas or for certain categories of mail and to
license others to provide competing services. The Government is to relax the
monopoly on express mail, document exchanges and delivery of Christmas cards.
Mechanisation of mail handling is in progress and over half of the 84 offices
which will eventually take over the work of hundreds of sorting offices handling
letters manually are in operation. All addresses in Britain have a postcode and the
British system is the most sophisticated in the world, allowing mechanised sorting
down to part of a street on a postman’s round and, in some cases, to an individual
address. Some 35 large parcel centres, each serving a group of counties, have taken
over the work of 1,200 offices which handled parcels manually.
There are 22,500 post offices, of which 1,600 are operated directly by the Post
Office and the remainder on an agency basis by sub-postmasters. Besides using
postal and telegraph facilities at a post office, a person may, among other
transactions, draw a pension or a family allowance, buy a dog licence or television
licence, renew a motor vehicle licence, obtain a British visitor’s passport, buy
national insurance stamps, and use the facilities of the National Savings Bank and
286
Specialist
Services
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the National Girobank. In much of its counter service the Post Office acts as agent
for government departments and local authorities.
The Post Office provides a range of specialist services. ‘Datapost’, a door-to-door
delivery service, handles 4-2 million items a year. As well as overnight links
throughout Britain, there are international services with 20 countries including
most of Europe and North America. An ‘Expresspost’ messenger service provides
a rapid delivery within or between 29 main cities and towns. Intelpost, the world’s
first international public facsimile transmission service sending letters and other
documents by satellite, was inaugurated in 1980 between London and Toronto.
The system has been expanded to provide high-speed electronic mail links
between 50 towns and cities in Britain as well as to and from the United States, the
Netherlands and further cities in Canada. The Philatelic Bureau in Edinburgh
handles about one-third of the Post Office’s philatelic business (worth ^12 million
a year), much of it involving sales to overseas collectors or dealers. The British
Postal Consultancy Service offers advice and assistance on all aspects of postal
business to overseas postal administrations, and over 20 countries have used its
services since 1965.
i6 Employment
As a major industrial country, Britain has a labour force with high levels of
technical and commercial skill, but it is appreciated that the increasing pace of
technological change calls for an even greater flexibility in the workforce and
improvements in training. Although the Government deplores the major human
problems of the high levels of unemployment which Britain, in common with
other industrialised countries, has suffered in recent years (in September 1981
3 million, or 12-4 per cent of the working population were unemployed), the
decline of traditional industries is also seen as an unavoidable process in the
restructuring of industry and employment on a technologically advanced basis.
Market forces are considered to be a major determinant in this, but the
Government continues to play an important role in the labour market by
providing employment services; by supplementing the training undertaken by
employers; by policies to promote regional development and labour mobility; by
measures to alleviate unemployment; through legislation to regulate terms and
conditions of employment and improve industrial relations; and through
legislation relating to health and safety at work.
TRENDS IN The total workforce in June 1980 was 26-4 million, just over 60 per cent of the total
EMPLOYMENT population aged 16 and over. If the unemployed, the self-employed, and the
Armed Forces are omitted from the working population, there remained 22-5
million employees (13 1 million men and 9 4 million women) in employment.
The percentage of women in employment (particularly those working part-time)
continues to rise, although at a reduced rate compared with previous years. The
TABLE 28. Manpower in Britain 1971-80
Thousands
Year
(June)
Employees
in
employment11
Self-employed Unemployedf’
Armed
Forces
Total
working
population^
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
22,122
22,121
22,664
22,789
22,710
22,543
22,619
22,757
22,920
22,511
1,909
1,899
T947
1,925
i,886f
i,886c
i,886f
i,886c
i,886f
i,886f
724
804
575
542
866
T332
1,450
1,446
T344
1,660
368
37i
361
345
336
336
327
318
3H
323
25,123
25T95
25,547
25,601
25,798
26,097
26,282
26,407
26,464
26,380
Source: Employment Gazette
‘'Part-time workers are counted as full units.
^Excluding adult students.
^Estimates.
^Discrepancies between totals and the sums of their constituent parts are due to rounding.
288
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
great majority of the working population work for a wage or salary, but nearly
2 million are self-employed. During the next few years both the male and female
labour forces are expected to increase.
The distribution of employees by industry in 1971 and 1980 is shown in Table
29. The most notable trend in the employment pattern during the last decade has
been the transfer of employment from manufacturing to service industries.
Technological developments have increased automation, with a consequently
reduced demand for manpower, and have assisted the growth of manufacturing
capacity in other, particularly developing, countries. New and, in some cases,
cheaper services have been introduced through advances in technology, while
improvements in living standards have led to an increasing demand for services.
There is considerable public discussion of the social and economic effects of micro¬
electronic technology.
UNEMPLOY¬
MENT
TABLE 29. Analysis of Civil Employment in Britain 1971 and 198°
Industry or Service
1971 1980“'
Thousands Per cent Thousands Per cent
Primary sector
Agriculture, forestry and fishing 734 3'1 637
Mining and quarrying 397 1'7 345
Manufacturing industries
Chemicals and allied industries 483 2-0 471
Metal manufacture 55^ 2'3 402
Textiles, leather and clothing i,i47 4'8 834
Engineering and allied industries 3>65° I5'2 3T51
Food, drink and tobacco 777 3'2 686
Other manufactures 1.565 6-5 1,383
Other production industries
Construction 1,594 6-6 1,651
Gas, electricity and water 377 1'6 347
Services
Transport and communications 1,639 6-8 1,578
Distributive trades 3,°88 12-9 3>223
Professional, financial, scientific
and miscellaneous services,’ 6,512 27-1 8,094
National and local government
service i,5°9 6-3 1,596
Total in civil employment 24,°3I 24,397
of whom employees 22,122 22,511
Self-employed i,9°9 1,886
Sources: Department of Employment
‘'Provisional estimates.
^Excludes private domestic service.
‘June 1975 estimate.
Discrepancies between totals and the sums of their constituent parts are due to rounding.
With some fluctuations unemployment rose sharply during the 1970s and by 1981
reached the highest level since the 1930s. While remaining relatively low in the
2-6
i'4
1- 9
1-6
3‘4
12-9
2- 8
5‘7
6-8
1-4
6-5
I3’2
33'2
6-5
MANPOWER
SERVICES
COMMISSION
EMPLOYMENT 289
south-east of England, it has been consistently higher in those parts of the country
which have the greatest dependence on traditional industries.
Government measures to assist the unemployed have been expanded for the
year 1981-82 and are expected to cost some ^1,000 million. Special emphasis has
been placed on those for unemployed young people and especially school leavers,
whose numbers are growing partly because of the birth-rate ‘bulge’ of the 1960s
but mainly due to the general increase in unemployment. The main measure for
young people is the Youth Opportunities Programme, which in 1981—82 will
provide around 550,000 young people with work experience and training
opportunities designed to improve their prospects of permanent jobs. There is also
the Community Industry scheme for unemployed young people who suffer
additional personal or social disadvantages. The aim of the Government is, as far as
resources permit, to assure every 16- and 17-year-old, not in education or a job, of
vocational training lasting, as necessary, up to the age of 18.
While it recognises that special measures cannot achieve as much for the adult
unemployed as for the young, the Government wants to ease the transition as far as
possible to a situation where new jobs can be founded on a sound economy. The
emphasis in adult schemes is placed on work of environmental improvement, with
encouragement for projects arranged by voluntary agencies. The new
Community Enterprise Programme encourages private-sector sponsorship of
projects benefiting the community and provides funds for partnerships involving
the private sector, public and community bodies in the creation of new enterprises.
The programme will provide 25,000 filled places by March 1982, with priority
given to the long-term unemployed and to projects in areas of high
unemployment. Other measures for the adult unemployed include: a scheme to
encourage employers to use short-time working as an alternative to redundancies;
a job release’ scheme to encourage older workers to take early retirement and
release jobs for younger unemployed people; a job introduction’ scheme for
disabled people; and support for training places in industry. Various government
measures to stimulate economic activity by assistance and encouragement to small
firms (see p 193) and the establishment of enterprise zones (see p 160) may assist job
creation.
In Great Britain the Department of Employment is generally responsible for
employment policy, industrial relations and pay policy and for the payment of
unemployment benefit, but the Manpower Services Commission (MSC) advises
the Government on manpower policy issues.
The MSC, on which employers, employees, local authorities and educational
interests are represented, is separate from the Government but accountable to the
Secretaries of State for Employment, Scotland and Wales. Scottish and Welsh
committees of the MSC consider special Scottish and Welsh aspects of manpower
issues. Most of the MSC’s activities are financed from public funds. It is advised by
a network of district manpower committees on which employers, employees and
other local interests are represented.
The MSC’s main duty is to help people to select, train for, obtain and retain jobs,
and to assist employers to obtain employees. The services in Northern Ireland are
run on similar lines by the Department of Manpower Services.
The main public employment services (other than the careers service) are
provided in Great Britain by the MSC’s Employment Service which provides a
comprehensive service for employers needing staff and for people, whether or not
already in employment, seeking jobs. It operates through a network of about 1,000
local jobcentres’ and employment offices which handle all occupations except
professional, scientific, technical and managerial, for which the MSC’s
290
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Professional and Executive Recruitment is responsible. Jobcentres, where the
provision of self-service facilities for job-seekers is a standard feature, are gradually
replacing employment offices where such facilities do not always exist.
Until new legislation is introduced, registration for employment is compulsory
for unemployed people claiming state benefits, although employers are not
compelled to notify their vacancies. The Government intends to introduce
legislation which will make registration voluntary before the end of 1982. In the
year to March 1981 6-9 million people registered for employment, 2-1 million
vacancies were notified and 15 million were placed in employment.
Services for
Disabled People
Geographical
Mobility Schemes
Professional and
Executive
Recruitment
The public employment service has long provided a resettlement service to
disabled people. This is provided by over 500 specially trained Disablement
Resettlement Officers who can advise on rehabilitation and training courses and
on the comprehensive range of special schemes and facilities available. They can
also advise employers about employing disabled people, and the grants available
for adaptation to premises and equipment so that they can employ or retrain a
disabled person. In 1980 the MSC found jobs for some 39>50<-) disabled people. The
Disabled Persons (Employment) Act 1944 requires employers who employ 20 or
more people to include 3 per cent registered disabled people within their
workforce. The quota scheme has, however, become less effective over the years
and is now under review. As part of its ‘Fit for Work campaign to improve the
employment prospects of disabled people, the MSC has instituted a scheme of
annual awards to give public recognition to firms which excel in carrying out
constructive policies on the employment of disabled people.
The MSC’s Employment Service runs a network of 27 Employment
Rehabilitation Centres, which provide facilities for those who have been ill or
injured or are handicapped to return to working fitness (some 16,500 a year). The
Service also supports a number of agency centres run by local authorities and
voluntary bodies specialising in the employment rehabilitation of the blind, the
mentally ill and people with cerebral palsy.
Sheltered employment is provided for the severely disabled in Great Britain by
Remploy Ltd, a non-profit-making company, and in Northern Ireland by Ulster
Sheltered Employment Ltd, a company constituted similarly to Remploy, and by
local authorities and voluntary organisations. Sheltered Employment
Procurement and Consultancy Services is a unit of the MSC set up to offer
consultancy, and other services to sheltered workshops.
In 1980 the MSC and the Northern Ireland Department of Manpower Services
helped with the cost of providing places for over 13,800 severely disabled people,
of whom approximately 1,760 were blind or partially sighted.
In order to ease regional imbalances in unemployment and job opportunities, the
MSC provides grants, allowances and other financial help under the Job Search
and Employment Transfer Scheme to enable people who are unemployed, or
under threat of redundancy, to look for and to move to jobs away from their
homes. This helps with the cost of attending interviews, visiting new areas to look
for work, and living away from home and moving home to the new area. The
National Mobility Scheme (see p 156) makes movement easier for public sector
housing tenants in England and Wales. Similar aims in Scotland are promoted by
provisions in the Tenants’ Rights (Scotland) Act 1980.
Professional and Executive Recruitment (PER) is a specialist branch of the MSC
which helps employers looking for professional, managerial, scientific or technical
staff and assists people seeking employment at this level. PER operates nationally,
through a network of offices and offers a comprehensive recruitment service which
EMPLOYMENT
291
Careers Service
TRAINING
SERVICES
Training in
Industry
Training
Opportunities
Scheme
includes selection, interviewing and advertising. The service is free for job-seekers,
while employers are charged a fee based on the type of service used. There is a
broadly similar service, known as Professional and Executive Personnel and free to
both employers and candidates, in Northern Ireland.
Local education authorities must under the Employment and Training Act 1973
provide a careers service, a vocational guidance service for people attending all
educational institutions (except universities) and an employment service for those
leaving them. Authorities also provide an employment service for people,
especially young people, in their early years at work. They work closely with the
MSC’s Employment Service which also caters for those who have left school and
choose to use its facilities in preference to those of the careers service.
In Northern Ireland the careers service is an integral part of the Department of
Manpower Services.
The MSC Careers and Occupational Information Centre publishes a wide range
of material to help people looking for jobs to make an informed choice, and
distributes careers literature to some 15,000 schools, careers offices and other
centres.
The main responsibility for carrying out industrial and commercial training lies
with individual employers, but in recent years the MSC, with government
support, has evolved a comprehensive strategy to help to improve the supply of
trained manpower needed by the economy, to provide opportunities for people to
acquire new skills, and to improve the effectiveness of training generally. The
MSC’s Training Services Division is responsible for putting these programmes
into effect. In May 1981 the Government announced a new initiative on training,
spelling out three important objectives for the 1980s and beyond: better
arrangements for skilled training to agreed standards; improving the vocational
education and training of all young people; and opening up more opportunities
for adults to train. Proposals are also under consideration for the establishment of
an ‘Open Tech’ to improve the effectiveness of training at technician level. Unlike
the Open University (see p 144) it would not be a separate institution but would
make existing training provisions more readily accessible for young people or
adults who could benefit from them.
There are a number of statutory industrial training boards and other industrial
training organisations concerned with the promotion of training within their
respective industries. Statutory industrial training boards may raise funds by a levy
on employers within the industry.
The Training Opportunities Scheme (TOPS) complements the training given in
industry and commerce by providing people aged 19 and over with the
opportunity to acquire new skills. Training is carried out at the Training Services
Division’s own skillcentres and annexes and at many colleges and employers’
establishments. Skillcentre courses concentrate mainly on engineering,
construction and automotive trades and those elsewhere on clerical and
commercial, management, technician and other skills. Special priority has been
given to expanding and developing technician training and, in particular,
electronics engineering courses biased towards micro-processor applications. In all
about 500 different courses are available in a wide range of occupations. Trainees
are paid allowances which vary with domestic responsibilities and may receive,
among other things, travelling expenses and lodging and meals allowances. Some
66,400 adults were trained under TOPS in 1980—81.
292
Training
Services to
Industry
CONDITIONS
OF
EMPLOYMENT
Immigrant
Workers
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Through its training services to industry the MSC provides training in the
construction and engineering trades designed to equip selected employees with
new or improved skills of direct and immediate benefit to their companies. This
training, specially tailored to the employer’s needs, is carried out either at the local
skillcentre or in the company’s own workshop. The MSC also provides regular
courses in instructional techniques for skilled craftsmen and programmes of
training in supervisory skills in the broad areas of leadership and safety. Staff
involved in preparing import/export documentation can be given instruction by
MSC trainers specialising in international trade. Training services at skillcentres
and courses at instructor training colleges are also available to trainees from
overseas.
Britain has been a pioneer in the introduction of protective legislation for the
safety, health and welfare of employees. The determination by statute of
minimum wages, holidays and holiday pay is limited to certain trades and
industries where the organisation of employers or workers, or both, is inadequate
to negotiate collective agreements and to ensure their observance. The
Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act 1978, provides considerable
safeguards for employees in their terms of employment.
An employer must give employees written information on their terms and
conditions of employment, the disciplinary rules applicable to them and the
procedure available to employees wishing to raise complaints; minimum periods
of notice when employment is to be terminated are also laid down for both
employers and employees. Employees with a minimum period of service of 104
weeks are entitled to lump-sum redundancy payments if their jobs cease to exist
(for example, because of technological improvements or a fall in demand) and
their employers cannot offer suitable alternative work, the cost being partly met
from a fund subscribed to by industry. Protection against unfair dismissal is
provided by machinery under which an employee who has been in continuous
employment for one year or more may complain against an employer of unfair
dismissal, and, if successful, obtain reinstatement, re-engagement or
compensation; under the Employment Act 1980, however, new employees in
companies employing 20 or fewer people must be employed for two years before
they have the right to complain of unfair dismissal. Legal support is given to the
right to trade union organisation by making it unfair to dismiss a person because of
membership or participation in the activities of an independent trade union, rights
of employees are also protected in regard to penalisation short of dismissal because
of trade union membership or activities. Other rights include limited payment
when work is not available for reasons other than as a result of trade dispute, and
maternity rights for female employees, including protection from dismissal
because of pregnancy, time off for antenatal care, maternity pay for the first six
weeks of absence, and the right, within certain limits, to return to work after
confinement.
In general, people coming to Britain for employment need a work permit issued
by the Department of Employment. People admitted as holders of work permits
may change their jobs only with the approval of the Department of Employment
but the Home Office will consider an application to remove the conditions
attached to their stay after four years in approved employment, and, if granted, a
worker may change employment without restriction. Among other conditions,
work permits are issued only for work requiring a recognised professional
qualification, or a high degree of skill or experience, where the Department of
Employment is satisfied that the worker is necessary and there is no suitable worker
EMPLOYMENT
293
in Britain or in other European Community countries to fill the post, and where
the wages and conditions are not less favourable than for similar work. In general,
the age limits for permits in most categories are 23-54 years. People coming for
certain kinds of specialist employment (for example, doctors or dentists taking up
professional appointments; ministers of religion; representatives of overseas
newspapers, news agencies or broadcasting organisations; the self-employed) do
not require work permits but may require entry clearances issued by a British
Consulate or High Commission.
Permits are also issued under the Training and Work Experience Scheme for
nationals of countries outside the European Community who are undertaking
limited periods of training or work experience leading to the acquisition of a
particular occupational skill or qualification and to young people from outside the
European Community to undertake short periods of employment to broaden their
industrial or commercial experience and, if appropriate, to improve their
knowledge of English.
European Community workers entering another member State have the same
rights as nationals of that State as regards facilities of the national employment
services, pay and working conditions, trade union rights, vocational training and
retraining facilities, access to housing and property, and social security and
industrial injury benefits.
Discrimination The Race Relations Act 1976 (see p 28) makes it unlawful to discriminate on
grounds of colour, race, nationality (including citizenship) or ethnic or national
origin, in employment, training and related matters. The Department of
Employment operates a Race Relations Employment Advisory Service with
advisers based in the main areas where ethnic minorities have settled. Its general
aim is to promote equal opportunity in employment and its advisers offer help and
guidance to employers and unions on a wide range of issues which arise in the
employment of a multi-racial workforce.
of Legislation forbids any employment of children under 14 years of age, and
employment in any industrial undertaking of children who have not reached the
statutory minimum school-leaving age (16); of women and young people
underground in mines and in certain other dangerous occupations (for example,
certain processes connected with lead manufacture); and of women in factories and
workshops within four weeks after childbirth. It also limits and defines the
permissible hours of employment for women and young people.
The employment provisions of the Sex Discrimination Act (see p 27) make it
unlawful to discriminate on the grounds of sex or marital status in employment,
training and related matters. The Equal Pay Act 1970 requires that a woman doing
the same or broadly similar work as a man or work that has been given equal value
by job evaluation, should receive equal pay and conditions of employment.
Earnings Pay for manual occupations, and increasingly for non-manual occupations, is
normally set by collective bargaining (see p 298). In a small number of industries
and trades legally enforceable minimum rates are set by wages councils.
Basic rates of pay vary widely, and in private industry rates paid locally often
exceed the rates specified in national agreements. Higher rates are usually paid for
overtime and shift work, and weekly earnings may be further increased by
incentive bonus schemes. Piecework, or payment-by-results, is still common,
though of declining importance as production methods in many industries
increasingly influence the pace of work.
According to the latest annual survey conducted by the Department of
Employment
Women and
Children
294
Hours of Work
Holidays with
Pay
Additional
Benefits
BRITAIN 1982 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Employment into the earnings and hours of work of manual workers, the average
weekly earnings of full-time male manual workers on adult rates in manufacturing
and some non-manufacturing industries in October 1980 were, including
overtime, ^1 I3-o6, while for full-time female manual workers on adult rates they
were X^^'73- Women’s earnings are thus markedly lower than those of men,
partly because on average they work shorter hours, with less overtime paid at
premium rates, and partly because they tend to be concentrated in the less well-
paid jobs. • 11 u
Remuneration in commercial, technical and professional careers is normally by
annual salary paid monthly, often on a scale carrying annual increments. Starting
salaries may be in the range of £3,000 to £3,500 (lower for 16 to 18 year-old
trainees and higher for some graduates entering industry). Most of the senior posts
in business, the professions and the Civil Service command salaries in the range of
£14,000 to £20,000 a year gross before tax. The posts with salaries in the range of
£20,000 to £40,000 a year include those of Cabinet Ministers, top-ranking
judicial appointments, the highest positions in government departments and the
largest municipal authorities, editors of daily newspapers, leading members of
professions and in the higher managerial posts in industry, commerce and banking.
Salaries of chairmen of major companies may exceed £50,000 a year gross, and
other people such as star entertainers often receive more through fees or fixed
contracts. The range of net incomes in the country as a whole is reduced by a
system of progressive direct taxation.
The basic working week in Britain is in the range 38-40 hours for manual work
and 35-38 for non-manual work ; a five-day week is usually worked. Actual hours
worked in manual occupations differ from their basic hours; in October 1980 they
were 43 for men on adult rates compared with 37 5 for women on adult rates. Men
and women in non-manual occupations generally work less overtime than manual
workers.
National legislation limits and defines permissible hours of work for women and
young people in industrial work—the maximum, with limited exceptions, being
48 hours a week and 10 hours a day (9 hours a day for 6-day-week workers) in
premises covered by the Factories Act for adult women over 18 and young people
between 16 and 18. The employment of women and young people at night is in
principle prohibited in industrial undertakings, except for young men over 16
working in some continuous-process industries (subject to certain conditions). The
Health and Safety Executive can make exemptions from these restrictions to
maintain or increase efficiency. In general the hours of work of adult men, or of
people not working in factories, are not restricted by statute.
Holiday entitlements are normally determined by collective agreements. These
generally provide for at least four weeks paid holiday a year. However, over half of
manual workers covered by agreements have entitlements of more than four
weeks. Non-manual workers tend to have longer holidays than manual workers.
Additional holidays, dependent upon length of service, are also quite common.
Additional benefits exist in varying degrees. About half of employees in
employment are covered by occupational pension schemes (see p 128). Many
employees are also covered by occupational sick pay schemes, additional or
complementary to the State schemes (see p 130), and by schemes to provide private
medical treatment. A smaller number are covered by schemes for redundancy
payments above the statutory minimum. Such benefits are more usual among
clerical and professional employees receiving a standard salary than among manual
Transport
Right: An experimental train, without wheels
or driver, is levitated on a magnetic field and
guided by a single concrete rail. It has been
designed for use as a shuttle service for
passengers going between Birmingham’s new
airport terminal, the railway station and the
National Exhibition Centre.
Below: The ‘Railbus’, developed jointly by
British Rail Engineering and Leyland
Vehicles, costs less than half the price and uses
under a third of the fuel of a conventional
diesel train. A prototype version has been
running successfully in Britain for two years.
Veterinary aids
Right: ‘Ewesplint’, a device made of stainless
steel for extending the economic life of sheep
unable to graze properly because of fractured
or worn teeth. The splint is bonded to the
existing teeth enabling the sheep to eat
normally.
Below: A portable operating bed and blanket
system which folds into a small suitcase. It can
lift a horse in four minutes using a blower
connected to a car battery.
Cloning oil palms
Scientists have developed a tissue culture
method for the propagation of selected oil
palms. Tissue is taken from any growing part
of the plant and put in a special nutrient
medium. This forms a callus which can be
repeatedly subdivided and will grow
indefinitely; with a hormone stimulus it will
then throw off a number of identical plants.
Above: A potted clonal
oil palm.
Below: The palm bank
from which new cultures
can be prepared.
Above: Forming the
callus.
,53 '. ,4
v- v.
EMPLOYMENT
295
Employers’ Health
Services
Other Amenities
Human
Relations in
Industry
TRADE
UNIONS
workers, who are more likely to have the opportunity to augment their pay.
Employees may have use of a company car and some firms provide profit-sharing
and share-saving schemes. In accord with its view that share ownership and profit-
sharing can help in developing employees’ understanding of, and commitment to,
business and industry, the Government has extended fiscal measures designed to
encourage profit-sharing.
Social security benefits, which include unemployment, sickness and industrial
injury benefits, are described in the Social Welfare chapter.
Many employers voluntarily maintain medical services for their employees over
and above the statutory requirements. The big employers, including the State and
the boards of nationalised industries, have taken the lead but a number of smaller
factories also provide medical services and in a few cases have joined together in
group medical services.
An increasing number of firms pay part or all of the cost of recreational facilities.
Some have their own rehabilitation centres or support convalescent homes. The
provision of low-priced meals at the place of employment has become usual in
large undertakings and quite common in smaller ones. Many offices and shops
which are unable to provide canteen facilities for their staff have adopted luncheon
voucher schemes.
Research has been sponsored or conducted by the Social Science Research Council
and the Medical Research Council into the factors affecting human relationships
and efficiency in industry. A number of independent bodies also research and
advise on matters such as management and job satisfaction. The Department of
Employment’s Work Research Unit advises employers and trade unions on
improving the quality of working life.
In nearly all industries and occupations some workers (and in some industries
nearly all workers) are organised into trade unions. These have grown up
gradually and independently over many years and, consequently, their form and
organisation vary considerably, as do their traditions. In the last decade or so, trade
unionism has again increased particularly among clerical, supervisory, technical
and administrative workers. Trade unions may be organised either by occupation
(for example, they may recruit clerks or fitters wherever employed) or by
industry. Some are based on a combination of both principles. In some companies
membership of the relevant trade union is required by agreement between the
employer and union (‘closed shops’). At the end of 1979 the total membership of
British trade unions was 13-2 million. There were 477 unions, but nearly 80 per
cent of all trade unionists were in the 27 largest unions, each with a membership of
100,000 or over. Among the largest unions are the Transport and General Workers
Union (2 million members), the Amalgamated Union of Engineering Workers
(j-2 million) and the General and Municipal Workers Union (967,000), of the
non-manual workers’ unions, which have grown considerably in size in recent
years while manual workers’ unions have tended to decline, the largest is the
National and Local Government Officers’ Association (753,000 members).
The Certification Officer appointed under the Employment Protection Act
1975 is required to maintain a list of trade unions. To be eligible for entry on the list
a trade union must show that it consists wholly or mainly of workers and that its
principal purposes include the regulation of relations between workers and
employers, or between workers and employers’ associations. Certain rights and
privileges are reserved for independent trade unions.
296
Trades Union
Congress
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The central organisation of most large unions consists of a national executive
council, usually elected by and responsible to the annual conference of delegates
from local branches. Between conferences, councils are the highest authority of
unions, and carry out policy decisions made by the conference delegates. Most
unions also have regional and district organisations. At the level of the individual
member there are local branches, covering one or more workplaces. Members
may attend branch meetings, make suggestions about terms and conditions of
employment, discuss the work of the union, and take part in the election of the
union’s officers. The branch takes action on certain matters considered to be
entirely, or mainly, of local interest and forwards its views on wider issues for
action by the union’s national or regional bodies. The organising of members in
individual places of work, and the negotiation of local pay agreements with
managements at the factory or plant, may be done by full-time district officials of
the union, or, increasingly, by ‘shop stewards’, who are chosen by their fellow
members in the place of work to represent them. Trade unions vary in the degree
to which shop stewards are integrated into their organisation. Where two or more
unions have members in the same workplace, shop stewards’ committees may be
formed to discuss matters of common concern.
Many unions provide ‘strike pay’ for members involved in official industrial
action. They also provide legal advice for members who suffer injury or contract
diseases at work, and may pay members’ legal costs where a case for compensation
goes to court. Some unions pay benefits in case of illness, accident, death and
retirement (additional to those payable under the national insurance scheme)
financed out of membership contributions. Many trade unions are affiliated to the
Labour Party. Any trade union wishing to use money for political purposes must
set up a separate fund, subject to special rules, one of which must allow any
member who objects to contributing to the fund to opt out.
In Britain the national centre of the trade union movement is the Trades Union
Congress (TUC), which was founded in 1868. The TUC’s objects are to promote
the interests of its affiliated organisations and to improve the economic and social
conditions of working people. Its affiliated membership comprises 109 trade
unions which together represent 12-1 million workpeople, or 92 per cent of all
trade unionists in Britain, and it exercises power less through a formal structure
than through influence. The TUC deals with all general questions which concern
trade unions both nationally and internationally and gives assistance on questions
relating to particular trades or industries. Through membership of the National
Economic Development Council (see p 177), it participates in discussions relating
to the national economy.
The annual Congress convenes in September to discuss matters of concern to
trade unionists and to employees generally. It elects a General Council which
represents it between Congresses and is responsible for carrying out Congress
decisions, watching economic and social developments, providing educational and
advisory services to unions, and presenting to the Government the trade union
viewpoint on economic, social and industrial issues. The council is also empowered
to mediate in inter-union disputes in certain circumstances, and uses its authority to
deal with unauthorised and unconstitutional stoppages of work, as well as official
disputes.
The TUC, as well as many individual unions, conducts extensive educational
services for members, mainly concerned with industrial subjects, trade unionism
and the principles and practice of industrial relations.
The TUC plays an active part in international trade union activity, through its
affiliation to the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions and the
297
Scotland, Wales
and Northern
Ireland
EMPLOYERS’
ORGANISA¬
TIONS
Confederation
of British
Industry
Legal
Framework
EMPLOYMENT
European Trade Union Confederation. It also nominates the British workers’
delegation to the annual International Labour Conference.
Trade unions in Scotland and Wales also have their own national central bodies,
the Scottish Trades Union Congress and the Wales Trades Union Congress, which
in many respects are similar in constitution and function to the TUC. Trade unions
in Northern Ireland are represented by the Northern Ireland Committee of the
Irish Congress of Trade Unions (ICTU), though the majority of trade unionists in
Northern Ireland belong to unions based in Great Britain. Almost 90 per cent of
Northern Ireland trade unionists are members of organisations affiliated to the
ICTU, while the majority belong to unions which are also affiliated to the TUC.
Many employers in Britain are members of employers’ organisations, a large
number of which are wholly or partly concerned with labour matters. The
primary aims of such organisations are to help to establish suitable terms and
conditions of employment, including a sound wage structure and proper standards
of safety, health and welfare; to promote good relations with employees and the
efficient use of manpower; and to provide means of settling any disputes which
may arise. They may also represent members’ points of view as manufacturers or
traders to the Government on commercial matters.
Employers’ organisations are usually organised on an industry basis rather than a
product basis, for example, the Engineering Employers’ Federation. A few are
purely local in character or deal with a section of an industry; others are national in
scope and are concerned with the whole of an industry. In some of the main
industries there are local or regional organisations combined into national
federations, while in others, within which different firms are engaged in making
different principal products, there is a complex structure with national and
regional federations for parts of an industry as well as for the industry as a whole.
Altogether there are some 150 national employers’ organisations, which negotiate
the national collective agreements for their industry with the trade unions
concerned. Many of these national organisations belong to the Confederation of
British Industry.
The Confederation of British Industry (CBI) is the largest employers’ organisation
in Britain, representing some 300,000 companies which together employ 12
million people. It exists primarily to ensure that Government and the public
understand the needs, intentions and problems of businessmen. Membership
ranges from the smallest to the largest companies, private and nationalised, and
covers a broad spectrum which includes manufacturing, agriculture, construction,
distribution, mining, finance, retailing and insurance. Most national employers
organisations, trade associations and some chambers of commerce are members.
Policy is determined by a council of 400 membeq, and there is a permanent staff of
400 including regional offices and an office in Brussels. The CBI is the British
member of the Union of Industries of the European Community. The CBI
nominates the employers’ representatives on the National Economic
Development Council, and on the Manpower Services Commission, the Health
and Safety Commission and the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service.
The Trade Union and Labour Relations Act 1974 defines the status of trade unions
and employers’ associations and sets out certain legal requirements which they
must observe. The Act confers immunities on trade unions in respect of actions
taken in support of a trade dispute, allows peaceful picketing, and also provides
that collective agreements shall not be legally enforceable unless they are written
agreements and specifically provide for this.
298
INDUSTRIAL
RELATIONS
Collective
Bargaining and
Joint
Consultation
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Employment Protection Act 1975 placed the Advisory, Conciliation and
Arbitration Service on a statutory basis, provided for the appointment of a
Certification Officer and for the setting up of the Central Arbitration Committee.
It also established an Employment Appeal Tribunal to hear appeals concerning
decisions of the Certification Officer and of industrial tribunals. (Industrial
tribunals are independent judicial bodies which deal, in general, with complaints
from employees on infringements of individual rights under a number of Acts
concerning, for example, redundancy payments, contracts of employment, equal
pay, unfair dismissals and sex discrimination.)
The Employment Act 1980 seeks to obtain a balance between rights and
responsibilities in industrial relations. It enables the Government to make funds
available to encourage the wider use of secret union ballots and to produce codes of
practice to promote good industrial relations. It limits lawful picketing to the
picket’s own place of work and restricts the scope for secondary action such as
blacking and sympathetic strikes. It provides greater protection for the individual
in relation to the closed shop and makes a number of changes to employment
protection legislation, particularly to help small firms. As provided for in the Act,
the Government has published codes of practice on the conduct of picketing and
the closed shop.
Northern Ireland has a similar but separate system of industrial relations.
Industrial relations legislation enacted in 1976 brought the province largely into
line with similar legislation enacted in Great Britain between 1974 and 1976, and
new legislation taking effect in 1981 is designed to reflect most of the provisions of
the Employment Act 1980.
The structure of industrial relations in Britain has been established mainly on a
voluntary basis. The system is based chiefly on the organisation of employees and
employers into trade unions and employers’ associations, and on freely conducted
negotiations between them at all levels. The State is ready to provide assistance
where the organisation of employees, employers, or both, is inadequate to conduct
negotiations, or where the usual methods of resolving disagreements have failed.
The number of stoppages of work due to industrial disputes in 1980 was the lowest
since 1941, whilst the number of working days lost was well below the 1979 figure
and less than the annual average for the period 1970—79.
In most industries terms and conditions of employment and procedures for the
conduct of industrial relations are settled by negotiation and agreement between
employers and trade unions. Agreements may be industry-wide, supplemented as
necessary by local agreements in companies or factories (plant bargaining). In the
public sector, agreements are generally reached at industry level. In some
industries, companies and factories, negotiations are conducted by meetings held
when necessary, while in others, joint negotiating councils or committees have
been established on a permanent basis. The scope of the various joint bodies (from
the national joint industrial councils for whole industries to the works councils and
committees in individual workplaces) varies widely, and has frequently been
extended to cover such additional matters as production plans, absenteeism,
training, education and welfare. Normally these arrangements for collective
bargaining suffice to settle all questions which are raised, but provision is
sometimes made for matters not so settled to be referred for settlement to
independent conciliation or arbitration. The Employment Protection Act 1975
made provision for information needed for collective bargaining purposes to be
disclosed by employers to trade unions, subject to certain safeguards.
There are standing arrangements for consultation at national level between the
299
Advisory,
Conciliation and
Arbitration Service
Office of
Manpower
Economics
Statutory
Negotiating
Machinery
EMPLOYMENT
Government, the TUC, the CBI, and the nationalised industries through the
National Economic Development Council on matters in which employers and
workers have a common interest. The operation of collective bargaining has from
time to time been restricted in an attempt to control inflation.
The Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service (ACAS) has the general duty
of promoting the improvement of industrial relations, and in particular of
encouraging the extension of collective bargaining and the development and
(where necessary) reform of collective bargaining machinery. ACAS is under the
control of a council consisting of an independent chairman and nine other
members experienced in industrial relations, of which three are nominated after
consultation with the CBI, three after consultation with the TUC, and three are
independent. The service conciliates in industrial disputes in both the public and
private sectors of industry on a voluntary basis where this is thought to be helpful.
ACAS assistance is sought in 2,000-3,000 disputes each year. In addition, there are
requests for ACAS to provide arbitration in a further 300—400 disputes, which it
may do either by appointing single arbitrators or boards of arbitration or by
referring cases to the Central Arbitration Committee (see below).
Although ACAS has prime responsibility for intervention in disputes, the
Secretary of State for Employment retains powers to appoint a court of inquiry or
committee of investigation into a dispute, although these are rarely used.
The service gives advice on all aspects of industrial relations and personnel
management. It conducts surveys to diagnose the causes of industrial relations
problems and suggests remedial action to management and trade unions or
employee representatives. It carries particular responsibility for attempting
conciliation on complaints of infringement of individual employee rights (such as
individual complaints of unfair dismissal, complaints under the Equal Pay Act 1970
and complaints on employment matters under the Sex Discrimination Act 1975
and the Race Relations Act 1976). The service is also required to inquire into
questions concerning wages councils (see below) referred by the Secretary of State
for Employment.
The Central Arbitration Committee is an independent body which provides
boards of arbitration for the settlement of disputes referred to it by ACAS at the
joint request of the employers and trade unions concerned. It adjudicates on claims
made under various provisions of the Employment Protection Act, the Equal Pay
Act and other legislation, and decides questions of compliance with the Fair Wages
Resolution (concerning wages and conditions of employment to be observed by
government contractors).
The Office of Manpower Economics, established in 1971 as an independent non-
statutory body, acts as secretariat for the police negotiating board and the three
review bodies set up to advise on the remuneration of certain groups in the public
sector for which negotiating machinery is not appropriate, such as the higher
judiciary and senior civil servants; the armed forces; and doctors, dentists and
pharmacists. It also services special inquiries on particular pay structures and related
problems.
In a small number of industries and trades where the organisation of employers or
employees or both is not strong enough to provide a basis for successful voluntary
arrangements, there are statutory wage-regulating bodies, known as wages
councils. These are composed of equal numbers of representatives of employers
and employees in the respective sectors of industry, with three independent
members. Wdges councils publish proposals for minimum remuneration,
holidays, holiday remuneration and other terms and conditions of employment.
300
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
HEALTH AND
SAFETY AT
WORK
The Health and
Safety
Commission
After considering any representations the councils make orders giving statutory
force to such proposals. The Department of Employment’s Wages Inspectorate
enforces the provisions of these wages orders. About 2-7 million workers are
covered by such arrangements.
The Secretary of State for Employment has power to convert a wages council
into a statutory joint industrial council (SJIC), a body which functions in the same
ways as a wages council, except that it has no independent members. Such
conversion is intended to assist in the development of collective bargaining, an
SJIC being seen as a half-way stage between the statutory system and full voluntary
collective bargaining.
Agricultural wages boards (there are boards for England and Wales, for
Scotland and for Northern Ireland) perform similar functions in relation to
employment in agriculture.
Employers have a duty at civil and criminal law to take reasonable care of their
employees, and others affected by their work activities, and to provide a safe
system of working, while employees have a duty of care towards each other and
also to take care of their own safety. The principal legislation is the Health and
Safety at Work etc Act 1974. Its purpose is to secure the health, safety and welfare
of people at work and to provide for the protection of the public whose health and
safety might be affected by work activities. The Act places general duties on
everyone concerned with work activities, including employers, the self-employed,
employees; manufacturers, designers, suppliers, importers of articles and
substances for use at work; and those in control of premises.
The 1974 Act is superimposed on earlier health and safety legislation, such as the
Mines and Quarries Act 1954, the Factories Act 1961 and the Offices, Shops and
Railway Premises Act 1963 and the various regulations made under them. The
earlier legislation imposes specific obligations and standards on, for example,
occupiers of particular types of premises or employers engaged in particular
activities and covers such matters as the fencing of machinery, precautions against
the exposure of people to toxic dusts and gases, precautions against fire, dangerous
substances and special risks, the safe condition of premises, and cleanliness, lighting,
temperature and ventilation.
Some of the earlier legislation was replaced immediately by the 1974 Act, but
the remainder continued in force pending its progressive replacement by
regulations and codes of practice approved by the Health and Safety Commission.
Replacement regulations have been introduced to require the notification of
accidents and dangerous occurrences and to control work with lead, each set being
supported by either an approved code of practice or other guidance material, and
there are others in the course of development.
The Health and Safety Commission, established by the Health and Safety at Work
Act and accountable to Parliament through the Secretary of State for Employment
has responsibility for developing policies, including guidance, codes of practice, or
proposals for regulations to further the implementation of the Act. In the case of
proposals for changes in legislation, the Commission consults the people who will
be affected by them and makes recommendations to the Secretary of State
concerned. The Commission has an independent chairman, three members
appointed after consultation with the Confederation of British Industry, three after
consultation with the Trades Union Congress, and two after consultation with
local authority associations. The Commission has three subject advisory
committees (on toxic substances, on dangerous substances and the Medical
Advisory Committee), two committees concerned with particular hazards (major
EMPLOYMENT
301
The Health and
Safety
Executive
Training
hazards and nuclear installations), and nine industry advisory committees, for
agriculture, ceramics, construction, foundries, health services, oil, paper and
board, printing and railways.
The Act also set up the Health and Safety Executive, which includes government
inspectorates covering a range of work activities: the Factory Inspectorate (which
also deals with a large number of activities outside factories such as hospitals and
educational establishments) and inspectorates for mines and quarries, agriculture,
major sources of industrial air pollution, nuclear installations, and hazardous
installations. It also includes the Employment Medical Advisory Service and the
Research and Laboratory Services Division. The inspectors who have powers of
entry and enforcement seek compliance with health and safety legislation in
individual workplaces and give advice. The Employment Medical Advisory
Service provides a nation-wide service of advice on the medical aspects of
employment problems to employers, employees, trade unions, doctors and others.
It carries out medical examinations of workers in hazardous occupations and
surveys of employment hazards, advises the staff of the Manpower Services
Commission on medical aspects of job placement, rehabilitation and industrial
training and co-operates with school medical officers and careers officers in helping
to solve the employment problems of handicapped school leavers.
The Research and Laboratory Services Division provides scientific and medical
support and testing services, and carries out research both in its own laboratories
and through universities and other institutions on a contract basis, often jointly
funded by industry. Areas of study include explosion risks, fires, protective
equipment, methods for monitoring and measuring airborne contaminants,
occupational medicine and hygiene, and the safety of engineering systems.
Health and safety legislation is enforced in most offices and shops by inspectors
appointed by local authorities, working under guidance from the Health and
Safety Executive. Some other official bodies work under agency agreements with
the Health and Safety Executive, for example the Railway Inspectorate (concerned
with worker safety on railways), the Industrial Pollution Inspectorate for Scotland
and the Department of Energy (concerned with health and safety in the oil and gas
industry).
A basic principle underlying the Health and Safety at Work Act is that
employers, in consultation with their employees, should have the responsibility of
working out health and safety arrangements, within the broad obligations of the
law, to suit their own workplaces. Employers with five or more employees must
draw up a written policy for safety and health, including arrangements for
implementing it and keeping it up to date, and communicate it to their employees.
Recognised and independent trade unions may appoint safety representatives to be
the employees’ official channel for representation and consultation over safety
matters. Two safety representatives may make a written request to the employer to
establish a safety committee, which must then be set up within three months.
Training for workpeople in health and safety is one of the general requirements of
the Health and Safety at Work Act. The Manpower Services Commission, which
has a general national responsibility for training, provides a number of courses on
health and safety matters through its Training Services Division, which works
closely with the Health and Safety Executive. The industrial training boards also
provide courses covering the industries for which they are responsible. In addition,
the Trades Union Congress organises a programme of courses to train safety
representatives to carry out their functions effectively.
302
Northern
Ireland
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Training for health and safety professional advisers is provided by nationally
organised voluntary bodies. The National Examination Board for Occupational
Safety and Health, set up in 1980, provides a nationally recognised qualification for
safety officers. Other nationally organised voluntary bodies, such as the Royal
Society for the Prevention of Accidents, also provide training in health and safety
at work.
In Northern Ireland, the Health and Safety Agency, roughly corresponding to the
Health and Safety Commission, and an Employment Medical Advisory Service,
were set up by the Health and Safety at Work (NI) Order 1978. The Northern
Ireland Department of Manpower Services, through its Factory Inspectorate, is
responsible for seeking compliance with health and safety legislation, which is
broadly similar to that for Great Britain.
rj Public Finance
THE PUBLIC
SECTOR
Through the public finance system government raises money from individuals and
companies by taxation, borrowing and other means, and spends it on behalf of the
community in the provision of goods and services such as education, health and
defence, in payments to people and organisations, and in capital investment. The
term public finance also covers the raising of revenue and its expenditure by local
authorities and certain other public bodies and the financial relationship between
these agencies and central government.
The broad principle of public finance is based on an assessment of expenditure
needs, followed by proposals for raising the required amounts of money. Public
expenditure plans are published annually, usually at the same time as the Budget,
which consists of proposals for changes in taxation necessary to raise the revenue to
finance public spending. Tax revenue and other receipts are paid into the
Consolidated Fund, the Government’s account at the Bank of England from
which most of the Government’s sterling expenditure is financed. Any excess of
expenditure over receipts is met by borrowing, most of it from the National Loans
Fund, also operated as an official sterling account at the Bank of England.
The public expenditure planning total includes the current and capital expenditure
of central government and local authorities, collectively known as general
government. This definition is used for published figures of public expenditure
totals, in particular for the Government’s public expenditure White Paper (The
Government’s Expenditure Plans ig8i—82 to 1983—84, HMSO ^9-30, Cmnd 8175,
ISBN o 10 181750 9). Public expenditure also includes finance for the nationalised
industries; the capital expenditure of certain other public corporations; and the
contingency reserve (to cover essential unforeseen or unquantifiable expenditure).
It does not include payment of debt interest. The estimate of out-turn for 1980—81
in the public expenditure White Paper published in March 1981 was that the
planning total amounted to some ^94,000 million; debt interest is estimated to
have been £4,850 million.
Expenditure by central government (including finance for the nationalised
industries) accounted for about three-quarters of the planning total in 1980—81 and
that by local authorities for about one-quarter. Social security accounted for 25 per
cent of the total, health and personal social services for 11 per cent and defence for
12 per cent. The planning total in 1981-82, as shown in the 1981 public
expenditure White Paper and analysed in the diagram on p 304, was £104,000
million, about the same in real terms as in 1980—81.
Current expenditure in 1980—81 accounted for nearly 88 per cent of total
expenditure and capital expenditure for a little over 12 per cent. The major item of
current expenditure was wages and salaries, closely followed by grants to
individuals (mainly social security benefits). Over half of capital expenditure
consisted of fixed investment.
In accordance with the Government’s policy of reducing the share of the public
sector in the economy over the medium term, the 1981 White Paper plans
provided for a fall in public expenditure in real terms of 4 per cent between
1980-81 and 1983-84.
304 BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Planned Public Expenditure 1981-82
Defence
£000m
12.3
European Community
contributions
Other overseas aid and
other overseas services
Agriculture, fisheries, food
and forestry 
Industry, energy, trade
and employment 
Transport  
Housing
Other environmental services 4.0
3.6
Law, order and protective
services
Education, science, arts
and libraries
Health and personal
social services
11.7
Social security
Other public services
Common services
Scotland
Wales
Northern Ireland
Nationalised industries’
total net borrowing
Contingency reserve, net of
general allowance for shortfall
and special sales of assets
11.8%
PUBLIC FINANCE
305
The Estimates
Public
Expenditure
Surveys
Control and
Examination of
Public
Expenditure
Cash Limits
Comptroller and
Auditor General
Each December government departments submit to the Treasury estimates of their
cash requirements for the financial year beginning in the following April. After
approval by the Treasury the estimates are presented to Parliament shortly before
the Budget (see p 306). They are approved by Parliament in July in the annual
Appropriation Act, expenditure between April and this date being covered by a
Vote on Account which Parliament passes before the start of the financial year.
Supplementary estimates may also be presented to Parliament during the course of
the year. If any Vote is overspent the Public Accounts Committee (see p 306) will
consider the provision of an Excess Vote and may ask for evidence from the
department concerned. In each parliamentary session there are 29 ‘supply’ days on
which the Opposition may choose the subject for debate. Supply days originally
provided Parliament with an opportunity for scrutiny and discussion of
government proposals for expenditure. Gradually, however, the debates evolved
into general discussions of departmental policy and administration, and debates on
the estimates have been supplemented by other means of controlling government
expenditure (see below).
Some items of expenditure, for example, the salaries and pensions of judges, are
not subject to annual approval by Parliament but are paid directly from the
Consolidated Fund in accordance with Acts of Parliament which allow payments
to continue from one year to the next.
Each year, a survey is made of the whole range of projected public expenditure
over the medium term. This culminates in the publication (in recent years on
Budget day) of a report on the Government’s expenditure plans which gives the
expected out-turn for the current financial year (ending on 31 March) together
with plans for the following three years. Hitherto, these plans have been expressed
at constant prices (broadly, the price levels of the previous autumn) in order to
show changes from one year to another in real terms. In the 1982 survey, however,
plans are to be considered in cash terms and will be published in this form in the
spring of 1982 in order to improve financial management.
Control of public expenditure additional to control inherent in parliamentary
approval of the estimates is exercised through the system of cash limits and by the
Comptroller and Auditor General. Examination of public expenditure is carried
out by Select Committees of the House of Commons.
Some 40 per cent of public expenditure is subject to control by cash limits (external
financing limits in the case of nationalised industries). Another 40 per cent consists
of‘demand determined’ services (for example, social security benefits) on which,
once policy and rates of payment have been determined, expenditure in the short
run depends on the number of eligible recipients. The remaining 20 per cent is
current expenditure of local authorities, which central government does not
directly control; however, the major part of the contribution by central
government to such expenditure, the rate support grant (see p 61), is subject to
cash limits. Once fixed, cash limits are not usually revised during the course of the
year unless a decision is taken to alter the level of provision for the service
concerned. The general policy is that, if any overspending occurs, a corresponding
deduction is made from the cash limit for the following year. As in the case of
overspending on votes, the Public Accounts Committee may ask for evidence
from the department concerned when overspending occurs.
The Comptroller and Auditor General, a crown official independent of the
Government, has two functions. As Comptroller General he has the duty to ensure
that all revenue and other public money payable to the Consolidated Fund and the
306
Select Committees
of the House of
Commons
Contingency
Reserve
THE BUDGET
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
National Loans Fund is duly paid and that all payments out of these funds are
authorised by statute. As Auditor General he audits, on behalf of the House of
Commons, accounts of the transactions of the Consolidated Fund and National
Loans Fund and every Appropriation Account. He submits reports on these and
other accounts to Parliament.
Public expenditure is also examined by Select Committees of the House of
Commons, which study in detail the activities of government departments and
require the attendance of ministers and officials for cross-examination. The Public
Accounts Committee considers the accounts of each government department and
the reports on them of the Comptroller and Auditor General. The Committee has
become a powerful instrument for the exposure of waste and inefficiency. It
submits to Parliament reports which carry considerable weight, and its
recommendations are taken very seriously by the departments and organisations
that it examines. The Government’s formal reply to the reports is presented to
Parliament by the Treasury in the form of a Treasury minute and the reports and
minute are debated annually in the House of Commons.
Planned expenditure includes an unallocated reserve for contingencies and other
requirements that cannot be quantified when plans are being drawn up. Formerly,
only decisions that increased the volume of expenditure (that is expenditure at
constant prices) were charged to the reserve but, in line with the move to cash
planning, the contingency reserve for 1981—82 has been expressed in cash terms and
decisions to increase cash limits (in respect of higher pay or prices as well as volume
increases) are charged to the reserve.
The Budget incorporates the Government’s proposals for financing its
expenditure, particularly for changes in taxation. The proposals are announced to
the House of Commons, usually in March or April, although supplementary
budgetary measures may also be introduced at other times of the year.
The Budget speech by the Chancellor of the Exchequer is followed by the
moving of a set of Ways and Means (or Budget) resolutions in which the proposals
are embodied. These resolutions, when passed by the House, become the
foundation of the Finance Bill, in which the proposals are set out for detailed
consideration by Parliament, becoming law as the Finance Act, usually in July.
A major function of the Budget is to act as an instrument of economic
management. The Budget statement is normally the main occasion for a review of
general economic policy and is accompanied by the publication of the Financial
Statement and Budget Report. The Budget is concerned with the balance between the
total of goods and services which are likely to be available to the nation and the
total claims which are likely to be made on them. Through taxation the
Government can exert a considerable influence on the volume of demand for
goods and services; its measures can also have a broader influence on the pattern of
demand and through, for instance, increasing incentives, on the long-term
performance of the economy.
The bulk of taxation proposals in the Budget are concerned with changes in the
rates or coverage of existing taxes, the introduction of new taxes or the abolition of
existing ones and changes in the administrative machinery relating to taxation. In
two cases (income tax and corporation tax), however, annual Ways and Means
resolutions followed by a Finance Act clause are necessary to maintain the taxes in
existence at all, since they are annual taxes. Thus a Budget at or about the
beginning of each financial year is a necessity.
Changes in tax coming into effect before the Finance Bill has received Royal
PUBLIC FINANCE
307
SOURCES
REVENUE
Taxes on
Income
Income Tax
Assent, usually from Budget Day or from the start of the tax year, are dealt with
under the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act. This enables the Government to
collect certain taxes provisionally; income tax, for example, either at the rates
previously in operation or at new rates following the passage of the appropriate
Ways and Means resolutions. Some changes affecting expenditure, such as
increases in pensions and family allowances, are usually announced in the Budget
statement. Such measures, however, are generally given effect by separate
legislation, statutory instruments or administrative action. Other ways of
changing taxation are by special legislation or the use of the regulator, which
permits limited changes between Budgets in the rates of value added tax (by up to
25 per cent) and the main groups of excise duties (by up to 10 per cent).
Table 30 shows total revenue from taxation and other sources in 1980—81 and
the forecasts for 1981-82.
OF The three principal sources of tax revenue are first, taxes on income, which include
income tax and corporation tax; second, taxes on capital, which include capital
transfer tax and capital gains tax; and third, taxes on expenditure (including taxes
on the ownership or use of certain assets), which include protective and excise
duties, value added tax (VAT), the national insurance surcharge, local rates (see
p 62), stamp duties and licence duties (for example, on motor vehicles). Taxes on
individual incomes are progressive in that larger incomes bear a proportionately
higher rate of tax. The Inland Revenue assesses and collects the taxes on income
and capital and the stamp duties; the Customs and Excise collects the most
important taxes on expenditure (the customs and excise duties and VAT), while a
variety of authorities is responsible for the collection of the remainder.
Income tax is imposed for the year of assessment beginning on 6 April. The basic
rate of 30 per cent applies to the first £11,250 of taxable income. A rate of 40 per
cent applies to the ^11,251-^13,250 band of taxable income, 45 per cent to the
^13,251-^16,750 band, 50 per cent to the ^id,751-^22,250 band and 55 per cent
to the -^22,251—^27,750 band, ending with a maximum rate of 60 per cent on
taxable income over ^27,750. These rates apply to both earned and investment
incomes. Investment incomes are also liable to a surcharge of 15 per cent on their
excess over ,£5,500. The tax imposed on an individual is graduated by means of
personal allowances (£1,3 75 for a single person or a wife and £2,145 for a married
man) and reliefs. These are given for, among other things, interest payments on a
mortgage; since 1981, as part of the business start-up scheme, certain investors in
new companies have been able to obtain relief on up to £10,000 invested in any
one year.
In general the income of married couples is taxed as one but a husband and wife
may choose to have the wife’s earnings charged separately for tax on condition that
the husband receives the single instead of the married personal allowance. Any
investment income is taxed jointly.
For 1981-82 a single person earning £5,000 a year pays £1,087 in income tax
while a married man with the same earned income pays £856. The amount of tax
payable by a single person varies from, for example, £37 on an earned annual
income of £1,500 to £12,050 on one of £30,000.
Most wage and salary earners pay their income tax under a Pay as You Earn
(PAYE) system whereby tax is deducted (and accounted for to the Inland
Revenue) by the employer, thus enabling them to keep as up to date as possible
with their tax payments.
In general, income tax is charged on all income which originates in Britain and
on all income arising abroad of persons resident in Britain. Interest on certain
308
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
TABLE 30: Taxation and Miscellaneous Receipts ig8o—8i and 1981-82
£ million
1980-81 1981-82
Budget Estimated Budget Percentage
forecast out-turn forecast of total
Income tax
Surtax"
Corporation tax6
Petroleum revenue tax
Supplementary petroleum duty
Capital gains tax
Development land tax
Estate dutyc
Capital transfer tax
Stamp duties
Special tax on banking deposits
23,830
8
4,860
2,560
490
25
17
400
670
24,704
5
4,650
2,420
520
24
27
415
635
28,202
3
4,600
2,210
1,850
575
25
15
445
775
400
37'3
61
29
2-4
o-8
o-6
10
0-5
Total Inland Revenue
32,860
33,400
39,100
5i->
Value added tax 12,450 11,30° 12,650
Oil 3,650 3,550 4,800
Tobacco 2,775 2,750 3,220
Spirits, beer, wine, cider and perry 2,825 2,600 3,200
Betting and gaming 475 465 510
Car tax 575 455 55°
Other excise duties 10 10 25
European Community own resources^
Customs duties, etc 95° 800 835
Agricultural levies 290 205 210
16-7
64
4'3
4'2
0-7
0-7
11
o-3
Total Customs and Excise
24,000
22,135
26,000
344
Vehicle excise duties
National insurance surcharge
1,411
3,509
1,403
3,585
1,628
3,809
2-2
5'0
Total taxation
Miscellaneous receipts'’
61,780
3,635
60,523
6,291
70,537
4,987
934
6-6
Total
65,415
66,814 75,524
Source: Financial Statement and Budget Report 1981—82
“Absorbed with income tax into a unified form of personal taxation in 1973 but sums are still due from
before the time of abolition.
^Corporation tax receipts include advance corporation tax:
Net of repayments 1,7°° 1,810 1,760 2-3
Superseded by capital transfer tax in 1975 but sums are still due in respect of deaths that occurred before
abolition.
^Customs duties and agricultural levies are accountable to the European Community as ‘own
resources’.
includes broadcast receiving licences, interest and dividends, oil royalties and special sales of assets.
British government securities belonging to persons not ordinarily resident in
Britain is exempt. Britain has entered into agreements with many countries
providing for relief from double taxation; where such agreements are not in force
unilateral relief is often allowed. Individuals who are resident in but domiciled
outside Britain and who work for non-resident employers are entitled to a special
PUBLIC FINANCE
309
Corporation Tax
Special Tax on
Banking Deposits
Oil Taxation
Taxes on
Capital
Capital Transfer
Tax
allowance under which only half of their gross salary (or three-quarters after nine
years of residence) is considered for purposes of British taxation.
Companies pay corporation tax on their profits, but the amount of taxable profit is
that remaining after deduction of allowances for investment and certain other
costs. Only a proportion of any capital gains is included in total profits, with the
result that chargeable gains as a whole are subject to a lower effective rate of tax. A
company which distributes profits to its shareholders is required to make to the
Inland Revenue an advance payment of corporation tax. In general, this payment
is set against a company’s liability to corporation tax on its income and the
recipient of the distribution in respect of which the advance payment was made is
entitled to a tax credit, which satisfies his or her liability to income tax at the basic
rate.
The rate of corporation tax is fixed retrospectively in the Budget for the past
financial year; for the financial year 1980 (1 April 1980—31 March 1981) it is 52 per
cent with a reduced rate of 40 per cent for small companies (such companies being
defined in the relevant Finance Act). The system of corporation tax is designed to
encourage expansion and re-investment, particularly when an enterprise is
relatively new, and substantial incentives and reliefs are available. Companies are
encouraged to invest by generous tax allowances while stock relief reduces the
liability to tax by taking account of increases in the cost of holding stock. As part of
its policy for encouraging small businesses the Government has raised the
qualifying profits limits for the small companies rate of corporation tax to ,£80,000
for full relief and ,£200,000 for marginal relief. If all allowances and reliefs are
taken into account, British companies in aggregate pay only 16 per cent of their
historic cost profits in corporation tax (excluding advance corporation tax). The
tax is assessed on the profits of accounting periods, the rate of tax being the rate for
the financial year in which the accounting period falls. Where an accounting
period straddles 31 March the profits are apportioned on a time basis.
In the Budget of 1981 a special tax, for one year only, was imposed on banking
deposits. The tax is payable by banks on aon-interest-bearing sterling deposits in
excess of ,£15 million at the rate of 2 percent on the first £200 million and 2-5 per
cent on the remainder. The tax is not deductible against corporation tax.
Under the Oil Taxation Act 1975 a petroleum revenue tax (deducted in
computing profits for corporation tax) is charged on profits from the winning, as
opposed to the refining or other form of processing, of hydrocarbons under licence
in Britain and on its continental shelf. The rate of tax is 70 per cent. Each licensee of
an oilfield is charged on the profits from that field after deduction of certain
allowances and reliefs, computed at half-yearly intervals. The Petroleum Revenue
Tax Act 1980 provides for payments of the tax in advance of assessment for
liability. A supplementary petroleum duty was introduced in the Budget of 1981,
to apply until the end of 1982, at a rate of 20 per cent on the total value of oil and gas
produced, after an exempt allowance of 1 million tonnes a year for each field. The
duty is deductible in computing profits liable to petroleum revenue tax and
corporation tax. Following consultations with the industry, measures either to
replace or to continue the duty will be proposed in the Budget of 1982.
A comprehensive tax, capital transfer tax, applies to transfers of personal wealth in
three main areas: lifetime gifts; transfers on death; and transfers relating to settled
property (that is any property held in trust). The tax is chargeable on a cumulative
basis in respect of lifetime transfers as they occur and on death as if the deceased had
given away the whole of his or her estate immediately before death. In both cases
3io
Capital Gains
Tax
Development
Land Tax
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the tax on a particular transfer is arrived at by adding to it the value of the
chargeable transfers made within 10 years up to the date of the transfer in question.
The rates of tax applicable are progressively higher on successive slices of the
cumulative total of chargeable transfers, with a lower scale of tax for lifetime
transfers than for transfers on death. The higher scale applies to transfers made on
death or up to three years before the transferer’s death. Under both scales the first
£50,000 of transfers is exempt. The rates on amounts over this figure rise from 30
per cent (higher scale) and 15 per cent (lower scale) on the slice between £50,000
and £60,000 to 75 per cent (higher scale) and 50 per cent (lower scale) on the excess
over £2-01 million.
Capital gains accruing on the disposal of assets are liable to capital gains tax or, in
the case of companies, to corporation tax. The rate of tax is normally 30 per cent,
but in the case of individuals may be less, depending on their circumstances. For
small businesses the tax on gifts and certain deemed disposals of business assets may
be deferred until the assets are sold. Certain assets, including the principal private
residence, chattels worth less than £2,000 (and any chattels, except those used for
the purpose of a trade, with a predictable life of less than 50 years), private motor
cars and National Savings Certificates are exempt. An individual is exempt from
the tax where the total net gains do not exceed £3,000 in any year. The excess over
this amount is chargeable at a rate of 30 per cent. Gains on government securities
are exempt from the tax if they have been held for more than 12 months.
The Development Land Tax Act 1976 introduced a development land tax (DLT)
on development value in place of the charge on development gains and on first
lettings introduced in the Finance Act 1974. Any assessable development value
raised on the disposal of an interest in land is chargeable to DLT at the rate of 60 per
cent but the first £50,000 of any such development value realised in any financial
year is completely exempt. Exemptions from DLT include the sale or
development of owner-occupied residences.
Taxes on
Expenditure
Value Added Tax
Protective Duties
Value added tax (VAT) is a broadly-based tax, currently chargeable at 15 per cent.
It is collected at each stage in the production and distribution of goods and services
by taxable persons (generally those carrying on a business with a turnover of more
than £15,000 a year). The final tax is borne by the consumer. The taxable person is
charged by suppliers of goods and services with VAT (input tax) and then charges
the customer with VAT on goods and services supplied (output tax). It is the
difference between output and input tax that is paid to Customs and Excise.
There are two methods by which certain goods and services are relieved from
VAT: one is by charging VAT at a zero rate (a taxable person does not charge tax
to a customer but reclaims any input tax paid to suppliers); the other is by
exemption (a taxable person does not charge a customer any output tax and is not
entitled to deduct or reclaim the input tax). Zero-rating applies to most types of
food (except in the course of catering); books, newspapers and periodicals; fuel
(except for petrol and other fuels for road use); construction ofbuildings; exports;
public transport fares; young children’s clothing and footwear; and drugs and
medicines supplied on prescription. Exemption applies to land (including rents),
insurance, postal services, betting, gaming (other than by gaming machines and
lotteries), finance, education, health, and burial and cremation.
These are chargeable as customs duties in accordance with the Common Customs
Tariff of the European Community (no such duties are chargeable on goods which
qualify as Community goods). Special customs import and export procedures are
operated under the common agricultural policy and community levies are
PUBLIC FINANCE
Excise Duties
Car Tax
Stamp Duty
National Insurance
Surcharge
PUBLIC
SECTOR
BORROWING
3ii
chargeable on a wide range of agricultural products from non-community
countries.
Oils used for road fuel bear duty at the basic rate. Heavy oil not used for road fuel
and light oil used for furnace fuel bear a lower duty and are zero-rated for VAT.
Oil used as chemical feedstocks or otherwise than as a fuel or lubricant in
manufacturing is relieved from the duty. There are duties on spirits, beer, wine,
madewine, cider and perry, mainly related to alcoholic strength. The cigarette
duty is based partly on a charge per 1,000 cigarettes and partly on a percentage of
retail price. Duty on other tobacco products is based on the weight of the finished
product. The principal betting duties are the general betting duty, which is
charged at a rate of 8 per cent of the stake money, except for on-course betting,
which is charged at 4 per cent; pool betting duty (which applies to football pools),
charged at a rate of 40 per cent of the stake money; and bingo duty, charged at 10
per cent. Casino gaming machines are taxed mainly by licence duties.
The licence duty on a private motor car is ^7° a year; for motor cycles and three
wheel vehicles, etc., it amounts to £7, £1401 £28 a year according to engine
capacity. Goods vehicles are taxed by unladen weight and taxis and buses are taxed
by seating capacity.
New cars, motor cycles, scooters, mopeds and caravans, whether British made or
imported, are chargeable with car tax at 10 per cent on the wholesale value. VAT
falls on the price including car tax.
Transfers of property (other than of stocks and shares, which are liable to duty at 2
per cent) up to a value of £20,000 are exempt from stamp duty. Above this
threshold stamp duty is chargeable at rates of 0-5 per cent, 1 per cent and 1-5 per
cent on transfers valued up to ^25,000, .£30,000 and £35>000» respectively, with
the full rate of 2 per cent applying to values above £35,000.
The national insurance surcharge took effect from the start of the I977-7^ financial
year. It is in the form of a levy paid by employers, along with their national
insurance contributions, in respect of their employees and is equal to 3-5 per cent of
employees’ earnings up to £200 per week (earnings of less than £27 per week are
exempt from the surcharge). Generally it is assumed that the incidence of this tax
will be passed forward into prices, so that it ranks as a tax on expenditure.
To raise the money it requires over and above tax revenue and other receipts the
Government issues marketable and non-marketable debt.
Marketable debt consists of Treasury bills and government stock (known as gilt-
edged stock as there is no risk of default). Each Friday the Government sells by
tender a quantity of Treasury bills with a life of 91 days. These are bought by the
discount houses (see p 316), institutions which developed in the nineteenth century
as discounters of bills of exchange. The discount houses hold the Treasury bills for a
period and, as maturity approaches, they sell them to the banks (which do not bid
directly at the tender, the discount houses guaranteeing to take up the whole of any
offer).
Gilt-edged stock is marketed on the Stock Exchange by the Government
broker; some stocks are also available at post offices through the National Savings
Stock Register. In 1981 the Government began to issue indexed stock on which
both principal and interest are linked to the movement in retail prices.
Non-marketable debt comprises the various forms of national savings designed
to attract the smaller saver (these enable the Government to raise funds from the
312
The National
Debt
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
personal sector—see p 316); certificates of tax deposits;1 and ways and means
advances which, basically, are very short-term internal government borrowing.
The bulk of public corporations' borrowing is met by central government
through the National Loans Fund, although public corporations’ temporary
borrowing needs are met largely from the market under Treasury guarantee. That
part of local authority borrowing met by central government is dealt with through
the National Investment and Loans Office (set up in 1980 as a result of the merger
of the Public Works Loan Board and the National Debt Office) which has recourse
to the National Loans Fund. The local authorities also borrow directly from the
market, both short-term and long-term, through a range of different investments.
Some public corporations and local authorities also borrow, under special
statutory power and with Treasury consent, in foreign currencies.
The Government has also, in the past, borrowed from abroad on the
international capital markets, from international agencies such as the International
Monetary Fund and from governments, as with the North American government
loans.
After allowing for the changes introduced by the 1981 Budget the central
government borrowing requirement for 1981—82 was expected to be ^11,497
million, compared with an estimated out-turn of ^ 12,760 million in 1980—81, and
the public sector borrowing requirement (PSBR) ^10,566 million compared with
an estimated ^13-455 million in 1980-81. A continuing reduction in the PSBR is a
fundamental aim of the Government’s monetary policy.
Net central government borrowing each year represents an addition to the
National Debt. At the end of March 1980 the National Debt amounted to some
£96,000 million of which nearly £4,000 million was in currencies other than
sterling. Of the £92,000 million sterling debt, nearly £71,000 million consisted of
gilt-edged stock; of this, 34 per cent had a maturity of up to five years, 24 per cent a
maturity of over five years and up to 15 years and 42 per cent a maturity of over 15
years or undated. The remaining sterling debt was made up mainly of Treasury
bills and national savings securities.
^he certificate of tax deposit scheme is operated by the Inland Revenue. Certificates may be purchased
by individuals or corporate bodies to be tendered in settlement of a wide range of taxes.
i8 Banking and Financial
Institutions
The main institutions which form the British banking system are the Bank of
England (the central bank), the deposit banks (offering a wide range of services),
the National Girobank, the Trustee Savings Banks, the overseas banks, the
merchant banks and the discount market. In addition, the Department for
National Savings is responsible for the administration of government savings
schemes.
Specialised financial services outside the banking system are provided by,
among others, finance houses, leasing companies, factoring companies, finance
corporations, pension funds, investment and unit trusts, building societies, credit
unions, the insurance market, the Stock Exchange, the foreign exchange market,
the London gold market and commodity markets.
The role of the financial institutions in the economic life of the country is
discussed in a report, Conwiittee to Review the Functioning of Ftnancicil Institutions.
Report and Appendices (Cmnd 7937- HMSO, ^io-jo. ISBN o 10 17937° ?)>
published in 1980 (the Wilson Report).
The Bank The Bank of England was established in 1694 by Act of Parliament and Royal
of England Charter as a corporate body; the entire capital stock was acquired by the
Government under the Bank of England Act 1946. The Bank’s main functions are
to act as note-issuing authority, to advise the Government on financial matters, to
execute monetary policy and to act as banker to the Government. It also exercises
prudential supervision over the banking system and manages the Exchange
Equalisation Account on behalf of the Treasury.
The Bank of England has the sole right in England and Wales of issuing bank
notes. The note issue is fiduciary, that is to say, it is no longer backed by gold but by
government and other securities. The Scottish and Northern Ireland banks have
limited rights to issue notes; these issues, apart from an amount specified by
legislation for each bank, must be fully covered by holdings of Bank of England
notes. The provision of coin for circulation is the responsibility of the Royal Mint,
a government department.
The Government has emphasised the importance of control of the money
supply as a tool of policy. The Bank seeks to influence the trend of the growth of
the money supply in accordance with target rates of growth. (Announced
monetary targets were adopted in 1976. The Government has incorporated the
targets in a medium-term financial strategy, which gives the planned annual rate of
monetary growth over four years.)
The Bank is able to influence monetary conditions through its dealings with the
discount houses (see p 316) which developed in the nineteenth century as bill
brokers for industrialists. If the Bank wishes to withdraw cash from the banking
system it sells government securities in the open market, leading to a transfer of
funds from the public to the Bank; bank deposits fall in the process and the banks
recall short-term loans to the discount market. If the banking system is short of
314 BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
funds the Bank relieves the shortage either by buying bills from the houses or by
lending directly to them.
The methods by which the Bank operates in the money markets, however, have
undergone some change. Until August 1981 the Bank was ready to lend directly to
the discount houses at rates at or near its announced Minimum Lending Rate, in
addition to its open-market dealings with the discount houses in bills. Under the
new arrangements, the Bank no longer undertakes to announce continuously the
rate at which it will supply cash to the market, but conducts its operations in such a
way as to keep short-term interest rates within an unpublished band. More
emphasis is now put on open-market operations in bills than on direct lending to
the discount houses.
As banker to the Government the Bank is responsible for arranging the
financing of the Government’s borrowing and for managing the National Debt.
Under the Banking Act 1979 deposit-taking businesses require authorisation
from the Bank of England and are subject to its continuing supervision. Institutions
may be authorised either as recognised banks or as licensed deposit-takers.
On behalf of the Treasury the Bank manages the Exchange Equalisation
Account (EEA), which holds Britain’s official reserves of gold, foreign exchange,
Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) on the International Monetary Fund and
European Currency Units (ECUs). Using the resources of the EEA, the Bank may
intervene in the foreign exchange market to check undue fluctuations in the
exchange value of sterling.
The Deposit The major deposit banks are Barclays, Lloyds, Midland, National Westminster
Banks and Williams and Glyn’s and, in Scotland, the Bank of Scotland, Clydesdale Bank
and the Royal Bank of Scotland. Their primary business is the receipt, transfer and
encashment of deposits, together with the provision of overdraft and other loan
facilities to personal and commercial customers. Customers may deposit money in
two main types of account, current accounts or deposit accounts. Although no
interest is paid on current accounts, withdrawals may be made on demand and
amounts transferred by cheque. Interest is paid on deposit accounts but seven days’
notice is required for withdrawals. Bank profits arise from the difference between
the interest earned from lending and the costs incurred, including the interest paid
to depositors. (Bank lending rates are determined by base rate, which may differ
between banks. The greater the creditworthiness of a borrower the smaller is the
premium charged above base rate.)
The deposit banks provide full banking services throughout Britain and operate
through some 14,000 branches. National Westminster has the largest number of
branches (3,200), followed by Barclays (3,000), Midland (2,500) and Lloyds
(2,400). The banks are increasingly involved in international banking activities and
are now important lenders for house purchase. They have also acquired substantial
interests in finance houses and leasing agencies and some have set up their own unit
trusts and merchant banks.
The deposit banks’ main liquid assets consist of balances at the Bank of England,
money at call (mainly loans to discount houses), their holdings of Treasury and
some other bills and short-dated British government securities. The banks also
hold a proportion of their assets as portfolio investments (mainly longer-dated
British government securities) or trade investments.
The introduction in 1981 ofa loan guarantee scheme (see p 196) has increased the
involvement of banks in financing small businesses. The banks had already taken
steps in this direction by, for example, the establishment in 1979 by Midland Bank
of an independent business banking unit and a venture capital scheme; most other
banks have similar schemes.
National
Girobank
Trustee
Savings Banks
BANKING AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 3I5
The bank giro, a credit transfer scheme, and direct debiting, by which a creditor,
with the prior approval of the debtor, may claim money due direct from the
latter’s bank account, have greatly speeded the money transmission services. An
increasing number of banks have automatic cash dispensing machines and many
are also introducing more automated banking facilities. Cheque cards entitle
holders to cash a cheque up to the value of £$0 at any office of major British and
Irish banks and at offices of many banks overseas and are also generally acceptable
as a guarantee for payments by cheque up to that amount. Credit cards (Access and
Barclaycard) associated with the clearing banks are also a widely used method of
payment; Barclaycard operates within the international VISA system.
Membership of the London Bankers’ Clearing House, which deals with the
clearing of cheques and drafts, consists of the Bank of England, the London
clearing banks, the Co-operative Bank and the Central Trustee Savings Bank. In
1981 it was announced that National Girobank (see below) was to join the clearing
house. In 1980 cheques and drafts worth nearly £4,500,000 million passed through
the London clearing system. Town clearing enables transfers of funds between
banks within the City of London to be settled the same day. By 1983 the proposed
Clearing House Automated Payment System will make available same-day
settlement elsewhere in Britain.
The National Girobank was introduced in 1968 to provide a low-cost current
account banking and money transfer service. It operates through more than 20,000
post offices in Britain. All accounts and transactions are maintained by means of a
computer complex at Bootle, Merseyside. In March 1981 Girobank had ^0,000
accounts with balances of over £470 million. The number of transactions was
nearly 300 million in the year ended March 1981. In addition to its services to
individuals, Girobank’s services to business customers include a facility whereby
organisations with dispersed branches, depots and representatives can rapidly
channel receipts into their central account. Some 180 local authorities as well as
voluntary housing associations use Girobank’s rent collection services. Girobank s
international services also provide money transfer facilities for the 19 million
account holders in the European Community and other countries.
The range of banking services provided by Girobank includes current accounts,
personal loans, a cheque guarantee card, limited overdrawing for personal
customers and overdrafts for corporate customers, deposit accounts, budget
accounts, bridging loans, travellers’ cheques and foreign currency, bureaux de
change and postcheques for drawing cash at post offices in 28 overseas countries.
The Trustee Savings Banks (TSBs), most of which were founded in the nineteenth
century, operate under their own trustees but are subject under legislation to the
supervision of the Trustee Savings Banks Central Board and the Treasury.
Following a planned programme of amalgamations, there were 16 individual
banks in June 1981 (compared with 67 in 1975) with about 1,650 branches, 14
million accounts and total deposits in excess of £5>700 million. TSBs are
empowered to provide a full range of banking services including cheque accounts
and credit services. A pass book account can be opened with as little as £1. Interest
is paid on seven-day and one-month deposits and a higher rate on larger sums
deposited for periods up to five years. Credit services include personal loans,
overdrafts and mortgages. The TSBs have their own credit card, Trustcard, which
operates within the VISA system, and TSB Trust Company provides a wide range
of life assurance and unit trust facilities. The TSBs have also begun to lend to
smaller companies in the form of term loans.
316
Overseas
Banks
The Merchant
Banks
The Discount
Market
National
Savings
National Savings
Bank
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Well over 400 overseas banks and financial institutions were represented in
London in 1981 through branches, subsidiaries, representative offices and
consortia. Some 360 banks were directly represented, while about 60 banks and
financial institutions were represented through a stake in one or more of the 27 or
so joint venture banks operating in London. Of those directly represented, some 76
were from the United States, about 25 fromjapan and nearly 140 from Europe, of
which well over half were from the European Community. They provide a com¬
prehensive banking service in many parts of the world and engage in the financing
of trade not only between Britain and other countries but also between third
countries.
Merchant banks have traditionally been primarily concerned with acceptances1
and with the sponsoring of capital issues on behalf of their customers. Today they
have a widely diversified and complex range of activities with an important role in
international finance and the short-term capital markets, the provision of expert
advice and financial services to British industrial companies, especially where
mergers, takeovers and other forms of corporate reorganisation are involved, and in
the management of investment holdings, including trusts, pensions and other funds.
The discount market is an institution unique to the City of London. It provides a
financial mechanism which promotes an orderly flow of short-term funds by the
discount houses borrowing ‘at call’ or at short notice from the banks and lending to
the government by buying Treasury bills. The discount houses have recourse to
the Bank as ‘lender of last resort’.
The assets of the discount houses mainly consist of Treasury and commercial
bills, government and local authority securities and negotiable certificates of
deposit denominated in both sterling and United States dollars. The discount
houses accept as a formal responsibility that they should cover the government’s
need to borrow on Treasury bills which are offered on tender each week.
The Department for National Savings is responsible for the administration of
government savings schemes: National Savings Bank accounts, National Savings
Certificates, British Savings Bonds, Premium Savings Bonds and Save As You
Earn contracts. Government policy has traditionally been directed towards
encouraging investment, primarily of personal savings, in these schemes,
particularly as they represent a major source of funds for financing the public sector
borrowing requirement. In May 1981 National Savings totalled .£17,000 million.
Facilities are provided by National Savings for the purchase of government stocks;
a selection of over 50 stocks is held on the National Savings Stock Register. Since
1980 new initiatives to raise a larger share of personal savings directly for the public
sector have been introduced and some existing facilities made more competitive.
The National Savings Bank provides a countrywide system for depositing and
withdrawing small savings at post offices or by post. There are about 21 million
active accounts. Ordinary Accounts, which carry a government guarantee, bear
interest at 5 per cent and the first £70 of annual interest is tax-free. Up to £ 100 can
be withdrawn on demand at any savings bank post office but a few days’ notice is
required for larger amounts. Deposits bearing a higher rate of interest may be
made in Investment Accounts. Since January 1981 the Investment Account has
been a direct charge on the National Loans Fund (see Chapter 17), which has
1 The term is derived from the method of financing trade by which commercial bills are accepted or
guaranteed by a merchant bank against documents, after which they may be discounted for cash by a
discount house or other intermediary.
317
National Savings
Certificates
Premium Savings
Bonds
BANKING AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
assumed full liability for the principal and interest paid to depositors. At the end of
May 1981 the sum of the two accounts totalled some £4,30° million.
National Savings Certificates, in units of £10, are encashable at par at any time.
Interest, which is free of income tax (including investment income surcharge) and
capital gains tax, is paid only on encashment. The maximum permitted holding of
the current Twenty-first Issue is ^5,000. Under the terms of the Second Index-
linked Issue of National Savings Certificates, the repayment value is related to the
movement of the retail prices index (subject to the certificates being held for one
year). If held for five years a bonus of 4 per cent of the purchase price is added to the
repayment value. The maximum permitted holding is £3,000.
In May 1981 the total investment in all forms of National Savings Certificate
was £9,500 million.
Premium Savings Bonds are in units of £1 (minimum purchase is £5) and
individual holdings are limited to £10,000. After a qualifying period of three
months the bonds give investors a chance to win tax-free prizes. There is a weekly
draw for prizes of £100,000, £50,000 and £25,000 and a monthly draw offering
thousands of prizes ranging in value from £50 to £250,000. Total net sales of
bonds to May 1981 were £1,470 million.
Save As You The Third Issue of the Save As You Earn (SAVE) scheme, introduced in 1975.
Eam allows for regular monthly savings of fixed amounts, from £4 to £50, over five
years. On the fifth anniversary of the start of the contract each payment is revalued
in line with the retail prices index. Alternatively, the payments may remain
invested until the seventh anniversary, when they will be index-linked again and a
bonus equal to two monthly payments added. Uncompleted contracts repaid
between the first and seventh anniversaries earn annual interest of 6 per cent.
The Fourth Issue of SAVE, introduced in November 1980, runs concurrently
with the Third Issue and is available to individuals entitled to purchase shares under
a share option scheme approved by the Inland Revenue. Regular monthly
payments, of between £10 and £50, by deduction from pay over five years,
qualify for bonuses equal to 18 and 36 monthly contributions on the fifth and
seventh anniversaries respectively. Interest at the rate of 8 per cent a year is payable
on completed contracts repaid between the fifth and seventh anniversaries and also
on repayment of uncompleted contracts between the first and seventh
anniversaries.
Any interest or bonus under a Third or Fourth Issue savings contract is free from
income tax (including investment income surcharge) and capital gains tax.
OTHER Many special financial facilities, which are supplementary to the credit facilities of
FINANCIAL the banks, are provided through institutions outside the banking system. These
INSTITUTIONS include institutions providing credit in specialised forms, such as finance houses,
leasing and factoring companies; finance corporations; institutions which manage
investments on behalf of the public, such as pension funds, and investment and unit
trusts; intermediaries which are less dependent on the financial markets in the City
of London, such as building societies and credit unions; the insurance market;
institutions which provide financial services, such as the Stock Exchange; the
foreign exchange market; the London gold market and commodity markets.
Finance
Houses
Finance houses are major suppliers of hire purchase finance for the personal sector
and of short-term credit and leasing to the corporate sector. About 80 per cent of all
their business is accounted for by the 42 firms which constitute the Finance Houses
Leasing
Companies
Factoring
Companies
Finance
Corporations
Pension Funds
Investment
and Unit
Trusts
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Association (FHA). At the end ofjune 1981 the value of credit outstanding to the
members of FHA amounted to £8,800 million.
The leading finance houses comply with the authorities’ policies on lending
similar to those applied to banks, and all finance houses are required to observe
term controls affecting the minimum deposits and maximum repayment period
for specific goods financed by certain forms of lending.
Leasing companies buy and own plant or equipment required and chosen by
businesses and lease it at an agreed rental. This form of finance has grown quickly
in importance, partly because the leasing companies can take advantage of
investment incentives to the benefit of customers whose tax position would
otherwise make them unavailable. In 1980 the 57 members of the Equipment
Leasing Association acquired assets valued at some £2,400 million, which
represented over 12 per cent of total investment during the year in plant,
equipment and vehicles.
Factoring consists of making cash available to a company in exchange for its debts.
Over the last 20 years it has developed as a major financial service, covering exports
from and imports to Britain as well as domestic trade. In 1980 the Association of
British Factors handled business of over £2,000 million and some 2,400 companies
made use of the Association’s services.
Finance corporations meet the need for medium- and long-term capital when such
funds are not easily or directly available from traditional sources such as the Stock
Exchange or the banks.
Finance for Industry Limited (FFI) was formed in 1973 as the holding company
for two previously separate but related corporations, the Finance Corporation for
Industry (FCI) and the Industrial and Commercial Finance Corporation (ICFC).
The purpose of the merger was to provide, in one specialist financial institution,
the capacity to support investment programmes over the whole range of industry.
During the year ended 31 March 1981 FCI advanced a total of £45 million. The
ICFC provides medium- and long-term funds at fixed interest rates for the small
and medium sectors of industry. At the end of March 1981 the ICFC had gross
facilities outstanding of £451 million in 3,900 companies. The shares in FFI are
owned by the Bank of England (15 per cent) and the individual London and
Scottish clearing banks.
Other finance corporations include Equity Capital for Industry, the
Agricultural Mortgage Corporation, the Commonwealth Development Finance
Company and the Commonwealth Development Corporation (the last two being
no longer confined to the Commonwealth in their activities).
Pension funds are administered by trustees in order to invest members’ pension
contributions, either directly on the market or through intermediaries such as
insurance companies. The market value of net assets held by pension funds rose
from £2,000 million in 1957 to £34,000 million in 1979, when 22 per cent was in
British government securities and 44 per cent in the securities of British companies.
Investment and unit trusts enable investors to spread their risks and obtain the
benefit of skilled management. Investment trusts are companies which observe
certain requirements of the Stock Exchange and the tax authorities and invest in
securities for the benefit of their shareholders. At the end of 1980 their investments
totalled over £7,000 million, of which 39 per cent was held overseas.
Unit trusts are constituted by trust deed between a management company and a
BANKING AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
319
Building
Societies
Credit Unions
The Insurance
Market
Insurance
Companies
trustee company which holds the assets. Normally, the managers sell units to the
public and must invest the proceeds in securities. The costs of running the trust are
defrayed partly by an initial charge which forms part of the price of a unit and
partly by a periodic service charge which is usually taken out of the trust’s income.
Authorisation by the Department of Trade is needed before units can be offered to
the public; this is only granted if the trust deed meets the Department’s
requirements. In 1981 the Department granted unit trusts permission to hold up
to 20 per cent of their assets in shares traded on the unlisted securities market
(see p 321), in addition to the 5 per cent of assets that they were already allowed to
hold in unlisted securities, whether or not traded on this market. In June 1981 there
were 1-8 million unit holdings with a total value of £6,000 million.
Building societies are non-profit-making mutual institutions which borrow
mainly short-term from individual savers, who are generally able to withdraw
their money on demand, although fixed-term investments at higher rates of
interest have become increasingly popular, and provide long-term loans at variable
rates of interest on the security of private dwellings purchased for owner
occupation. They also lend to a limited extent on the security of business or
commercial property. Most societies pay and charge interest on the basis of a
structure of rates recommended periodically by The Building Societies
Association, the movement’s representative body.
Building societies account for about 75 per cent of all lending for house purchase
in Britain and in recent years they have overtaken the banks as the principal
repository for the personal sector’s total liquid assets. This growth has been
accompanied by a concentration of most of the business in the hands of a few large
societies, the five largest accounting for 55 per cent of the total assets of the
movement. At the end of 1980 there were 273 registered building societies with
total assets of £54,000 million and in the course of the year over £10,000 million
was committed in new mortgages.
Credit unions are small savings and loan clubs where members agree to pool part of
their savings in order to provide themselves with low cost credit. They have
developed in Northern Ireland since the time of the Industrial and Provident
Societies Act (Northern Ireland) 1969 and, more recently, have grown elsewhere
in Britain. There are now about 65 in Great Britain. The Credit Unions Act 1979
requires that members of a credit union should have a ‘common bond’, such as
working in the same factory, and provides a system for their registration and
supervision by the Chief Registrar of Friendly Societies.
The British insurance industry provides a comprehensive and competitive service
domestically and internationally. It has been estimated that British insurers handle
some 20 per cent of business placed on the world market. The London market is the
world’s leading centre for insurance where, in addition to most British companies
and Lloyd’s, a large number of overseas companies are also represented. It is the
world centre for the placement of international reinsurance and, partly as a
consequence of this, many British companies have formed close relationships with
overseas companies. A certain amount of insurance is provided by friendly
societies, banks and trades unions but most insurance services in Britain are in the
hands of mutual or joint stock insurance companies or Lloyd’s underwriters.
Although some British insurance companies confine their activities to domestic
business, the majority of the large companies undertaking general business,
together with underwriters at Lloyd’s, regard themselves primarily as
Lloyd’s
Insurance
Brokers
International
Insurance
Services
The Stock
Exchange
BRITAIN 1982 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
international insurers, the largest proportion of their premium income and claims
being attributable to international risks. There are about 850 companies authorised
to carry on one or more classes of insurance business in Britain, of which about 180
are overseas companies.
Some 320 companies belong to the British Insurance Association and these
account for about 95 per cent of the world-wide business of the British insurance
companies market.
Life assurance is available from some 300 authorised insurance companies and
from certain friendly societies: a very limited range of contracts is obtainable from
certain Lloyd’s underwriters. In 1981 three insurance companies established an
independent Insurance Ombudsman Bureau. The Bureau deals with unresolved
complaints in personal insurance issued by these companies; a number of other
companies have since joined.
Lloyd’s, established in the seventeenth century, is an incorporated society of
private insurers in London. Although its activities were originally confined to the
conduct of marine insurance business, a very considerable world-wide market for
the transaction of other classes of insurance business in non-marine, aviation and
motor markets has been built up. Lloyd s, which does not accept insurance itself, is
regulated by a series of special Acts of Parliament, the earliest dating from 1871.
Lloyd’s is not a company but a market for insurance, where business is transacted
by individual underwriters for their own account and risk and in competition with
each other. Insurance may only be placed through Lloyd’s brokers (see below),
who negotiate with Lloyd’s underwriters on behalf of the insured. Only elected
underwriting members of Lloyd s, who must transact insurance with unlimited
liability and who have met the most stringent financial regulations laid down by
the Committee, are permitted to transact business at Lloyd’s; these safeguards give
security to the Lloyd’s policy.
There are some 19,000 underwriting members of Lloyd’s grouped into about
420 syndicates and represented at Lloyd’s by underwriting agents who accept risks
on behalf of the members of their syndicates.
Insurance brokers, acting on behalf of the insured, are an essential part of the
Lloyd’s market and a valuable part of the company market. Many brokers
specialise in reinsurance business, acting as intermediaries in the exchange of
contracts between companies, both British and overseas, and often acting as
London representatives of the latter. The Insurance Brokers (Registration) Act
1977 provides for the registration of insurance brokers by a Registration Council.
Some 52 per cent of the general (that is, non-life) business of members of the British
Insurance Association originates from about 100 overseas countries, through
establishments abroad, including overseas branches and agencies, and through
reinsurance placed on the London market.
In accordance with the Treaty of Rome, insurance and reinsurance in the
European Community are regulated by directives addressed to the governments of
member states and intended to harmonise the legislation of the various member
countries, thus providing a ‘common market , which would avoid distortion of
competition. Directives in force cover reinsurance, compulsory motor insurance,
freedom of establishment for life and non-life insurers, Community co-insurance
and insurance intermediaries. The directives have been or are being implemented
in British legislation.
The stock exchanges of the United Kingdom and Irish Republic amalgamated in
1973 to become ‘The Stock Exchange’ with its mam trading floor and central
The Foreign
Exchange
Market
The London
Gold Market
Commodity
Markets
BANKING AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 321
administration in London. There are also trading floors in Glasgow, Liverpool,
Manchester, Birmingham and Dublin.
The number and variety of securities officially listed on the Stock Exchange are
greater than in any other market in the world and its turnover of company
securities is roughly equivalent to that of all the European exchanges combined.
Some 7,300 securities are quoted on the Stock Exchange; at the end of March 1981
these had a total market value of £376,000 million. About 5,800 securities of
companies were quoted, including a number of leading overseas securities.
Company issues represented more than four-fifths of the securities at market
valuation, the remainder being British, Irish Republic and other overseas
government and corporation stocks. Institutional investors, such as pension funds,
now own a higher proportion of ordinary shares than individuals. A market in
unlisted securities (generally those of small companies which have been unable
hitherto to obtain a Stock Exchange listing) was opened in 1980.
A market in traded share options opened in 1978 on the Stock Exchange. The
market, in the shares of 15 prominent British companies, enables investors not only
to buy options to purchase or sell shares in future at pre-fixed prices but also to
trade in the options themselves. Since 1981 investors have also been able to buy
options to sell shares at pre-fixed prices. A futures market in financial instruments is
under consideration.
In 1978 the Council for the Securities Industry was set up as a self-regulatory
body for the securities industry. Its main function is to sustain proper conduct and
high standards in the industry.
The market consists of banks and several firms of foreign exchange brokers which
act as intermediaries between the banks. It provides those engaged in international
trade with foreign currencies for their transactions. The foreign exchange banks
are in close contact with financial centres abroad and are able to quote buying and
selling rates for both spot and future delivery. The forward market enables traders
who, at a given date in the future are due to receive or make a specific foreign
currency payment, to contract in advance to sell or buy the foreign currency
involved for sterling at a precise fixed exchange rate.
Anyone may deal in gold but, in practice, dealings are largely concentrated in the
hands of the five members of the London gold market. The five members meet
twice daily to establish a London fixing price for gold. This price provides a
reference point for world-wide dealings in gold. Although much interest centres
upon the fixings, active dealing takes place throughout the day. A futures market
in gold is planned.
Britain remains the principal international centre for transactions in a large number
of commodities, although most of the sales negotiated in London relate to
consignments which never pass through the ports of Britain. The need for close
links with sources of finance and with shipping and insurance services often
determined the location of these physical markets in the City of London. There are
also futures markets in cocoa, coffee, grains (wheat and barley), rubber, soya bean
meal, sugar, wool and non-ferrous metals (aluminium, copper, lead, nickel, silver,
tin and zinc), potatoes and oil.
ig Overseas Trade and
Payments
Although small in area and accounting for only about 1-4 per cent of the world’s
population, Britain is the fifth largest trading nation in the world—and, as a
member of the European Community, part of the world’s largest trading area,
which accounts for about one-third of all trade.
For hundreds of years, and especially since the mid-nineteenth century, when
the rapid growth of industry, commerce and shipping was accompanied by
Britain’s development as an international trading centre, overseas trade has been of
vital importance to the economy; it has become increasingly so during the 1970s
and early 1980s with the lowering of trade barriers and greater specialisation of
international production. Exports are equivalent to about 30 per cent of the gross
domestic product at factor cost. Britain is a major supplier of machinery, vehicles,
aerospace products, metal manufactures, electrical equipment, chemicals and
textiles, and a growing oil exporter. It relies upon imports for about two-fifths of
total consumption of foodstuffs, and for most of the raw materials needed for its
industries. Invisible trade is also of great significance to the economy, accounting
for one-third of overseas earnings; and Britain’s net earnings from invisibles are
second only to those of the United States.
This chapter describes the pattern of Britain’s overseas trade in goods (including
its distribution by commodity and area) and services (invisible transactions) and
summarises the main aspects of its commercial policy, controls on trade, and
government services to exporters. The chapter ends with a description of the
balance of payments.
Overseas trade
VISIBLE In 1980 Britain’s exports of goods were valued at about £47,400 million and its
TRADE imports of goods at about £46,200 million (both values are free on board, defined
in Table 31, and are on a balance of payments basis, as distinct from an overseas
trade statistics basis, which for imports includes the cost of insurance and freight,
and for both exports and imports includes returned goods). Between 1979 and
1980 the value of exports rose by 16 per cent while that of imports increased by 5
per cent. However, in terms of volume exports rose by 2 per cent (in spite of the
strength of sterling), while imports fell by 5-5 per cent, reflecting the lower level of
economic activity in Britain and related destocking.
Commodity The changing commodity pattern of trade is shown in the diagram on p 323 and
Composition more detailed statistics are given in Table 32. Britain has traditionally been an
importer of food and raw materials and an exporter of manufactured goods.
However, in recent years the import pattern has changed considerably, with nearly
two-thirds of imports accounted for by finished and semi-finished manufactures,
almost double the proportion of i960.
Manufactured goods are still responsible for the bulk of exports, although there
has been a shift towards finished, rather than semi-finished, goods. By far the most
OVERSEAS TRADE AND PAYMENTS
323
324
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
TABLE 31: Exports and Imports 1970-80 (balance of payments basis)
1970
1977
1978
1979
1980
Value (,£ million)
Exports f.o.b.
Exports f.o.b.a
Imports f.o.b.
Imports c.i.f/
Volume index (1975 = 100):
Exports
Imports
Unit value index (1975 = 100):
Exports
Imports
Terms of trade (I975 = I00),’
8,150
8,096
8,184
9TI3
8i-i
8l-8
50-8
42-8
118-8
3T728
3T990
34,oi2
36,219
118-4
107-7
14D5
HIT
100-2
35,063
35,380
36,605
39,533
121-5
112-9
155-5
146-8
105-9
40,678
40,637
44T36
46,925
125-6
125-6
171-8
161-6
106-3
47,389
47,339
46,211
49,886
127-9
1191
192-9
185-9
103-8
Sources: Monthly Review of External Trade Statistics and United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1981 edition
“On an overseas trade statistics basis.
^Export unit value index as a percentage of import unit value index.
Notes: f.o.b. = free on board, that is all costs accruing up to the time of placing the goods on board the
exporting vessel having been paid by the seller,
c.i.f. = cost, insurance and freight, that is including shipping, insurance and other expenses
incurred in the delivery of goods as far as their place of importation in Britain. Some of
these expenses represent earnings by companies resident in Britain and are more
appropriate to the invisibles account.
TABLE 32: Commodity Composition of Trade i98oa
Exports (f.o.b)
^million per cent
Imports (c.i.f)
.£million per cent
Non-manufactures:
Food, beverages and tobacco
Basic materials
Fuels
Manufactured goods:
Semi-manufactures of which,
Chemicals
Textiles
Iron and steel
Non-ferrous metals
Metal manufactures
Other
Finished manufactures of which,
Machinery
Road vehicles
Other transport equipment
Other manufactures
Miscellaneous
TOTAL
11,136
3,269
T450
6,417
34,814
14,036
5,290
1,3^3
984
1,760
1,310
3,329
20,778
n,473
3,156
1,645
4,504
1,388
23*5
6- 9
3-i
13-6
73*5
29-6
11-2
2-9
2-1
3'7
2-8
7- 0
43-9
24-2
6-7
3'5
9-5
29
I7T36
6,178
4,050
6,908
31,240
13,493
3,146
1,545
1,449
2,487
866
3,997
17,747
7,733
3,346
1,469
5,177
1,510
344
12- 4
8-1
13- 8
626
27-0
6-3
3-i
2- 9
5- o
1-7
8-o
35-6
15'5
6- 7
3- 0
10-4
3-o
47,339
100 49,886
100
Source: Monthly Review of External Trade Statistics
aOn an overseas trade statistics basis.
Note: Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
OVERSEAS TRADE AND PAYMENTS
325
important group is machinery and transport equipment, which in 1980 accounted
for 34 per cent of total exports. Exports of machinery alone accounted for 24 per
cent of the total. The share of chemicals has also grown fairly steadily, to reach 11
per cent. The greater importance of North Sea oil exports is reflected in the recent
rapid rise in the share of fuels in total exports, from 4 per cent in 1975 to 14 per cent
in 1980. Sectors which have become relatively less important include passenger
motor cars and textiles, the latter accounting for under 3 per cent of exports in
1980, compared with 7 per cent in i960.
Recent changes in the commodity pattern of Britain’s imports are similar to
those which have affected other major industrialised countries, although to a lesser
degree. There has been a large rise in the share of finished manufactures and semi¬
finished goods, particularly the former which accounted for 35 per cent of imports
in 1980, as against 11 per cent in i960. Since 1962 imports of semi-manufactures
have formed a larger part of the total import bill than basic materials, reflecting the
tendency for producer countries to undertake processing of primary products up
to the semi-finished and occasionally finished stage. The decline in the proportion
of food imports reflects the increasing extent to which demand for food has been
met by domestic agriculture and the smaller share of consumers’ expenditure
devoted to food.
Geographical About three-quarters of Britain’s exports and imports are with other developed
Distribution of countries (see diagram below). In the last 30 years trade with the rest of western
Trade Europe has become increasingly important, representing nearly 60 per cent of
Britain’s trade in 1980, compared with about 30 per cent in 1950.
Geographical Distribution of Trade 1980
IMPORTS
EXPORTS
European
Community
Rest of
Western
Europe
North
America
Ulher develooed"
cm intnor-
-Counfm
exporting
count ring
Other develt
countries
Centrally planned
economies
* The figures do not total 100 because of rounding.
326
INVISIBLE
TRADE
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
European Community countries account for six of the top ten export markets
and for six of the ten leading suppliers of goods to Britain (see Table 33), and in
1980 Britain had a surplus on trade with the rest of the Community for the first
time since 1970. In 1979 the Federal Republic of Germany replaced the United
States as Britain’s largest single export market. In 1980 the United States regained
its traditional position as the largest single supplier of Britain’s imports from the
Federal Republic of Germany, which had been the largest single supplier in 1978
and 1979. However, in general, there has been a decline in the importance of North
America (the United States and Canada) as a trading partner, while other recent
features of Britain’s trade have been a decline in the proportion of trade with other
Commonwealth countries and the emergence of oil-exporting countries as a major
market for British exports.
TABLE 33 : Principal British Markets and Suppliers 1980“
Main markets Value Share
£ million per cent
Exports
Federal Republic of Germany
United States
Netherlands
France
Irish Republic
Belgium/Luxembourg
Switzerland
Italy
Sweden
Nigeria
Imports
United States
Federal Republic of Germany
France
Netherlands
Belgium/Luxembourg
Italy
Switzerland
Saudi Arabia
Irish Republic
Japan 
Source: Monthly Review of External Trade Statistics
"On an overseas trade statistics basis. Exports are f.o.b., imports c.i.f.
Britain has nearly always earned a surplus from its invisible transactions. These fall
into three main groups: services (receipts and payments arising from services, as
distinct from goods, supplied to and received from overseas residents); interest,
profits and dividends (income arising from outward and inward investment), and
transfers between Britain and other countries. In 1980 there was a surplus of
£2,028 million on Britain’s invisible earnings (see Table 34), some £600 million
less than in 1979-
Gross earnings of X25’764 million from invisible exports in 1980 were
equivalent to 54 per cent of the total of ^47,400 million from visible exports. The
value of exports and imports of services both grew by around 11 per cent over the
5,071
4,535
3,843
3,586
2,637
2,259
1,953
1.896
1,618
1,195
6,034
5,666
3,851
3,407
2,384
2,304
1.897
1,887
1,773
1,709
10-7
96
8-i
7-6
56
4-8
4-i
4-o
3’4
2'5
121
11'4
7.7
6-8
4-8
4-6
3-8
3-8
36
3'4
OVERSEAS TRADE AND PAYMENTS
TABLE 34: Britain’s Invisible Trade 1980
Services:
Private sector and public corporations of which,
Sea transport
Civil aviation
Travel
Financial services0
Other
General government
Interest, profits and dividends:
Private sector and public corporations
General government
Transfers:
Private
General government
Total invisible trade
327
^ million
Credits Debits Balance
15,809
15,412
3,816
2,210
2,965
T595
4,826
397
8,204
7,261
943
G75I
793
958
25,764
11,621
io,433
3,681
1,815
2,757
2,180
1,188
8,242
6,644
1,598
3,873
1,083
2,790
23,736
+ 4,188
+ 4,979
+ 135
+ 395
-\-208
+ 1,595
+ 2,646
-791
-38
+ 617
-655
— 2,122
— 290
-1,832
+ 2,028
Source: United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1981 Edition . .
‘'The figure is obtained net of overseas payments, and similar earnings in Britain by overseas financial
institutions are negligible. For these reasons the item appears only as a credit entry.
year, although in terms of volume this represented only a 5 per cent rise in imports
and a fall in exports of services of 2 per cent; trade was affected by the strength of
sterling. Although the surpluses in the value of earnings on most types of service
transactions have been rising in value, the balance of travel transactions
deteriorated in 1980 as there was a marked increase in spending on overseas visits,
14 per cent more visits overseas were made by British residents and average
expenditure per visit rose by 15 per cent. The balance on interest, profits and
dividends fell substantially, mainly because of increases in the earnings of overseas
oil companies from their British operations, while there was a fall in British oil
companies’ earnings overseas in sterling terms; interest payments to non-residents
on their sterling deposits were also much higher. There has been some increase in
earnings from portfolio investment (investment in overseas securities), a reflection
of the abolition of exchange controls (see p 332)-
Substantial government transfer payments comprise contributions to the
European Community, contributions and subscriptions to international
organisations, and bilateral aid. Receipts from transfers, all from the European
Community, rose by 74 per cent to ^958 million in 1980 as a result of higher
grants from the Regional Development Fund, greater receipts under the
Community’s agricultural policies and the first instalment of budget refunds
negotiated in 1980 (see p 72).
COMMERCIAL Britain has long been an advocate of the removal of artificial barriers to trade, and
POLICY to this end has taken a leading part in the activities of such organisations as the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), the International Monetary
Fund (IMF), the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD) and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD) (see p 86). Since joining the European Community in 1973, Britain
has conducted many of these activities in collaboration with its Community
328
General
Agreement on
Tariffs and
Trade
Community
Trade
Agreements
CONTROLS
ON TRADE
Import
Controls
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
partners. Britain also participates in the development of the Community’s
commercial policy. The Community’s common customs tariff is, on average, at a
similar level to the tariffs of other major industrial countries.
Protective tariffs have mostly been considerably reduced in recent years as a result
of negotiations held under the auspices of the GATT. These also reduced other
barriers to trade and discrimination in international commerce. In the latest series
of the GATT Multilateral Trade Negotiations, the ‘Tokyo Round’ (1973-79), a
number of agreements dealing with both tariff and non-tariff barriers to trade were
concluded. The non-tariff agreements have the common aim of reducing or
eliminating existing non-tariff barriers to trade and preventing the erection of new
obstacles. They cover areas such as technical barriers (calling for the use of
international standards whenever possible), government procurement (calling for
liberalisation of government purchasing), customs valuation (aiming at greater
uniformity for customs valuation methods), and an agreement on subsidies and
countervailing duties. Developed countries have undertaken not to grant any
forms of export subsidies and all signatories undertake not to apply countervailing
duties unless it can be clearly demonstrated that a subsidy causes or threatens to
cause material injury to the domestic market of the country concerned.
The GATT Anti-Dumping Code, to which the European Community is a
signatory, is implemented by a Community regulation which controls the anti¬
dumping action that may be taken to protect British industry (as part of
Community industry) against unfair competition and determines the criteria by
which allegations of dumping are judged.
All tariffs on trade between Britain and the other European Community countries
have been eliminated. Britain applies the common customs tariff to all countries
neither belonging to, nor having any special arrangement with, the Community,
subject to special arrangements for some industrial materials.
The Community has reciprocal preferential trading agreements with the
European Free Trade Association (EFTA) countries (Austria, Finland, Iceland,
Norway, Portugal, Sweden and Switzerland), Cyprus, Israel, Malta, Spain and
Turkey, and non-reciprocal agreements with Algeria, Morocco, Tunisia, Egypt,
Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, Yugoslavia, and a group of African, Caribbean and Pacific
countries (see below). Tariff preference is also given to developing countries
(under the Generalised System of Preferences), the Faroe Islands and the overseas
countries and territories of member countries.
Former Commonwealth preferential agreements have been phased out and
replaced, in the case of 31 developing Commonwealth countries in Africa, the
Caribbean and the Pacific, by the trade provisions of the Convention of Lome
which came into effect in 1975. This was succeeded by a second convention, Lome
II, in 1981. A further 30 non-Commonwealth developing countries within the
same geographical area are also signatories.
Britain maintains few restrictions on its international trade. Most goods may be
imported freely and only a narrow range of goods is subject to any sort of export
control.
In accordance with its international obligations under the GATT and to the
European Community, Britain has progressively removed almost all quantitative
restrictions imposed on economic grounds. The few remaining quantitative
controls mainly affect textile goods (in view of the rapid contraction of the
329
OVERSEAS TRADE AND PAYMENTS
domestic textile industry in the face of competition from low-cost supplying
countries). All quantitative restrictions have been removed from imports of goods
of Community origin, with the exception of certain internationally recognised
restrictions operated by the Department of Trade on a few goods such as arms,
ammunition and radioactive materials. Other government departments operate
certain restrictions on non-economic grounds (on goods such as animals and plants
and some of their derivatives, drugs, explosives and pornographic material) for
reasons of health, safety, conservation or social policy.
Export The great majority of British exports are not subject to any government control or
Controls direction. However, there are controls governing exports of military and strategic
significance which also apply to certain metals, metal products (including certain
British coins), waste and scrap; on cattle, sheep, pigs, horses, asses and mules, for
humanitarian purposes; on salmon and trout, to inhibit out-of-season fishing, on
cattle, swine and certain meat exported to another member State of the European
Community, for health certification purposes; on endangered species of animals
and plants and some of their derivatives, in accordance with international
agreements; on photographic material over 60 years old and valued at X200 or
more per item and other articles over 50 years old, to restrict the export of items of
national importance; on dangerous drugs; on British spirits (beverages) in casks of
less than 40 litres; and on Common Agricultural Policy products.
The Government assists exporters by creating conditions favourable to the export
trade and by providing information and advice about opportunities for trade in
other countries and credit insurance facilities. Export promotion is also assisted by
the Scottish Council (Development and Industry), the Development Corporation
for Wales and in Northern Ireland by the Department of Commerce.
The British Overseas Trade Board (BOTB) directs Britain’s official export
promotion services, which include the provision of export intelligence assistance to
British exporters in appointing agents and locating potential customers, help at
trade fairs and other promotional events overseas, and support for firms
participating in trade missions. It includes representatives of commerce and
industry, the Trades Union Congress, the Department of Trade and the Foreign
and Commonwealth Office and operates under the general authority of the
Secretary of State for Trade, who is the president.
Exporters wanting assistance and advice can consult the offices of the BOTB
throughout Britain and, through these offices, the commercial posts of the British
Diplomatic Service overseas.
Export Credit The Export Credits Guarantee Department (ECGD) provides credit insurance for
Insurance about a third of the country’s export trade and insures exports of both goods and
services. The main risks covered include insolvency or protracted default of the
buyer, governmental action which stops the British exporter receiving payment,
new import restrictions, and war or civil disturbance in the buyer s country. Cover
may commence from the date of contract or (at lower premiums) from the date of
shipment.
This insurance may be supplemented by unconditional guarantees of repayment
given direct to banks financing exporters, whether in sterling or foreign
currencies. Alternatively, for contracts over £1 million ECGD will guarantee
loans direct to overseas buyers enabling them to pay on cash terms, or lines of
credit’ similarly covering an agreed buying programme of an overseas country.
The banks provide finance against these guarantees. ECGD is also prepared to
British
Overseas Trade
Board
GOVERNMENT
SERVICES
330
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
support the issue of performance bonds in the commercial market in respect of cash
or near-cash contracts worth over ,£250,000.
Investment insurance is provided for new British investment overseas against
expropriation, war damage and restrictions on remittances.
Balance of Payments
The balance of payments statistics record transactions between residents of Britain
and non-residents. The balance on current account shows whether Britain has a
surplus of income over expenditure.
In recent years Britain’s balance of payments has usually shown a deficit on
visible trade offset wholly or partially by a surplus on invisible earnings. However,
in 1980 there was a substantial improvement in visible trade, resulting in the first
visible trade surplus since 1971. This led to a considerable improvement in the
current account which was in surplus by over ,£3,200 million (see Table 35). For
the first time exports of North Sea oil exceeded imports of crude oil, but most of
the improvement came from non-oil trade. Invisible earnings continued to
increase, but these were more than offset by the higher earnings of overseas oil
companies in Britain, by higher interest payments to non-residents on their
sterling deposits and increased spending on overseas visits by British residents.
The surplus on current account indicates a substantial increase in Britain’s
overseas assets. Although non-residents continued to invest substantially in sterling
during 1980, this was more than offset by British investment overseas.
A description of visible and invisible trade is given on pp 322—27 and capital
transactions are described below.
TABLE 35: Britain’s Balance of Payments igyo—So
£ million
1970
1975
1978
1979
1980
Visible trade balance
Invisible trade balance
Current balance
Investment and other
capital transactions
Allocation of Special
Drawing Rights
Official financing:
Net transactions with
overseas monetary authorities
Foreign currency borrowing
(net) by the Government and
public sector
Official reserves6
Balancing item
-34 -3,333
+ 857 +1,812
-1,542 -3,458 +1,178
+ 2,481 +2,595 +2,028
+ 823
+ 545
+133<1
-1+95
-125
-81
-1,521
+ 134
+ 939 -863 +3,206
-4,260 +2,177 —i,475
+ 195
+ 810
+ 655
-78
1,016
-187
+ 2,329
+ 2,195
-596
— 250
-i,059
+ 396
+ 180
—140
-941
— 291
-539
Source: United Kingdom Balance of Payments ig8i Edition
aIncludes gold subscription to the IMF ( — £38 million).
^Drawings on (-)-)/additions to ( —).
EXTERNAL
ASSETS AND
CAPITAL
FLOWS
OVERSEAS TRADE AND PAYMENTS
At the end of 1980 Britain’s aggregate identified external assets were valued at
£84,776 million1: £67,055 million belonging to the private sector (£48,431
million of investment overseas and £18,624 million of banking and commercial
claims) and £17,721 million to the public sector including official reserves (gold,
convertible currencies and IMF Special Drawing Rights) estimated at £13,275
million. An analysis of investment and other capital transactions between 1978 and
1980 is given in Table 36.
TABLE 36: Analysis of Investment and Other Capital Transactions 1978 80
£ million
Overseas investment in Britain:
British public sector
British private sector
British private investment overseas
Official long-term capital
Import credif’
Export credif
Foreign currency borrowing or
lending abroad by British banks
Changes in external sterling liabilities'
External sterling lending by British banks^
Other external borrowing or lending
Other transactions
Total
1978 1979 080
-97
4-2,005
-4,634
-336
+ 349
— 920
-433
+ 174
-507
4-88
+ 5i
+ 902
+ 3,405
-6,555
— 401
+ 72
-849
+ 1,623
+ 3,36o
+ 198
+ 490
-68
+ 582
+ 4,067
— 6,891
-125
-238
-907
+ 2,024
+ 3,8i5
— 2,462
— 1,103
-237
— 4,260 +2,177 —1,475
Source: United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1981 Edition
“Assets- increase (-)/decrease ( + ); liabilities: increase ( + )/decrease (-). Excludes official financing.
'’Excluding trade credit between related firms; after deducting advance and progress payments to
suppliers.
'’Exchange reserves and other external banking and money market liabilities in sterling.
‘'Excluding credit for exports from Britain.
At the end of 1980 direct private investment overseas (investment in branches,
subsidiaries and associated companies), excluding insurance (other than in the
United States) and oil, totalled £23,981 million, portfolio investment £16,300
million and investment by oil companies £7,35° million. At the end of 1978 over
three-quarters of direct investment (including investment by oil companies) was in
other developed countries, with North America and the European Community
each receiving about one-quarter. The main individual countries were the United
States (which has about 21 per cent of Britain’s overseas direct investment),
Australia (13 per cent) and the Federal Republic of Germany (7 per cent). Just
under half of direct investment is in manufacturing units, 13 per cent in
distribution and just over 40 per cent in other activities. In 1980 direct investment
outflow, excluding oil, was £2,569 million, while that of portfolio investment
overseas totalled £2,958 million, over three times the outflow in 1979-
At the end of 1980 Britain’s aggregate identified external liabilities were valued
at £69,982 million. Overseas investment in the private sector accounted for
£29,526 million, comprising £15,926 million of direct investment (excluding that
‘The significance of any inventory of Britain’s aggregate external assets and liabilities is limited because
a variety of claims and obligations are included that are very dissimilar in kind, in degree of liquidity and
in method of valuation.
332
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
of oil and insurance companies), ,£5,100 million of portfolio holdings of British
securities and ,£8,500 million of investment by overseas oil companies. At the end
of 1978 investment from developed countries accounted for virtually all of
overseas direct investment (excluding insurance) in Britain, with 60 per cent
originating in the United States and 23 per cent in the European Community.
Slightly under 50 per cent is in manufacturing industry.
Britain’s exchange controls were abolished during 1979 and residents are free to
acquire foreign currency for any purpose including direct and portfolio
investment overseas. Controls on the lending of sterling abroad have also been
removed and non-residents may freely acquire sterling for any purpose. Gold may
be freely bought and sold. The abolition of exchange controls means that Britain
meets its full obligations on capital movements under the OECD Code on Capital
Movements and under European Community directives. The Government
welcomes both inward and outward investment. Outward investment encourages
output abroad and develops markets for British exports, while providing earnings
in the form of interest payments, profits and dividends. Foreign investment in
Britain often helps to increase the efficiency of industry by introducing new
technological developments. In 1980 the inflow of direct, portfolio and other
investment in the British private sector amounted to ,£4,067 million.
20 Promotion of Science
and Technobgy
Britain has for centuries encouraged research and innovation, and its record of
achievement in relation to size of population is in many respects unsurpassed. This
record has been maintained throughout the twentieth century. For example,
fundamental contributions to modern molecular genetics were made by the
working out of the structure of the molecule of deoxyribonucleic acid (DN A) by
Professor Francis Crick, Professor Maurice Wilkins, and an American colleague,
James Watson, at Cambridge University in 1952. A more recent achievement was
the research carried out by Mr Patrick Steptoe and Dr Robert Edwards which
made possible the birth of the world’s first test-tube baby in Britain in July 1978.
Other notable contributions in recent years have been made by Professor Dennis
Gabor on holography (the production of three-dimensional images using lasers),
Dr Brian Josephson on superconductivity (abnormally high electrical conductivity
at low temperatures), Professor Stephen Hawking on black holes (hypothetical
regions of space), Sir Martin Ryle and Professor Antony Hewish on radio¬
astrophysics, Professor Frederick Sanger on molecular biology, and Dr Godfrey
Hounsfield on computer-assisted tomography (for medical diagnosis), among
others. Nobel prizes for science have been won by 62 British citizens, a number
exceeded only by the United States.
The Government keeps under review facilities for training scientists and ensures
that adequate research is devoted to matters of national interest, which include
defence, industrial innovation, environmental protection, use and conservation of
natural resources, the provision of good food, shelter and energy and of efficient
transport and communications.
Total expenditure in Britain on scientific research and development in 1978-79
(the latest year for which complete estimates are available) was £3,250 million, or
2 per cent of the gross domestic product. About half was provided by industrial
enterprises and by private endowments and trusts. The other half was financed by
the Government, which carries out roughly a quarter of Britain s research and
development in its own establishments. Government finance for research and
development also went to industry and the universities.
Government Responsibility for basic civil science in Britain rests with the Secretary of State tor
and Scientific Education and Science, and responsibility for technology mainly with the
Research Secretary of State for Industry, but in all cases the Prime Minister has overall
responsibility. Other government departments are concerned with research and
development related to their functions. Government responsibility for space
activities is undertaken by the Secretary of State for Education and Science
(through the Science and Engineering Research Council, see below), the Secretary
of State for Defence and the Secretary of State for Industry according to the nature
of the project. Applied research and development is controlled by the ‘customer-
contractor principle’ under which government departments, as customers, define
their research requirements. The work is undertaken by contractors who may be,
for example, government laboratories, research councils, research associations.
334
Expenditure
The
Department of
Education and
Science
The Advisory
Board for the
Research Councils
THE
RESEARCH
COUNCILS
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
industry or the universities. Departments with major technological needs
generally have a Chief Scientist’s organisation, which helps to formulate
requirements, select the most suitable contractors and co-operate with them to
obtain the best value for money.
Advice on scientific and technological matters is provided by the Advisory
Board for the Research Councils, the Advisory Council for Applied Research and
Development, and a committee of Chief Scientists and Permanent Secretaries.
These bodies ensure that scientific questions are brought before ministers as
appropriate and that scientific priorities reflect those of the Government as a
whole.
Total government expenditure on research and development in 1981-82 is
estimated (at out-turn prices) to be some £3,300 million. The largest departmental
research and development budget (£1,683 million) is that of the Ministry of
Defence for defence equipment (see also p 94). The main civil departments
involved are the Department of Education and Science (£788 million) which
supports the research councils and the universities; the Department of Industry
(£305 million); the Department of Energy (£234 million); the Ministry of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries
for Scotland (a total of £112 million); and the Department of the Environment
and the Department ofTransport (a total of £71 million). More details of the kinds
of research carried out are given in the relevant chapters.
The Department of Education and Science discharges its responsibilities for basic
and applied civil science mainly through the five research councils to which it
allocates funds from its science budget (the budget, at 1980 Survey prices, totals
£343 million in 1981—82). The councils and their allocations are: the Science and
Engineering Research Council (£174-3 million), the Medical Research Council
(£73-2 million), the Natural Environment Research Council (£39-4 million), the
Agricultural Research Council (£30-6 million) and the Social Science Research
Council (£16-1 million). Science budget grants are also made to the British
Museum (Natural History) and to the Royal Society. The budget is allocated for
research grants and contracts to universities, polytechnics and elsewhere, research
units and other establishments of the research councils, postgraduate support and
subscriptions to international scientific organisations. The Department is also
responsible for some aspects of international scientific relations (see p 342) and
helps to co-ordinate government policy regarding scientific and technical
information.
The Advisory Board for the Research Councils advises the Secretary of State on
civil science, particularly about the research council system, the support of
postgraduate students, the proper balance between national and international
scientific activities, and the allocation of the science budget among research
councils and other bodies; and promotes close liaison between the councils and
users of their research. Its membership includes the chairman or secretary of each of
the research councils, the chairman of the University Grants Committee, the Chief
Scientists from departments with a major interest in the work of the research
councils, the Chief Scientist to the Central Policy Review Staff, and independent
members drawn from universities, industry and the Royal Society.
Each of the five research councils is an autonomous body established under Royal
Charter with membership drawn from the universities, professions, industry and
the Government. They conduct research through their own research establish¬
ments and by supporting selected research in universities and other higher
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
335
Science and
Engineering
Research
Council
Research
Establishments
International
Collaboration
Engineering
Astronomy
education establishments. As well as being financed from the science budget, three
of the councils receive commissions, estimated (at out-turn prices) at £71 million
in 1981-82, from departments under the customer-contractor principle. In
1981-82 the Agricultural Research Council is expected to earn 51 per cent of its
income from commissions, the Natural Environment Research Council 33 per
cent and the Medical Research Council 1 per cent.
The Science and Engineering Research Council (SERC) supports basic research in
astronomy, geophysics, the biological sciences, chemistry, mathematics, physics,
and engineering and applied sciences, in furthering its primary purpose of
sustaining standards of education and research in the universities and polytechnics.
A large proportion of the SERC’s resources is devoted to the provision of research
grants to help academic staff to carry out fundamental research, either in their own
institutions or in the Council’s research establishments or elsewhere; the
encouragement of active collaboration between higher education establishments
and industry, particularly in areas of national importance; the award of
studentships to suitable graduates for training in methods of research or a
specialised branch of science or engineering of importance to British industry; and
the award of fellowships to promising scientists or engineers to enable them to
carry out their own independent research programmes.
The SERC maintains four research establishments: the Daresbury Laboratory at
Warrington (Cheshire), the Royal Greenwich Observatory at Herstmonceux
(East Sussex), the Royal Observatory, Edinburgh, and the Rutherford and
Appleton Laboratories, at Chilton (Oxfordshire). The establishments are centres of
specialised research, and are also used for the development and operation of central
experimental facilities beyond the resources of an academic institution. They
provide support for scientists whose research needs access to facilities run by
international research organisations, such as the powerful particle accelerators at
the European Organisation for Nuclear Research (CERN) near Geneva,
Switzerland, and the high-flux neutron source at the Institut Laue-Langevin (ILL)
at Grenoble, France.
The SERC provides national contributions to CERN, the civil science
programme of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation, the Anglo-Australian
Telescope, and the European Incoherent Scatter Project; and, also, part of Britain’s
contribution to the European Space Agency (see p 342). It also contributes to, and
shares with, its French and Federal German partners, the control of the ILL reactor
at Grenoble. In addition, the SERC encourages scientists and engineers to initiate
or extend collaborative projects with colleagues overseas, particularly in Europe,
by using its existing fellowships, studentships and grant schemes.
Developments in engineering research and training geared to the needs of industry
are major concerns of the SERC. Some special programmes are being supported
within a general effort to develop research and postgraduate training in university
and polytechnic engineering departments. Subjects receiving major support
include marine technology, polymer engineering, microelectronics and computer
applications (such as industrial robotics), materials and energy conservation,
information and communication systems, biotechnology, biomaterials (for
medical applications), combustion engines and coal technology. A network to
provide an interactive computing facility to universities has been built up and is
serviced at Chilton.
Astronomy uses both ground-based techniques, such as optical and radio
telescopes, and space-based methods (see p 342). Optical astronomy is carried out
336
Nuclear Physics
Natural Sciences
Medical
Research
Council
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
in university departments and, within the SERC, at the Royal Greenwich
Observatory and the Royal Observatory, Edinburgh. Instruments include the
Royal Greenwich Observatory’s Isaac Newton Telescope, of diameter 2-5 metres
(8 feet), which is being installed at a new site on the island of La Palma in the
Canary Islands (the 4-2 metre [14-ft] Herschel Telescope, destined for La Palma, is
under construction); the Anglo-Australian Telescope, of diameter 3-9 metres
(13 feet), at Siding Spring, Australia, in a joint project with the Australian
Government; a i-2-metre (4-ft) Schmidt telescope on the same site; optical
telescopes operated by the South African Astronomical Observatory, to which the
SERC contributes; and a 3-8-metre (12-ft) infra-red telescope, the largest telescope
in the world designed specifically to make infra-red observations, at Mauna Kea,
Hawaii. Cambridge and Manchester Universities are the main centres for research
in radio astronomy with substantial support from the SERC. The Starlink
network of computer systems, centred at Chilton and located at six centres of
astronomical research in Britain, provides and co-ordinates image processing and
data reduction facilities for use by British astronomers.
The SERC establishments concerned with the provision of facilities for university
research in nuclear physics are at Chilton, which supports university teams
engaged in experiments in particle physics at CERN and other centres, and the
Daresbury Laboratory, where a 30 million volt tandem accelerator for research
into nuclear structure is due for completion in late 1981. Research projects using
these and other facilities are funded through research grants to universities.
Support is provided for high-quality research in biological and natural sciences,
mathematics and science-based archaeology. Where experimental facilities are too
expensive to be provided for individual universities and polytechnics, central
facilities have been provided. For example, at the Daresbury Laboratory a new
synchrotron storage ring came into operation in 1980. It provides high intensity
electromagnetic radiation used in a wide range of experiments in materials science,
surface physics, crystallography and molecular biology. Other central facilities
include a high-powered laser facility at Chilton, which is used to study plasmas,
and a spallation neutron source being built, also at Chilton, to provide a pulsed
beam of neutrons.
The main research establishments of the Medical Research Council (MRC) are the
National Institute for Medical Research at Mill Hill, London, which carries out
fundamental research relevant to medicine, the Clinical Research Centre at
Northwick Park Hospital, London, and the Laboratory of Molecular Biology at
Cambridge. In addition, the MRC has over 60 research units, mostly located in
university departments, medical schools and hospitals in Britain. In March 1981
the MRC, in conjunction with four cancer charities, agreed to fund the installation
at Clatterbridge Hospital, Merseyside, of a £4 million cyclotron to develop
neutron-beam techniques in the treatment of deep-seated cancers. (Charities and
voluntary bodies between them contribute some £2$ million a year to medical
research.) This facility is due to come into operation in 1984.
The MRC is assisted by four advisory boards: the Neurobiology and Mental
Health Board; the Cell Biology and Disorders Board; the Physiological Systems
and Disorders Board; and the Tropical Medicine Research Board. The MRC’s
arrangements for the support of research fall under three main headings,
investigations by members of its own staff, mostly working in MRC
establishments; research grants to workers in universities, polytechnics and other
centres; and research training awards (fellowships and studentships) tenable, for
the most part, in Britain.
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
337
Natural
Environment
Research
Council
Agricultural
Research
Council
Social Science
Research
Council
The Natural Environment Research Council (NERC) is responsible for
encouraging, planning and executing research in the physical and biological
sciences relating to man’s natural environment and its resources. The work is
broadly divided into groups defined as: the Solid Earth—its physical properties
and mineral resources; Seas and Oceans—their behaviour and living and mineral
resources; Inland Waters—their behaviour and living resources; Terrestrial
Environments—wildlife communities and their resources; Atmosphere—its
structure and interactions; and a number of interdisciplinary studies including
pollution and the physical and biological properties of the Antarctic environment.
Research programmes which the NERC is planning to expand include those on
geological work in connection with deep drilling and mapping, which is
important for future mineral and energy exploration; new means of insect pest
control using viruses harmless to man; the climate; remote sensing by satellite, for
resource and ecological surveys; and modelling the behaviour of British estuaries.
The Council’s research institutes are: the British Antarctic Survey, the Institute
of Geological Sciences, the Institute of Hydrology, the Institute of Marine
Biochemistry, the Institute for Marine Environmental Research, the Institute of
Oceanographic Sciences, the Institute of Terrestrial Ecology, the Institute of
Virology and the Sea Mammal Research Unit. The Council also maintains central
scientific and technical services which include research vessel services, an
experimental cartography unit, and computing services.
Research institutes aided by council grants are: the Freshwater Biological
Association, the Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom, the
Scottish Marine Biological Association, the Unit of Marine Invertebrate Biology,
the Unit of Comparative Plant Ecology and some university units.
The Agricultural Research Council (ARC) has eight institutes under its direct
control: the Animal Breeding Research Organisation, the Institute for Research
on Animal Diseases, the Institute of Animal Physiology, the Food Research
Institute, the Letcombe Laboratory, dealing with the growth of crops in relation to
soil conditions and cultivation, the Meat Research Institute, the Poultry Research
Centre, and the Weed Research Organisation. There are four ARC units under
distinguished scientists associated with universities. The ARC is also responsible
for 15 independent state-aided agricultural research institutes, notably the
Rothamsted Experimental Station, at Harpenden (Hertfordshire), which is the
largest agricultural research institute in Britain (and was the first in the world to be
established, in 1843), and deals with research on soils, fertilisers, crop physiology
and crop husbandry; and the National Institute of Agricultural Engineering, at
Silsoe (Bedfordshire). There are also seven independent institutes in Scotland
financed by the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland with advice
from the ARC on their scientific programmes, staffing and equipment.
The ARC is planning to devote additional sums to research in a number of areas
including the study of photosynthesis with the aim of increasing crop yields, the
genetic manipulation of plants, the breeding of plants which could make their own
nitrogen and so bring savings in the use of fertilisers, and work on studying animal
behaviour and diseases to obtain healthier and more productive livestock.
The Social Science Research Council’s (SSRC) areas of interest include
economics, political science, psychology, social anthropology, social and
economic history, sociology and social administration, social sciences and the law,
education, management and industrial relations, human geography, linguistics,
planning, and various aspects of a wide range of other disciplines. It initiates
research into such topics as health policy, energy policy, population studies, central
338
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and local government, young people in society, transmitted deprivation, and the
social impact of North Sea oil. Grants are provided for research projects at
universities and other institutions, and awards made to postgraduate students. The
SSRC also has four research units: the Industrial Relations Research Unit; the
Cambridge Group for the History of Population and Social Structure; the
Research Unit on Ethnic Relations; and the Centre for Socio-legal Studies.
UNIVERSITY Of the total estimated university expenditure on scientific research in the academic
RESEARCH year 1979-80 (over ^308 million), the largest government contribution (over
£173 million) was through the University Grants Committee.
Scientific research in the universities and other institutions of higher education is
also supported through the research councils. This support takes two forms. First,
nearly two-thirds of the postgraduate students in science and technology receive
maintenance awards from the research councils, through postgraduate student¬
ships. These awards are in some cases for periods of up to three years of training in
research work and in others for shorter periods for advanced studies. Second,
grants and contracts are given to the universities and other institutions by the
research councils for specified projects, particularly in new or developing areas of
research. The ARC, MRC and SSRC maintain a number of research units within
universities. In addition, the research councils provide central facilities in their own
establishments for use by university research workers. The other main channels of
support for scientific research in the universities are various government
departments, the Royal Society, industry and the independent foundations.
A number of universities in industrial centres have acquired outstanding
reputations in studies relating to their local industries, and on a national scale close
relationships are fostered between the universities, industries and the Government
in numerous joint projects. Britain has several science parks, including those
established by Trinity College, Cambridge, Warrington New Town
Development Corporation and Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh. These are
sites containing science-based industries and are designed to facilitate commercial
developments in advanced technology in consultation with and to the benefit of
local scientists.
THE LEARNED Although today most research is conducted under other auspices, the learned
SOCIETIES societies, of which there are more than 300, have retained their traditional function
of facilitating the spread of knowledge. The most eminent of those concerned with
science in its broadest aspects (as distinct from those societies with specialised
interests and activities) are the Royal Society, Royal Society of Arts, Royal
Institution and British Association.
Royal Society The Royal Society, or, more fully, the Royal Society of London for Improving
Natural Knowledge, founded in 1660, occupies a unique place in Britain’s
scientific affairs and is equivalent to national academies of sciences in other
countries. It is the oldest such academy in the world to have enjoyed continuous
existence. There are today three main categories of Fellowship: Royal Fellows,
Foreign Members, of whom there are about 85, and the main body of Fellows
numbering about 900. Election to the Fellowship, which is for life, is restricted to
40 persons a year. The Royal Society is governed by a council of 21 members. The
President of the Society is consulted on scientific appointments to research councils
(other than the Social Science Research Council) and Fellows serve on most
governmental advisory councils and committees concerned with research.
The Royal Society recognises the highest standards of scientific and
technological achievements through its elections to the Fellowship and the award
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
339
Royal Society
of Arts
Royal
Institution
of its medals and endowed lectureships. It awards 14 medals (not all annually)
including the Copley Medal (its highest award) and three Royal Medals, while
there are seven endowed lectureships. The Society encourages research through
the award of grants and research appointments. It administers 18 research
professorships, of which four are supported from private funds and the remainder
from its parliamentary grant. A further 12 senior research fellowships and 30 other
research fellowships are supported in British universities. Grants for research are
made from its private funds and from its parliamentary grant, and particular funds
are available for scientific investigations and expeditions, for travel by individual
scientists, for studies in the history of science and for scientific publications. The
dissemination of scientific knowledge is encouraged by a programme of scientific
discussion meetings and through its publications. It has an extensive library of
works relating to the history of science. The council gives advice to the
Government and other bodies on matters relating to science and technology and
their application, and study groups on particular aspects of science are established at
intervals to prepare reports which are widely distributed to the scientific
community. A number of committees of the council, some of them jointly with
other bodies, promote improvements in education in science subjects and
emphasise the importance of the applied sciences and engineering in industry. A
joint committee with the British Academy has been established to keep under
review the activities of learned societies in Britain and to assist them.
The international relations of the Royal Society are extensive. As the national
academy of science, it represents Britain in all but one of the 18 international unions
comprising the International Council of Scientific Unions. The Society also
represents Britain on the Council of the International Institute for Applied Systems
Analysis. It is a member of the European Science Foundation and certain other
organisations, and also plays a leading part in international scientific programmes.
It has agreements for exchange visits by scientists and co-operative research with
many academies throughout the world, and maintains informal relations to
promote scientific co-operation with many other countries. The largest formal
scheme is the European Science Exchange Programme, which provides for
fellowships (usually of one year) and study visits (lasting about two months) with
16 other countries in Western Europe.
The Royal Society of Arts (properly, the Royal Society for the Encouragement of
Arts, Manufactures and Commerce) is concerned with arts, architecture and
design, science and technology, industry and commerce, the environment and
education. Since its foundation in 1754, one of the Society’s principal objects has
been to promote the progress of all branches of practical knowledge, chiefly by
means of lectures and conferences, and by the publication of a monthly journal
designed to enable leading authorities to report on developments of public as well
as specialist interest.
The Royal Institution was founded in 1799 as a public body for facilitating the
introduction of useful mechanical inventions and improvements, and for teaching
the application of science to everyday life. Later it undertook the ‘promotion of
chemical science by experiments and lectures for improving arts and
manufactures’, and ‘the diffusion and extension of useful knowledge’. Its character,
however, was largely determined by the early nineteenth century work of Sir
Humphry Davy and Michael Faraday, who established a tradition of research.
Today the Royal Institution has extensive laboratories which undertake research
on subjects including fast chemical kinetics, photosynthesis and solar energy.
Lectures are given on recent developments in science and other branches of
340
British
Association
Professional
Institutions
Fellowship of
Engineering
Zoological
Gardens
Botanical
Gardens
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
knowledge with particular emphasis on encouraging young people to take an
interest in science.
The British Association for the Advancement of Science was founded in 1831 to
promote general interest in science and its applications. One of its chief activities is
the annual meeting, attended by many young students as well as by eminent
scientists. In addition the Association plans special lectures, exhibitions and
discussions (some designed for young audiences), the publication of pamphlets, the
organisation of conferences, and the appointment of study groups. The
Association has 16 branches and four lectureships for young scientists (dealing with
the physical, biological and social sciences) to encourage scientists to make their
activities known to wider audiences. The British Association has made an
important contribution to the development of science by taking or recommending
action to remove obstacles to the discovery and application of scientific
knowledge.
There are numerous technical institutions and professional associations, many of
which promote their own disciplines or are interested in the education and
professional well-being of their members. The Council of Engineering Institutions
represents the chartered engineering institutions, such as those for mechanical, civil
and chemical engineers. The Council of Science and Technology Institutes is a
federal body with 11 member institutes representing among others, biologists,
chemists, mathematicians, metallurgists, physicists and geologists.
The Fellowship of Engineering was formed in 1976 from distinguished engineers
in the Royal Society and in the leading chartered engineering institutions. Among
its aims is to perform for engineering a role similar to that undertaken for science
by the Royal Society, including the provision of advice on engineering matters to
the Government. Some 60 leading engineers are elected each year and there were
400 members in 1981.
The Zoological Society of London, whose main function is as a scientific
organisation, runs the world-famous London Zoo, opened in 1828, which
occupies 14 hectares (36 acres) of Regent’s Park, London. In 1931 the Society
opened Whipsnade Park Zoo near Dunstable (Bedfordshire) where over 2,000
animals roam a 200-hectare (500-acre) park. Comparative studies are undertaken
in pathology, biochemistry, radiology and infectious diseases, and in the
reproductive processes of mammals. The Society also organises scientific meetings
and symposia for zoologists, publishes scientific journals and maintains one of the
largest zoological libraries in the world. Other well-known zoos (of which there
are some 150 in Britain), include those at Edinburgh, Bristol, Chester, Dudley,
Marwell (near Winchester), Chessington and Jersey. There are also a number of
‘safari parks’ containing reservations of wild animals through which the public can
pass in closed motor cars.
The Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew (founded in 1759), covering 120 hectares (300
acres), and its 200-hectare (500-acre) estate at Wakehurst Place, Ardingly (West
Sussex) are part of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food. The Herbarium
houses one of the largest collections of specimens in the world and is primarily
concerned with research into the classification of plants and the preparation of
floras and plant lists as well as the identification of about 50,000 specimens a
year from overseas. A Conservation Unit gathers and provides information on
endangered species of plant on a worldwide basis. The study of plant anatomy,
plant biochemistry, cytology, and genetics is undertaken in thejodrell Laboratory.
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
341
Scientific
Museums
INTER¬
NATIONAL
SCIENTIFIC
RELATIONS
The laboratory’s plant physiology section is based at Wakehurst Place where
research is being carried out into seed germination and storage. A wide range of
living plants, comprising some 110,000 different kinds of plant representing most
plant families, is displayed at Kew.
The Royal Botanic Garden at Edinburgh was founded in 1670 and is
administered by the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland.
Associated gardens are the Logan Botanic Garden at Ardwell near Stranraer, the
Younger Botanic Garden at Benmore near Dunoon, and Dawyck Garden at Stobo
near Peebles. The large collection of living plants, both out of doors and in
greenhouses, is used for taxonomic research (into plant classification).
The British Museum (Natural History) is one of the world’s principal centres for
the general study of natural history, particularly for specialised research into
taxonomy. It has five scientific departments: botany, entomology, mineralogy,
palaeontology and zoology. It possesses extensive collections of extant and fossil
animals and plants and of minerals, rocks and meteorites. The Science Museum
illustrates the development of pure and applied science in all countries, but chiefly
in Britain. The geology of Britain is probably known in more exact detail than that
of any other country in the world, and the Institute of Geological Sciences has an
outstanding collection of exhibits in its Geological Museum. These three museums
are in South Kensington, London. Other important collections are those of the
Museum of Science and Industry, in Birmingham, the Museum of the History of
Science, at Oxford and the Royal Scottish Museum, Edinburgh.
Britain is represented on the European Community’s Scientific and Technical
Research Committee, the object of which is to co-ordinate national policies on
these matters and to implement joint projects of interest to the Community, and
the Committee for Scientific and Technological Policy of the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Other intergovernmental
organisations involved in scientific co-operation with which Britain is concerned
include: European Co-operation in Science and Technology; specialised agencies
of the United Nations such as the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organisation; the International Atomic Energy Agency; the Nuclear
Energy Agency and the International Energy Agency of the OECD; the European
Organisation for Nuclear Research; the European Space Agency; the European
Molecular Biology Laboratory; the International Agency for Research on
Cancer; and the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation Science Committee. Among
non-governmental organisations Britain is represented in the international unions
comprising the International Council of Scientific Unions (see p 339). The five
research councils, the Royal Society and the British Academy were founder
members of the European Science Foundation set up in 1974. Since 1968 Britain
has signed over 30 intergovernmental agreements with other countries on co¬
operation in science and technology or technical co-operation. These agreements
are usually intended to promote mutually beneficial exchanges and are
administered by various government departments.
There are scientific counsellors in the British Embassies in Washington, Paris,
Bonn, Moscow and Tokyo who among other things promote contacts in science
and technology between Britain and the countries to which they are accredited.
These counsellors serve all central government departments concerned in overseas
scientific affairs, as well as the research councils and the Royal Society, which is the
main representative of Britain in areas of non-governmental collaboration.
Administrative support for the counsellors is provided in Britain by the
Department of Industry’s Overseas Technical Information Unit.
342
SPACE
ACTIVITIES
BRITAIN 1982 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The British Council (see p 67) fosters co-operation between British scientists and
scientists of overseas countries to promote among overseas specialists a better
understanding and knowledge of Britain and its scientific achievements, and, in the
developing countries, to identify and manage development projects in the
technological, scientific and educational sectors. The Council helps British
scientists to visit other countries, makes its own awards for postgraduate study in
Britain by scientists from overseas and supervises programmes for senior specialists
and students who come to Britain through United Nations agencies or bilateral
technical assistance schemes.
A number of government departments have an interest in space activities,
including the Department of Industry, the Department of Education and Science
(through the Science and Engineering Research Council) and the Ministry of
Defence. Expenditure on civil space activities in 1980—81 was about £60 million.
Britain is a member of the European Space Agency (ESA) together with
Belgium, Denmark, France, the Federal Republic of Germany, the Irish Republic,
Italy, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland. The Department of
Industry is responsible for leading the British delegation to the ESA and for British
participation in its space applications programmes, with emphasis on the
development of land and maritime communications satellites but including earth
observation satellites, and Spacelab, a manned laboratory to be carried on board
the United States Space Shuttle. Development and production of equipment for
the ESA’s ‘ARIANE’ launcher is undertaken through a bilateral agreement with
France. The department also promotes technological development in Britain s
space industry through a national space programme. The Department of
Education and Science, through the Science and Engineering Research Council,
provides Britain’s representatives and financial contribution for the ESA s
scientific satellite programme.
There are bilateral arrangements for space research with other countries,
notably the United States through its National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA). British experiments have provided information which
has helped to increase scientific knowledge, especially in astronomy and
astrophysics, and to interpret climatic patterns. The British Ariel V scientific
satellite found several hundred new X-ray sources in space and the Ariel VI
satellite, launched in 1979, produced more detailed information on these sources.
2i Promotion ofthe Arts
Arts Councils
Artistic and cultural activity in Britain ranges from the highest standards of
professional performance to the enthusiastic support and participation of amateurs.
London is one of the leading world centres for music, drama, opera and dance; and
festivals held in Bath, Cheltenham, Edinburgh and other towns and cities attract
much interest. Many British playwrights, composers, sculptors, painters, writers,
actors, singers, choreographers and dancers enjoy international reputations. At an
amateur level, activities which make use of local talent and resources take many
forms. Amateur choral, orchestral, operatic, dramatic and other societies for the
arts abound; and increasing numbers of people take an interest in crafts such as
pottery, weaving and woodwork.
Promotion and patronage of the arts are the concern of both official and
unofficial bodies. The Government and local authorities take an active part, and a
substantial and increasing amount of help also comes from private sources,
including trusts and commercial concerns. Policies towards support for the arts are
broadly similar, however, and there are two main aims. One is to maintain and
improve the traditional arts and cultural heritage, and to make them more
accessible to greater numbers of people. The other is to provide financial aid to
working artists and craftsmen, and to encourage more people to take part in
creative leisure pursuits.
A Minister of State at the Department of Education and Science is responsible
for general arts policy and administrative work connected with the arts is
undertaken by the Office of Arts and Libraries within the Department. The
Secretaries of State for ^X^ales, Scotland and Northern Ireland are also concerned
with cultural matters. In addition, the Government is responsible for the upkeep of
ancient monuments and historic buildings, and grants are made towards the
maintenance of privately owned historic buildings (see p 160).
Arts education in schools, further education colleges, polytechnics, evening
institutes and community centres is the responsibility of central government
education departments, in partnership with local education authorities and
voluntary bodies.
Most government support for the arts takes the form of grants to independent
agencies. The most important of these is the Arts Council of Great Britain,
established by Royal Charter in 1946, whose main objects are to develop and
improve the knowledge, understanding and practice of the arts, to increase their
accessibility to the public, and to advise and co-operate with government
departments,'local authorities and other organisations.
Government allocations to the Arts Council in 1981-82 amount to £80 million.
The Council gives financial help and advice to many organisations, from the major
opera, dance and drama companies, orchestras and festivals, to the smallest touring
theatres and experimental groups. It encourages such interests as contemporary
dance, photography and art films, and helps professional creative writers,
choreographers, composers, artists and photographers through bursary and award
schemes. It promotes art exhibitions and tours of opera, dance and drama
companies. Funds are provided for specialist training courses in the arts and for
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
help with the construction or conversion of premises under its ‘Housing the Arts’
programme.
Organisations in Scotland and Wales receive their subsidies through the Scottish
and Welsh Arts Councils which are committees of the Arts Council of Great
Britain with a large measure of autonomy.
In Northern Ireland there is an independent Arts Council with aims and
functions similar to those of the Arts Council of Great Britain. It receives an annual
grant from the Northern Ireland Department of Education.
British Council The British Council promotes knowledge of British culture and literature overseas
(see p 67), and maintains libraries in most of the countries in which it is represented.
The Council may initiate or support overseas tours by British theatre companies,
orchestras, choirs and opera and dance companies, as well as by individual actors,
musicians and artists. It promotes fine arts and other exhibitions overseas, organises
British participation in international exhibitions, and encourages professional
interchange in all cultural fields between Britain and other countries.
Broadcasting The BBC has orchestras employing many of the country’s full-time professional
Organisations musicians, and each week it broadcasts nearly 100 hours of serious music (both live
and recorded) on its Radio 3 channel. It regularly commissions new music,
particularly by British composers, and sponsors concerts, competitions and
festivals. Independent television companies make grants for the promotion of the
arts in their regions, particularly to regional arts associations, and transmit general
magazine programmes on the arts. Both the BBC and IBA broadcast a wide range
of new drama together with adaptations of novels and stage plays.
Local Support In addition to their responsibilities for education (including specialised art
education) and the public library service, a large number of local authorities
maintain local museums and art galleries. Many contribute to regional arts
associations, towards the expenses of professional symphony orchestras and local
theatre companies, and towards the cost of new buildings, especially theatres.
Business Valuable support for the arts comes from many voluntary sources, a practice
Sponsorship encouraged by the Government. Industrial and commercial concerns offer an
important source of sponsorship and patronage, often advised by the Association
for Business Sponsorship of the Arts and the Arts Council.
Regional Arts Regional co-operation in arts patronage is encouraged through 15 regional arts
associations in England and Wales which aim to ensure that the arts are more
widely available. They offer financial assistance to arts organisations and advise on
and promote activities. They are financed by local authority, Arts Council and
private funds; local authorities and other interests are represented on the managing
bodies of the associations.
Festivals Considerable interest and enthusiasm is shown for more than 200 professional arts
festivals which take place each year. Those concentrating on music include the
Three Choirs Festival which has taken place annually for more than 250 years in
Gloucester, Worcester or Hereford; the Cheltenham Festival, largely devoted to
contemporary British music; and the Aldeburgh and Bath festivals. Among others
catering for a number of art forms are the Edinburgh International Festival, the
Royal National Eisteddfod of Wales, the Llangollen International Musical
Eisteddfod and those in Belfast, Brighton, Chichester, Malvern, Harrogate,
Salisbury, Windsor and York.
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
345
Arts Centres
Authors’
Copyright
DRAMA
Professional
Theatre
The 200 or so arts centres in Britain provide opportunities for enjoyment of and
participation in the arts. The centres are supported mainly by regional arts
associations and local authorities with some help from the Arts Council and other
organisations. Many theatres and art galleries provide a focal point for the
community by offering facilities for other arts.
The author of any original literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work is
automatically protected by the Copyright Act 1956 and its related international
conventions1 from the unauthorised reproduction of the work both before and
after publication. The author of the work is the first owner of the copyright, and
the normal term of copyright in published original works is the life of the author
and a period of 50 years after his or her death.
Britain is one of the world’s major theatre centres. As well as theatre in London and
the regions, touring companies visit many of the new arts centres and community
festivals. Support comes from the Arts Council, local authorities and regional arts
associations, and some private sponsorship. The Arts Council assists new drama by
encouraging co-operation between theatres and playwrights by means of
bursaries, commissions and guaranteed royalties. There are also schemes to train
stage designers, directors, technicians, actors and theatre administrators.
Over 150 theatres in professional use can each accommodate more than 200 people.
Some are owned by non-profit-distributing companies, the majority of which
receive Arts Council subsidies, while the remainder are operated commercially or
owned by local authorities.
London is the focus with some 63 principal theatres in or near the centre and 37
in the suburbs. Most are let to producing managements on a commercial basis, but
17 are permanently occupied by subsidised companies. These include the National
Theatre which stages classical and modern plays from various countries in its three
auditoria on the south bank of the River Thames and the Royal Shakespeare
Company which presents Shakespearean plays at Stratford-upon-Avon and a
mixed repertoire in London. The Royal Shakespeare Company is to become
resident at the Barbican Theatre which is due to open in 1982 as part of the new
Barbican Centre for Arts and Conferences.
Outside London a number of theatres accommodate pre- and post-West End
tours of the major London productions and performances by companies specially
formed for touring. (Both the National Theatre and Royal Shakespeare
companies have toured in Britain and overseas.) A decline in the number of these
theatres has been checked in response to the demand by audiences for, the larger
opera, dance and drama companies and several theatres and opera houses have been
handsomely restored. Many non-repertory theatres outside London present all
kinds of drama and many also put on variety shows and other entertainments.
There has been a growth in the activities of 39 resident theatre companies which
receive financial support from the Arts Council and the local authorities.
There is no censorship of plays, but it is an offence to present or direct an obscene
performance of a play in public or in private (including theatre clubs), an obscene
performance being one which tends to ‘deprave and corrupt persons who are likely
... to attend it’. Provision is made for a defence against an obscenity charge on the
grounds that the performance is for the public good in the interests of, for example,
drama, opera or literature.
1 A copyright work first published in Britain has automatic copyright in all countries which are
members of the Berne Copyright Convention and the Universal Copyright Convention.
346
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Amateur
Theatre
Dramatic
Training
Theatre for
Young People
MUSIC,
OPERA
AND DANCE
Music
Orchestras
Choral Societies
The several thousand amateur dramatic societies are encouraged by local education
authorities, other public bodies, and four special organisations—the British
Theatre Association, the National Drama Conference, the Scottish Community
Drama Association and the Association of Ulster Drama Festivals.
Training for the theatre is provided mainly in drama schools. Among the best
known are the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, the Central School of Speech and
Drama, the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art, and the Guildhall
School of Music and Drama, all of which are in London ; the Old Vic School in
Bristol; the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama in Glasgow; and, in
Cardiff, the Welsh College of Music and Drama. Several universities offer courses
in drama.
Theatre for young people is popular and concessionary ticket schemes encourage
attendance. In 1970 the Young Vic was opened in London as a theatre for young
people. The National Youth Theatre is based in London, and the Scottish Youth
Theatre was established in Edinburgh in 1970. There are some 10 specialist
companies, including the Unicorn Theatre for Young People, Theatre Centre and
the Polka Company, some of which are supported by the Arts Council. Most
repertory companies provide programmes and other types of theatre activity for
young people.
Pop music, folk music, jazz, light music and brass bands all have substantial
followings while the widespread interest in classical music is reflected in the large
audiences at choral and orchestral concerts and at performances of opera, dance and
chamber music.
The Arts Council offers subsidies (usually with financial assistance from local
authorities and commercial sponsors) to orchestras, opera and dance companies,
music societies and festivals. It also provides bursaries and commissions for
composers, musicians, designers and choreographers.
The Master of the Queen’s Music holds an office within the Royal Household,
with responsibility for organising and writing music for State occasions.
Seasons of orchestral concerts are promoted every year in many of the large towns
and cities. In central London the principal concert halls are the Royal Festival Hall,
adjacent to which are the Queen Elizabeth Hall and the Purcell Room
accommodating smaller-scale performances; the Royal Albert Hall, where the
annual summer season of Promenade Concerts is given; the Wigmore Hall, a
recital centre; and St John’s, Smith Square. The Barbican Centre for Arts and
Conferences (see p 345) contains a large new concert hall.
The leading symphony orchestras are the London Philharmonic, the London
Symphony, the Philharmonia, the Royal Philharmonic, the Royal Liverpool
Philharmonic, the Halle (Manchester), the City of Birmingham Symphony, the
Bournemouth Symphony, the Ulster and the Scottish National. The BBC’s
orchestras provide broadcast concerts which are often open to the public. There are
also specialised string and chamber orchestras such as the English Chamber
Orchestra, the Academy of St Martin-in-the-Fields, the London Mozart Players,
the City of London Sinfonia, the Academy of Ancient Music, the Bournemouth
Sinfonietta, the Northern Sinfonia (Newcastle upon Tyne), the Scottish Baroque
Ensemble and the Scottish Chamber Orchestra. Interest is growing in performing
with early instruments.
Among the principal choral societies are the Bach Choir, the Royal Choral
347
Amateur Interest
Opera and
Dance
Other Opera
Groups
Dance Companies
Training in
Music, Opera
and Dance
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
Society, the Swansea Philharmonic Choir, the Edinburgh Royal Choral Union
and the Belfast Philharmonic Society. Almost all the leading orchestras have close
links with particular choirs, such as the Philharmonia Chorus and the London
Symphony Chorus.
Amateur music-making is encouraged by county music committees aided by the
Carnegie United Kingdom Trust and united in the Standing Conference for
Amateur Music. The National Federation of Music Societies (the organisation for
chamber music societies, amateur choirs and orchestras) receives Arts Council
funds to help affiliated societies with the cost of engaging professional musicians.
Some 1,200 music societies are members of the Federation, which advises them on
concert planning and promotion. The 3^elsh Amateur Music Federation, funded
by the Welsh Arts Council, and the Scottish Amateur Music Association similarly
assist amateur music-making.
Regular seasons of opera and ballet are given at the Royal Opera House, Covent
Garden, London, which receives financial assistance from the Arts Council and
from private and business sponsorship. The Royal Opera House has a permanent
orchestra which plays for the Royal Opera and the Royal Ballet. Seasons of opera
and operetta in English are given by the English National Opera which performs in
the London Coliseum, and makes provincial tours. Sadler s Wells Theatre houses
most of the London performances of visiting opera and dance companies and the
Sadler’s Wells Royal Ballet which performs in London and the regions. Scottish
Opera has regular winter seasons at its permanent home, the Theatre Royal in
Glasgow, and tours mainly in Scotland and northern England, while the Welsh
National Opera has seasons in Cardiff, London, and Birmingham, and tours
chiefly in Wales and the west of England. Opera North, based in Leeds, undertakes
tours in the north of England.
An opera season, for which international casts are specially assembled, is held every
summer at Glyndebourne in Sussex; this is followed with an autumn tour by
Glyndebourne Touring Opera with different casts. Other opera companies include
Kent Opera, the English Music Theatre Company which specialises in the
performance of works by British composers, and the New Opera Company.
Opera in Northern Ireland is promoted by the Northern Ireland Opera Trust and
the Studio Opera Group.
Dance companies also include London Festival Ballet, Ballet Rambert (Britain s
oldest ballet company, which re-formed in 1966 as a leading modern dance
company), Scottish Ballet, based in Glasgow, London Contemporary Dance
Theatre (which provides regular seasons of contemporary dance in London besides
touring extensively) and Northern Ballet Theatre, based in Manchester (which
concentrates its activities in the north of England, although it makes periodic tours
elsewhere). Extemporary Dance Company and Moving Picture Mime Show also
provide programmes throughout the year. Several modern dance groups are
supported by regional arts associations. About 20 small dance and mime groups or
soloists are assisted by the Arts Council.
Professional training in music is given at colleges of music, of which the Royal
Academy of Music, the Royal College of Music and Trinity College of Music in
London, and the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama in Glasgow are
grant-aided. Other leading colleges include the Guildhall School of Music and
Drama in London, the Royal Northern College of Music in Manchester, the
Welsh College of Music and Drama, Cardiff, and the Birmingham School of
348
FILMS
Cinema
Licensing and
Film
Censorship
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Music. The National Opera Studio provides advanced training courses. The
leading dance schools are the Royal Ballet School, the Rambert School of Ballet
and the London School of Contemporary Dance which, with many private
schools, have helped in raising British dance to its present high standard. Dance is
now a subject for degree studies.
Youth and Music, an organisation affiliated to the international Jeunesses
Musicales, encourages attendances by young people at opera, dance and concert
performances. Ballet for All, run by the Royal Academy of Dancing, presents
lecture-demonstrations on classical ballet to young audiences. Scottish Ballet
Workshop works in schools throughout Scotland.
Many children learn to play musical instruments at school, and some take the
examinations of the Associated Board of the Royal Schools of Music. The
National Youth Orchestras of Great Britain, of Scotland and of Wales and other
youth orchestras are noted for their high standards. Over a third of the players in
the European Community Youth Orchestra come from Britain.
British films, actors and the creative and technical services which support them
have achieved successes in international film festivals and other events. Cinema and
television films are exported to most countries. While the feature film industry has
declined over recent years, Britain produces a great number of advertisements,
documentary, training and television films, many of which have won awards.
There are about 1,600 cinema screens in Great Britain, and estimated
attendances in 1980 amounted to 101 million. Cinema attendance figures have
been declining since the mid-1950s: in 1953 the average weekly cinema audience
was some 25 million but by 1980 it was less than 10 per cent of that figure.
The Government does not invest directly in films but the National Film Finance
Corporation lends money for production and distribution of feature films from
capital advanced by the Government and private interests, and also provides loans
for script-writing and other pre-production costs. The Government makes a grant
to the Welsh Film Board as part of the funds allocated each year in support of the
Welsh language.
A levy on cinema admissions, the Eady Levy, provides a fund to benefit the
makers of eligible films. Grants from the levy can be made to the Children’s Film
Foundation, the British Film Institute Production Board, the National Film
School, and the National Film Finance Corporation. The rest of the fund is
distributed to makers of eligible films in proportion to a film’s takings.
A specified number of British or European Community main feature films and
supporting programmes must be shown in British cinemas each year; the quota is
15 per cent.
Local authorities have powers to license cinemas and censor films. They have a
legal duty to prohibit the admission of children under 16 to unsuitable films, and
may censor films for adults. In considering the suitability of films the authorities
normally rely on the judgment of an independent body, the British Board of Film
Censors, to which most films for public showing are submitted. The Board was set
up on the initiative of the cinema industry, to ensure a proper standard was
maintained in films offered to the public. It does not use any written code of
censorship, and may require cuts to be made before granting a certificate to a film;
very rarely, it refuses a certificate. Films passed by the Board are put into one of
four categories: ‘U’ (for general exhibition); ‘A’ (for general exhibition but
parents are advised that the film contains material which they may not wish
children under the age of 14 years to see); ‘AA’ (for persons of not less than 14 years
of age); and ‘X’ (for persons of not less than 18 years of age).
Documentary
Films
Children’s
Films
British Film
Institute
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS 349
The documentary tradition in short film production in Britain was founded in
1929 when a group of directors began making factual films of a distinctive and
imaginative kind for the Government, and later for commercial organisations. The
war years saw a big expansion in this field and, since then, British documentary
technicians have continued to produce, for both cinema and television, high
quality factual films which have won numerous international awards. The British
Industrial and Scientific Film Association promotes the use of films in industry,
science and commerce. The Federation of Specialised Film Associations is the trade
association of documentary, short, industrial, advertising and cartoon film makers.
The National Panel for Film Festivals, under the aegis of the British Council, is
responsible for the selection of British entries for international short and
documentary film festivals.
The Government sponsors a wide range of documentary films for selected
viewing and for television in Britain and overseas. They are produced through the
Central Office of Information and the majority are commissioned from private
companies. Several major documentary film libraries provide films on hire or free
of charge to a wide variety of educational, industrial and other users.
Cinemas which give children’s shows require a special licence from local
authorities. About 200 cinemas provide programmes for children on Saturday
mornings. An important contribution is made by the Children’s Film Foundation,
which, with aid from the British Film Fund Agency, produces and distributes
entertainment films specially designed for children.
The development of the film and television as an art is promoted by the British
Film Institute, founded in 1933 and financed mainly by a government grant, and in
Scotland by the Scottish Council for Educational Technology which also receives
a government grant. The Institute offers financial and technical help to new and
experienced film makers who cannot find support elsewhere. It administers the
National Film Theatre in London and the National Film Archive and has a library
from which films may be hired; it also has a library of scripts and books on the film
and television, a British National Film Catalogue recording all non-fiction and
short films available in Britain, and an information service. It makes grants to the
Federation of Film Societies, the British Universities Film Council and the Society
for Education in Film and Television. The Institute’s Educational Department
offers guidance to teachers in formal education at all levels on film and television
courses, and its Editorial Department produces a range of publications.
The National Film Archive contains nearly 50,000 films, including newsreels
and other miscellaneous items, and over 5,000 television programmes, besides art
designs and posters; it also has over 1 million photographic stills, selected to
illustrate the history and the art of the film and television.
The National Film Theatre has two cinemas showing films of outstanding
historical, artistic or technical interest. It is unique in offering regular programmes
unrestricted by commercial considerations or by the age or nationality of the films.
Each year it organises the London Film Festival. The British Film Institute has
promoted the development of some 50 regional film theatres on the lines of the
National Film Theatre and may make grants towards their costs. In Wales, the
Welsh Arts Council acts as the Institute’s agent. In Scotland the Scottish Film
Council, as a committee of the Scottish Council for Educational Technology, is
responsible for regional film theatres and administers the Scottish Film Archive;
the Council is also responsible for promoting education in film and television. The
Scottish Arts Council makes grants to film production in Scotland. Grants in
Northern Ireland are made by the Arts Council of Northern Ireland.
350
Training in
Film
Production
VISUAL ARTS
The Art Market
Museums and
Art Galleries
National
Collections
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
An independent National Film School financed primarily by grants from the
Government and the British Film Fund Agency offers courses for writers,
directors, producers and cameramen. Training in film production is also given at
the London International Film School, the Royal College of Art, and at some
polytechnics and other institutions.
A number of modern British painters and sculptors have a high international
reputation, and have received many international prizes and commissions for
major works in foreign cities.
State support for painting and sculpture mainly takes the form of maintenance
and purchase grants for the national museums and galleries, purchase grants for
municipal museums and galleries, and grants towards the cost of art education. The
Government also encourages high standards of industrial design and craftsmanship
through grants to the Design Council.
The Arts Council maintains its own collection of contemporary British art, and
organises or offers grants or guarantees for a variety of touring and other
exhibitions. It also supports art societies and independent galleries, and provides
commissions and awards for artists. A number of photography galleries receive
Arts Council support, including the Side Gallery in Newcastle upon Tyne, the
largest gallery in Britain devoted entirely to photography. The Scottish and Welsh
Arts Councils have art galleries in Edinburgh and Cardiff respectively, and the
Northern Ireland Arts Council runs a gallery in Belfast.
London is a major centre for the international art market and regular sales of works
of art take place in the main auction houses. Certain items are covered by export
control: these are works of art and collectors’ items over 50 years old and worth
more than £8,000 (more than £2,000 in the case of British historical portraits);
photographic material over 60 years old and worth more than £200; document¬
ary material over 50 years old; and British archaeological material over 50 years
old. A licence is required before such items can be exported, but this is granted
automatically in the case of objects imported into Britain within the last 50 years.
In other cases the application for a licence is considered by the Department of
Trade, and, if the Department’s expert advisers recommend the withholding of a
licence, the matter is referred to the Reviewing Committee on the Export of
Works of Art. If the Committee considers a work to be of national importance it
can advise the Government to withhold the export licence for a specified time to
give a public museum or art gallery an opportunity to buy at a fair price.
Over 1,000 museums and art galleries are open to the public including the major
national collections and a wide variety of municipally and independently owned
institutions. More than 21-5 million people visited the national art galleries and
museums in 1980.
The national museums and art galleries in London contain some of the most
comprehensive collections of objects of artistic, archaeological, scientific, historical
and general interest. They are the British Museum, the Victoria and Albert
Museum, the Science Museum, the National Gallery, the Tate Gallery, the
National Portrait Gallery, the Imperial War Museum, the National Army
Museum, the Royal Air Force Museum, the National Maritime Museum, the
Wallace Collection, the British Museum (Natural Flistory) and the Geological
Museum. Some of these national museums also have branches outside London,
examples being the National Railway Museum at York, which is part of the
Science Museum, and portrait collections at Montacute House (Somerset) and
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
351
Other Collections
Finance
Policy and Co¬
ordination
Beningborough Hall (Yorkshire), administered by the National Portrait Gallery in
collaboration with the National Trust.
There are three national museums and art galleries in Edinburgh: the National
Museum of Antiquities of Scotland, the Royal Scottish Museum (including the
Scottish United Services Museum), and the National Galleries of Scotland
(comprising the National Gallery of Scotland, the Scottish National Portrait
Gallery, and the Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art). The National Museum
of Wales, in Cardiff, has a branch at St. Fagan’s Castle where the Welsh Folk
Museum is housed, an Industrial and Maritime Museum in CardifFs dockland, the
Museum of the Woollen Industry at Drefach Felindre, and the North Wales
Quarrying Museum at Llanberis. In Northern Ireland there are two national
museums: the Ulster Museum in Belfast and the Ulster Folk and Transport
Museum, County Down.
Most of the national collections are administered by trustees, but the Victoria
and Albert and Science Museums are the responsibility of the Office of Arts and
Libraries in the Department of Education and Science; the Royal Scottish
Museum is the responsibility of the Scottish Education Department.
Other important collections in London include the Armouries in the Tower of
London, the Public Record Office, the Museum of London and Sir John Soane’s
Museum. In Buckingham Palace the Queen s Gallery has exhibitions of pictures
from the extensive royal collections.
Most cities and towns have museums devoted to art, archaeology and natural
history, usually administered by the local authorities, but sometimes by local
learned societies or by individuals or trustees. Both Oxford and Cambridge are
rich in museums, many of them associated with the universities (for example, the
Ashmolean Museum in Oxford, founded in 1683, the oldest in the country, and the
Fitzwilliam Museum in Cambridge). There are important museums and art
galleries in Aberdeen, Belfast, Birmingham, Bristol, Cardiff, Dundee, Glasgow,
Leeds, Leicester, Liverpool, Manchester, Norwich, Reading, Sheffield, South¬
ampton and York. Many private art collections in historic family mansions,
including those owned by the National Trust, are open to the public. An increasing
number of open air museums depict the regional life of an area or preserve early
industrial remains (for example, the Weald and Downland Museum in Sussex, the
North of England Open Air Museum in Durham, and the Ironbridge Gorge
Museum in Shropshire).
All national collections are financed chiefly from government funds. Besides
meeting administrative and maintenance costs, the Government provides annual
purchase grants and may also provide special purchase grants. An independent
National Heritage Memorial Fund provides assistance to organisations wishing to
acquire land, buildings, works of art and other objects associated with the national
heritage. Pre-eminent works of art accepted by the Government in place of capital
transfer tax are allocated to public galleries.
Museums and art galleries maintained by local authorities, universities and
private benefactions, receive help in building up their collections through the
annual government grants administered by the Victoria and Albert, Science and
Royal Scottish Museums. Financial and practical assistance is also given by the Arts
Council and by trusts and voluntary bodies, including the Calouste Gulbenkian
Foundation, the National Art-Collections Fund, the Contemporary Art Society
and the Association for Business Sponsorship of the Arts.
The Government is advised on policy matters by the Standing Commission on
Museums and Galleries, which also promotes co-operation between national
352
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Exhibitions
Training in Art
and Design
Crafts
LITERATURE
AND
LIBRARIES
and provincial institutions. Nine area museum councils, grant-aided by the
Government, provide technical services and advice on conservation, display,
documentation and publicity.
The independent Museums Association, to which museums and art galleries and
their staffs belong and which also has many overseas members, is a focus for the
collection of information and discussion of matters relating to museum ad¬
ministration, and as a training and examining body for professional qualifications.
Temporary exhibitions provided by the Arts Council, the national museums and
galleries and the area museum councils are a regular feature of many museums. In
London the Hayward Gallery, the Tate Gallery, the British Museum, the Victoria
and Albert Museum and the Royal Academy are the main centres for loan
exhibitions; these are also held at the Whitechapel Art Gallery, the Camden Arts
Centre, the Serpentine Gallery and the Institute of Contemporary Arts.
Commercial exhibitions are held in the galleries of the London dealers.
There are a number of national art exhibiting societies, some of which, notably
the Royal Academy at Burlington House, have their own galleries in London. The
Royal Scottish Academy holds annual exhibitions in Edinburgh. There are also
children’s exhibitions, including the National Exhibition of Children’s Art.
Art and design education is provided in colleges of art, further education colleges
and polytechnics, maintained by local education authorities. Other institutions
offering courses include universities, the Royal Academy Schools and private art
schools. At postgraduate level there is the Royal College of Art which awards its
own degrees. Art is also taught at an advanced level at the four Scottish Central
(Art) Institutions administered by the Scottish Education Department.
The leading academic institutions for the study of the history of art are the
Courtauld and Warburg Institutes of the University of London, and the
Department of Classical Art and Archaeology in University College, London.
Art has a place in all school curricula, and the Society for Education through Art
encourages, among other activities, the purchase by schools of original works of
art by organising an annual Pictures for Schools exhibition.
Government grants for the crafts, amounting to some ^i ’4 million in 1981—82, are
administered in England and Wales by the Crafts Council. The Council holds
regular exhibitions at its London gallery, which also houses a craft resource centre,
including a colour slide library, and publishes Crafts magazine. It runs a number of
grant and loan schemes to help craftsmen and women at different stages in their
careers. The Council manages a craft shop at the Victoria and Albert Museum,
which sells work by British craftsmen. The British Craft Centre in London, which
receives an annual grant from the Crafts Council, holds some ten exhibitions a
year. Scotland receives a separate government grant which is similarly ad¬
ministered by the Crafts Consultative Committee of the Scottish Development
Agency. The Welsh Arts Council acts as the agent of the Crafts Council in
supporting the crafts in Wales.
The study of literature is included in the curricula of all schools, colleges and
universities. There are free public libraries throughout the country, private
libraries and many private literary societies. Book reviews are featured in the press
and on television and radio and there are numerous periodicals concerned with
literature. Recognition of outstanding literary merit is provided by a number of
awards, including the Booker, W. H. Smith & Son, and Whitbread prizes. Awards
to encourage young writers include those by the Somerset Maugham Trust Fund
and the E. C. Gregory Trust Fund.
353
Literary and
Philological
Societies
Books
Libraries
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
A scheme to give authors the right to receive payment from government funds
for the use of their books borrowed from public libraries is expected to start in
1982. The title Poet Laureate is conferred on a poet who receives a stipend as an
officer of the Royal Household.
Societies to promote literature include the English Association and the Royal
Society of Literature. The British Academy for the Promotion of Historical,
Philosophical and Philological Studies (the British Academy) is the leading society
of humanistic studies and receives a government grant.
Other specialist societies include the Early English Text Society, the
Bibliographical Society, the Harleian Society, the Saltire Society, and several
societies devoted to particular authors, the largest of which is the Dickens
Fellowship. A number of societies, for example the Poetry Society, sponsor poetry
readings and recitals. There are also a number of clubs and societies, such as the
Poetry Book Society, which distribute selected new books to their members.
In 1980 British publishers issued over 48,000 separate titles: more than 36,000 new
ones, and nearly 11,000 reprints and new editions. There has been an increase in the
number of book clubs, where books may be bought by mail order.
Leading organisations representing book production and distribution interests
are the Publishers’ Association and the Booksellers Association. The British
Council also publicises British books and periodicals through its libraries in 61
countries, its programme of book exhibitions (293 exhibitions were mounted in
1980-81) and its publications including the monthly British Book News. The Book
Development Council promotes British books overseas. (For sales and exports see
p 219.) The National Book League, with a membership including authors,
publishers, booksellers, librarians and readers, encourages interest in books and
arranges exhibitions in Britain and overseas.
The British Library is organised in three divisions. The Reference Division, which
receives a copy of each new book, pamphlet or newspaper published in Britain and
acquires significant literature from other countries, includes the Department of
Printed Books holding about 10 million titles, the Department of Manuscripts, the
Department of Oriental Manuscripts and Printed Books, and the Science
Reference Library, the national centre for patent documentation. The Lending
Division at Boston Spa, West Yorkshire, has nearly 4-5 million volumes including
some 56,000 current periodicals available on loan to other libraries. It also has access
to many millions of books in other libraries and is the national centre for inter-
library lending within Britain and between Britain and countries overseas. The
Bibliographic Services Division processes the material deposited with the British
Library for inclusion in its catalogues and publishes the British National Bibliography
which lists all new books and new editions published in Britain, The British
Education Index, Serials in the British Library, the British Catalogue of Music and other
bibliographic records. It also provides automated information services of
bibliographic data for libraries and their users throughout Britain. The Research
and Development Department is a major source of funding for the support of
research and development in library and information services. Construction of a
new building for the British Library’s London services is planned to begin in 1982.
Under copyright legislation, the national libraries of Scotland and of Wales, the
Bodleian Library of Oxford University and the Cambridge University Library
can claim copies of all new British publications.
Some of the national museums also have large libraries, and many government
departments have important libraries. The Public Record Office contains the
354
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
University
Libraries
Public Libraries
Library
Association
records of the superior courts of law and of most government departments, as well
as such famous historical documents as Domesday Book. In Scotland the Scottish
Record Office serves the same purpose. The National Register of Archives
(maintained by the Historical Manuscripts Commission) contains particulars of
local and private records.
Besides the few great private collections, such as that of the London Library,
there are the rich resources of the learned societies and institutions (for scientific
societies and institutions, see p 338). Examples are the libraries of the Royal
Institute of International Affairs, the Royal Commonwealth Society, the Royal
Geographical Society, the British Theatre Association, the Royal Academy of
Music, the National Library for the Blind and the National Book League.
The university libraries of Oxford and Cambridge are unmatched by those of the
more recent foundations, although the combined library resources of the colleges
and institutions of the University of London total some 5-5 million volumes, the
John Rylands University Library in Manchester contains some 3 million volumes,
and the university libraries of Edinburgh, Birmingham, Glasgow and Leeds each
have over 1 million volumes. Many universities have important research
collections in special subjects; for example, the Barnes Medical Library at
Birmingham, and the British Library of Political and Economic Science at the
London School of Economics.
Britain’s network of public libraries, administered by local public library
authorities, has a total stock of some 135 million books.
Qualified and specialist staff are available for consultation in all but the smallest
service points. About one-third of the total population are members of public
libraries. Public library authorities in England and Wales have a duty to provide
(with some limitations) a free lending and reference library service of books and
periodicals. In Scotland local authorities must provide library facilities. In
Northern Ireland the public library service is the responsibility of the education
and library boards which also have a duty to make library services available to
schools. There are some 5,600 public library service points in Britain; some areas
are served by mobile libraries of which about 700 are in service, and domiciliary
services cater for people who are unable to visit a library.
Many libraries have collections of records and musical scores for loan to the
public. Notable examples are the City of Westminster Central Music Library and
the Henry Watson Music Library at Manchester Central Library. A number of
libraries also lend from collections of works of art, either originals or re¬
productions. Nearly all provide children’s departments, while reference sections
and art, music, commercial and technical departments meet the growing and more
specific demands in these fields. Most libraries hold documents on local history.
Under a voluntary system of library co-operation in England and Wales eight
regional library bureaux (consisting mainly of public libraries in each area) aim to
be largely self-sufficient in the interlending of current British books, achieved in
some regions by a system of co-operative subject specialisation.
The National Libraries of Scotland and of Wales carry out functions similar to
those of the regional bureaux and the Lending Division of the British Library. In
Northern Ireland access to the stocks of all co-operating libraries is available to the
libraries controlled by the five education and library boards and to the libraries of
Queen’s University and the New University of Ulster.
The principal professional organisation is the Library Association. It maintains a
Register of Chartered Librarians, publishes books, pamphlets and official journals,
and holds regular conferences.
22The Press
Ownership
More daily newspapers, national and regional, are sold per person in Britain than
in most other developed countries. On an average day nearly three out of four
adults over the age of 15 read a national morning newspaper and about one in two
reads an evening newspaper. National papers have a total circulation of about 14-8
million on weekdays and i8-i million on Sundays though the total readership is
considerably greater.
The press caters for a variety of political views, interests and levels of education.
There is no State control or censorship of the press, but it is subject to the general
laws on publication (see p 361). Newspapers are almost always financially
independent of any political party and are not obliged to follow any specific line.
Where they express pronounced views and have obvious political leanings, these
derive from traditional, proprietorial and other non-party influences. In order to
preserve their character and traditions, a few newspapers and periodicals are
governed by various trustee-type arrangements. Others have management
arrangements to ensure editors’ authority and independence.
Against this background of press freedom, Britain’s position within UNESCO
discussions on a ‘new world information order’ and other communications
questions has been to oppose measures which could have the effect of sanctioning
the use of the media as an instrument of government policy and limiting the free
flow of information.
Unlike most of its European counterparts the British press receives no subsidies
and relatively few tax and postal concessions. Newspaper and magazine sales and
advertising receipts are zero-rated for value-added tax. Registered newspapers
receive a concession on postal rates, and there are concessions on ‘per-word rates
for international press telegrams and photo-telegrams. Like all postal customers,
publishers can obtain reductions in charges for regular bulk postings.
There are over 120 daily (Monday to Saturday) and Sunday newspapers and
over 1,100 weekly newspapers in Britain. These figures include certain specialised
papers with circulations limited not by region but by interest; for instance,
business, sporting and religious newspapers, and newspapers in foreign languages.
Newsprint, some 90 per cent of which is imported, forms roughly a third of
average national newspaper costs while labour represents about 45 per cent.
Revenue from sales accounts for varying proportions of income, relatively small
proportions in the case of some high circulation newspapers and periodicals which
derive considerable earnings from their advertising. The financial problems which
have led to the closure of some newspapers in recent years have resulted from rising
costs of raw materials and labour in a highly competitive market. At the same time
some new titles have been launched.
Ownership of the national, London-evening and regional daily newspapers is
concentrated in the hands of a number of large press publishing groups (the groups
controlling the national press are listed in Table 37), but there are, in addition, some
200 independent regional and local newspaper publishers.
Although most enterprises are organised as limited liability companies,
individual and partner proprietorship survives. The large national newspaper and
356
The ‘National’
Press
English
Regional
Newspapers
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
periodical publishers are major corporations with interests ranging over the whole
field of publishing and communications; some have shares in independent
television and radio contracting companies; others are involved in industrial and
commercial activities.
The law provides safeguards against the risks inherent in undue concentration of
the means of communication. For instance, if it appears that newspaper
shareholdings in television programme companies have led or are leading to results
contrary to the public interest, the Independent Broadcasting Authority may, with
the consent of the Home Secretary, notify the companies that their programmes
may cease to be transmitted. There is a similar stipulation for independent local
radio; if a local newspaper has a monopoly in the area, it is not allowed to have a
controlling interest in the local radio station. In addition, it is unlawful to transfer a
newspaper or newspaper assets to a proprietor whose newspapers have an average
daily circulation amounting, with that of the newspaper to be taken over, to
500,000 or more without the written consent of the Secretary of State for Trade.
Except in certain limited cases, this may be given only after the Secretary of State
has referred the matter to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission and received
its report.
Ten morning daily papers and seven Sunday papers (see Table 37) circulate
throughout the country, and are known as national newspapers. They are
produced in London (where Fleet Street is the traditional centre for the press), but
six of the dailies and four of the Sundays also print northern editions in Manchester
(accounting for about a quarter of the total production of the national press). An
edition of the Financial Times is also printed in Frankfurt. Prices of the national
newspapers vary from I2p to 3op for the dailies and 20p to 35p for the Sundays.
The leading Scottish papers, The Scotsman and the Glasgow Herald, have a
considerable circulation outside Scotland.
National newspapers are often thought of as either ‘quality’ or ‘popular papers
on the basis of differences in style, content and format (broadsheet or tabloid,
though this is not a rigid distinction). Four dailies and three Sundays are usually
described as quality newspapers. The three Sunday qualities and two populars
produce colour supplements as part of the paper.
The slow decline in newspaper circulations as a whole (from 37 million in 1971
to 33 million in 1981), conceals the fact that the circulation of some newspapers has
remained generally steady, while that of others has increased.
The regional newspapers of England (outside London, over 70 morning or
evening dailies and Sundays and some 700 newspapers appearing once or twice a
week) provide mainly regional and local news. The daily newspapers also give
coverage of national affairs, and a number co-operate to provide their own foreign
news service. Generally, regional evening newspapers are non-political, while the
morning newspapers adopt a more positive political stance and tend to be
independent or conservative in outlook.
The total circulation of these papers is estimated at over 7 million. Of the
morning papers the Yorkshire Post (Leeds) and the Northern Echo (Darlington) have
circulations of some 100,000 and two provincial Sunday papers—the Sunday Sun
(Newcastle upon Tyne) and the Sunday Mercury (Birmingham) have circulations
of over 144,000 and 176,000 respectively. Circulation figures of evening papers
start at about 15,000; most are in the 30,000-100,000 range, although the
Manchester Evening News and the Birmingham Evening Mail have circulations of
over 330,000 and the Liverpool Echo of over 235,000. Weekly papers are mainly of
THE PRESS
357
London Papers
Wales
TABLE 37: National Newspapers
Title and foundation date
Controlled by
Circulation
average
Jan.-June
1981
NATIONAL MORNINGS
Daily Express (1900)
Daily Mail (1896)
Daily Mirror (1903)
Daily Star (1978)
The Daily Telegraph (1855)
Financial Times (1888)
The Guardian (1821)
Morning Star (1966)
The Sun (1969)
The Times (1785)
NATIONAL SUNDAYS
News of the World (1843)
The Observer (1791)
Sunday Express (1918)
Sunday Mirror (1963)
Sunday People (1881)
Sunday Telegraph (1961)
Sunday Times (1822)
Trafalgar House Investments 2,196,492
Associated Newspapers Group Ltd 1,963,054
Reed International Ltd 3>504>377
Trafalgar House Investments 1,336,116
Telegraph Newspaper Trust 1,400,935
Pearson Longman Ltd 199,233
The Guardian and Manchester
Evening News Ltd 393>729
The People’s Press Printing
Society Ltd 32.77°
News International Ltd 3,622,720
News International Ltd 282,186
News International Ltd 4,003,067
George Outram & Co Ltd, a
subsidiary of Lonrho Ltd 918,460
Trafalgar House Investments 2,996,447
Reed International Ltd 3,740,629
Reed International Ltd 3,712,485
Telegraph Newspaper Trust 955»4°7
News International Ltd 1,431,707
a Circulation figures are those of the Audit Bureau of Circulations (founded in 1931 and consisting of
publishers, advertisers and advertising bureaux) and are certified average daily or weekly net sales for
the period. The circulation figure of the Morning Star is otherwise audited.
local appeal; they are also a valuable medium for local advertising. Most have
circulations in the 5,000—40,000 range.
There are also many free distribution advertising newspapers (mostly weekly),
some published by orthodox newspaper publishers.
The one London evening newspaper, the New Standard, formed in 1980 from a
merger of the Evening Standard (1827) and the Evening News (1881), has sales of
some 641,000. The local weeklies (about 120) include papers for every district in
Greater London. They circulate in as many as six to eight local editions of
individual papers, affiliated in some cases to larger groups. As elsewhere, there is a
range of free distribution newspapers.
A number of evening newspapers, using the latest production technology, are
published in the outer metropolitan area.
Wales has one daily morning newspaper, the Western Mail, published in Cardiff;
its circulation of just under 90,000 is mainly in south Wales. In north Wales the
Daily Post, published in Liverpool, gives wide coverage to events in the area.
Evening papers published in Wales are the South Wales Echo, Cardiff; the South
Wales Argus, Newport; the South Wales Evening Post, Swansea; and the Evening
Leader, Wrexham. Their circulation range is between 27,000 and 112,000. North
358 BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Wales is also served by the Liverpool Echo, while the Shropshire Star covers parts of
mid- and north Wales, and there is coverage to a smaller extent by the Manchester
Evening News.
The weekly press (over 50) includes English language papers, some of which
carry articles in Welsh, bilingual papers, and Welsh language papers.
Scotland Scotland has six morning, six evening and four Sunday newspapers. The morning
papers, with circulations of between about 100,000 and over 700,000 are The
Scotsman published in Edinburgh; the Glasgow Herald', the Daily Record (sister
paper to the Daily Mirror); the Dundee Courier and Advertiser', the Aberdeen Press
and Journal', and the Scottish Daily Express (printed in Manchester). The evening
papers have circulations in the range of 13,000 to 211,000 and are the Evening News
of Edinburgh, Glasgow’s Evening Times, Dundee’s Evening Telegraph and Post,
Aberdeen’s Evening Express, the Paisley Daily Express and the Greenock Telegraph.
The Sunday papers are the Sunday Mail, the Sunday Post, the Scottish Sunday
Express (printed in Manchester), and the Sunday Standard, first published in 1981.
Weekly and local newspapers number about 140, with the Hamilton Advertiser
and the Falkirk Herald having the largest circulations.
Northern
Ireland
New
Technology
Northern Ireland has two morning newspapers, one evening and one Sunday
paper, all published in Belfast with circulations ranging from 44,000 to 149,000.
They are the News-Letter (Unionist) and the Irish News (Nationalist), the evening
Belfast Telegraph and the Sunday News. There are 42 weekly newspapers.
The large labour costs of newspapers continue to encourage publishers to look for
ways of increasing productivity, often by use of the new composing technology
which dispenses with traditional ‘hot metal typesetting, with type set in molten
lead, and uses photographic methods to reproduce an image. It can combine
photo-composition with computer storage and handling of data, and substitutes
electronic for manual methods. It presents possibilities for reorganisation which
can have effects throughout a newspaper office and may raise difficult problems of
manning levels, health and safety; the introduction of the on-line system, for
example, under which text can be fed at electronic speeds to the computer store
(and recalled for checking on visual display units) and can be passed between the
store and the photosetters, can affect all the traditional departments of a newspaper
up to the printing stage. The provincial press has generally led the way in adopting
the new techniques.
The Periodical The 5,360 periodical publications (including local free-sheets) are classified as
preSS ‘general’, ‘specialised’, ‘trade’, ‘technical’ and professional . There are also about
800 ‘house magazines’ produced by industrial undertakings, business houses or
public services for their employees and/or clients. The alternative press probably
includes several hundred further titles, most of them devoted to radical politics,
community matters, religion, the occult, science or ecology.
General and specialised periodicals include magazines of general interest;
women’s magazines; publications for children; religious periodicals, fiction
magazines; magazines dealing with sport, gardening, hobbies and humour,
journals specialising in a wide range of subjects; and the publications of learned
societies, trade unions, regiments, universities and other organisations.
The weekly periodicals with the highest sales are: Radio Times and TV Times
which have circulations of about 3-5 million and Woman’s Weekly, Woman’s Own,
Woman, Weekly News (which sells mainly in Scotland) and My Weekly with
circulations in the 800,000 to 1 -6 million range. The leading journals of opinion are
THE PRESS
359
The Economist, a politically independent publication covering a wider range of
topics than its title implies; the New Statesman, which reviews politics, literature
and the arts from an independent socialist point of view; the Spectator, which
covers much the same subjects from an independent conservative standpoint;
Tribune, which represents the views of the left-wing of the Labour Party; New
Society, covering the sociological aspects of current affairs; and New Scientist,
which reports on science and technology in terms which the non-specialist can
understand. Punch, traditionally the leading humorous periodical, and Private Eye,
a satirical fortnightly, also cover public affairs. A more recent publication is
Financial Weekly, a periodical for people with business and investment interests.
Literary and political journals and those specialising in international and
Commonwealth affairs, published monthly or quarterly, generally appeal to the
more serious reader.
Trade, technical, business, scientific and professional journals are an important
aspect of British publishing. Many have a considerable circulation overseas. Their
publication ranges in frequency from weekly to quarterly.
Periodicals published in England circulate throughout Britain. In Wales there
are also several monthly and quarterly journals published in both Welsh and
English; in Scotland there are three monthly illustrated periodicals, a weekly paper
devoted to farming interests, a number of literary journals and numerous popular
magazines; and Northern Ireland has weekly, monthly and quarterly publications
covering farming, the linen industry, building, motoring, politics and social work.
News Agencies The three principal British news agencies are: Reuters Ltd, The Press Association
Ltd and The Exchange Telegraph Company Ltd.
Reuters Ltd, a world news organisation, is owned jointly by the Newspaper
Publishers Association, The Press Association, the Australian Associated Press and
the New Zealand Press Association; each is party to a trust deed which safeguards
the independence and integrity of the news service. Reuters employs some 540
journalists and correspondents in 70 countries and territories, and has links with
about 120 national or private news agencies, which give it access to coverage by
many hundreds of local reporters. Some 700,000 words of general news, sports,
and economic reports are received in London every day and are retransmitted
worldwide over a network of leased teleprinter lines, satellite links and cable and
radio circuits. These news services are specially tailored to the needs of recipients
and are distributed either direct or through national news agencies. Reuters
Economic Services, one of the world’s largest financial and business news services,
supplies information to banks, brokers and other commercial undertakings
throughout the world by means of computer-based video display units,
teleprinters and bulletins.
The Press Association Ltd, the British national news agency, is co-operatively
owned by the principal newspapers of the United Kingdom outside London, and
of the Irish Republic. It provides a complete service of home news, including
general and parliamentary news, legal reports, and all branches of financial,
commercial and sports news; and includes in its services to regional papers the
world news of Reuters and the Associated Press. News is teleprinted from London,
certain items being available in teletypesetting form. Its photographic department
serves London and regional newspapers with a daily service of pictures from home
and overseas; these are wired to the regional press. Its Special Reporting Service
supplies reports of local or special interest. Press Association Features provides
exclusive rights to syndicated articles and visual features.
The Exchange Telegraph Company Ltd (Extel), an independent news agency,
supplies financial and sporting news and, in conjunction with The Press
360
Training for
Journalism
Press
Institutions
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Association Ltd, transmits racing services by telephone and video terminals from
offices throughout Britain.
The British press and broadcasting organisations are also served by Associated
Press Ltd, and by United Press International, which are British subsidiaries of
United States news agencies.
A number of other British, Commonwealth and foreign agencies and news
services have offices in London, and there are minor agencies in other cities, mostly
specialising in various aspects of newspaper and periodical requirements.
Syndication of features is not as common in Britain as in some countries, but a few
agencies specialise in this type of work.
The National Council for the Training of Journalists (NCTJ), which represents the
principal press organisations, sets and conducts examinations, and organises short
training courses for journalists.
The two methods of entry into newspaper journalism are selection for a one-
year NCTJ pre-entry course or direct recruitment by a regional or local
newspaper. Both categories of entrant take part in an apprenticeship scheme
consisting of‘on-the-job’ training, and block release courses for those who have
not attended a pre-entry course. There are also centres providing courses for
reporters and press photographers. Other training facilities include postgraduate
courses in journalism at the University College of South Wales in Cardiff, and at
the City University (London), and courses provided by the Newspaper Society
Training Service for regional newspapers in such subjects as circulation,
advertising, industrial relations and management. The NCTJ co-operates closely
with the Printing and Publishing Industry Training Board (PPITB) which is
responsible for training in printing, publishing and professional photography.
Under the Commonwealth Press Union Harry Brittain Memorial Fellowship
Scheme, several young Commonwealth journalists each year spend three months
working and studying in Britain. The Thomson Foundation holds training courses
for journalists from all parts of the world and provides consultants and tutors for
courses in journalism held overseas.
Training for work with periodicals was traditionally done ‘on the job’ but
formal courses of instruction are becoming more widely available. The London
College of Printing offers a one-year pre-entry course in periodical journalism as
well as block- and day-release courses for those who have already started work as
trainees. In addition, several of the larger publishing houses provide in-company
training which includes periods in the classroom to supplement work experience.
For publishers who do not offer training independently, a training group has been
established under the auspices of the PPITB.
The most important employers’ organisations are the Newspaper Publishers
Association, whose members publish national newspapers in London and
Manchester; the Newspaper Society, which represents the regional, local and
London suburban press; the Scottish Daily Newspaper Society, which represents
the interests of daily and Sunday newspapers in Scotland; the Scottish Newspaper
Proprietors Association, which represents the owners of weekly newspapers in
Scotland; Associated Northern Ireland Newspapers, whose members are the
proprietors of weekly newspapers in Northern Ireland; and the Periodical
Publishers Association, whose membership embraces the independent publishers
of trade and technical journals and general magazines.
Organisations representing journalists are the Institute ofjournalists, with about
2,400 members, and the National Union ofjournalists, with more than 32,000
members. All practising journalists (including those engaged in radio, television.
THE PRESS
361
The Press
Council
The Press and
the Law
public relations, freelance journalism and book publishing editorial work) are
eligible for membership of either, but not both. Four main printing unions are
concerned with the press.
The Guild of British Newspaper Editors with about 500 members aims to
maintain the professional status and independence of editors, defend the freedom
of the press, and improve the education and training of journalists. The British
Association of Industrial Editors is the professional organisation to which most
editors of house journals belong.
The Press Council comprises equal numbers of press and non-press members, with
an independent chairman. Its aims are: to preserve the established freedom of the
press; to maintain the character of the press in accordance with the highest
professional and commercial standards; to keep under review any developments
likely to restrict the supply of information of public interest and importance; to
deal with complaints about the conduct of the press or the conduct of persons and
organisations towards the press (the Council’s complaints committee comprises
equal numbers of press and non-press members); to report on developments in the
press which may tend towards greater concentration or monopoly; to make
representation on appropriate occasions to the Government, the United Nations
and press organisations abroad; to publish its adjudications and periodic reports
recording its work; and to review from time to time developments in the press and
the factors affecting them. The Council’s annual reports include press statistics and
articles on the structure of leading press groups.
The press has generally the same freedom as the individual to comment on matters
of public interest.
Apart from legal requirements to register newspapers and periodicals, there are
no specific press laws but certain statutes include sections which apply to the press.1
These relate to such matters as the extent of newspaper ownership in television and
radio companies; the transfer of newspaper assets; restrictions on the reporting of
certain types of court proceedings; the right of press representatives to be admitted
to meetings of local authorities; restrictions on the publication of (a) advertisement
and investment circulars, which are governed by Acts dealing with the publication
of false or misleading descriptions of goods and services and with fraud, and (b)
advertisements of remedies for certain diseases, which are covered by public health
legislation; agreements between British Telecom and newspaper proprietors on
telegraphic communications, which must comply with telegraphs legislation;
restrictions on certain types of prize competition; and copyrights, which come
under copyright laws. In certain circumstances, if the defence authorities and press
representatives in the Defence, Press and Broadcasting Committee agree that
publication of information on particular topics would be detrimental to the
national interest, defence notices (‘D’ notices) are circulated confidentially to the
news media requesting that such information should not be published.
Compliance with these requests is expected, but they have no legal force. An
internal review of the ‘D’ notice system is being conducted by the committee.
Of particular relevance to the press are such laws as those on contempt of court,
official secrets, libel and defamation. A newspaper may not publish comments on
the conduct of judicial proceedings which are likely to prejudice their reputation
for fairness before or during the actual proceedings, nor may it publish before or
1 A code of conduct on trade union closed shops has been issued under the Employment Act 1980 (see
p 298). In relation to the press the code considers the position of editors and journalists and the essential
freedom to collect and publish information and to publish comment and criticism.
362
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
during a trial anything which might tend to influence the result. The obtaining and
publication of information from state and official sources of a confidential or
security nature is affected by the official secrets legislation. Newspapers are also
liable to proceedings for seditious libel and incitement to disaffection. The
majority of legal proceedings against the press are libel actions brought by private
individuals. In such cases, the editor, proprietor, publishers, printer and distributor
of the newspaper, as well as the author, may all be held responsible.
2j Tekvisbn and Radio
The British
Broadcasting
Corporation
All British broadcasting is based on the tradition that it is a public service
accountable to the people through Parliament. Two public bodies - the British
Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) and the Independent Broadcasting Authority
(IBA) - provide television and radio services; they work to broad requirements
and objectives placed on them by Parliament, but are otherwise independent in the
day-to-day conduct of business. This independence carries with it certain
obligations over programmes and programme content. Programmes must
display, as far as possible, a proper balance and wide range of subject matter,
impartiality in matters of controversy and accuracy in news coverage, and must
not offend against good taste. Codes of guidance on violence in television
programmes, particularly during hours when large numbers of children are likely
to be viewing, are operated by both authorities. A code of advertising standards
and practice is also operated by the IB A. A complaints commission has been
established to deal with complaints of unfair treatment or infringement of privacy
against both the BBC and IBA.
The Home Secretary regulates broadcasting generally, is answerable to
Parliament on broad policy questions, and may issue directions on a number of
technical and other matters.
Television viewing is by far the most popular leisure pastime in Britain, and
virtually everyone has access to television. Over 20 per cent of households have
two or more receivers. Average viewing time per person is nearly 24 hours a week.
Practically every home also has a radio set, and car radios and portable sets have
made radio a major day-time diversion.
Households with television must buy a licence each year; they cost £12 for
black and white and £34 for colour. Of over 18 million licences current in April
1981 about 13.7 million were for colour.
Citizens’ band radio, a communication system for private users, will be
introduced under the name of‘Open Channel’ in November 1981. It will operate
on 930 mHz and 27 mHz FM.
The constitution and finances of the BBC are governed by the Royal Charter and
by a Licence and Agreement. The Corporation of 12 governors (each appointed by
the Queen on the advice of the Government and including separate governors for
Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland), is responsible for all aspects of
broadcasting. Committees advise them on a wide range of matters including the
social effects of television, religious broadcasting, music, agriculture, schools
broadcasting, further education, programmes for immigrants, science and
engineering and charitable appeals. The governors appoint the Director General
who is chairman of the BBC’s board of management.
The National Broadcasting Councils for Scotland and Wales control the policy
and content of television and radio programmes intended primarily for reception
in their respective areas. A similar council is to be established for Northern Ireland.
Local radio councils, representative of the local community, advise on the
development and operation of the BBC’s local radio stations.
The domestic services of the BBC are financed principally from the sale of
364 BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
television licences. This is supplemented by profits from trading activities,
including television programme exports, the sale of records and publications
connected with BBC programmes, the hire and sale of educational films and film
library sales and exhibitions based on programmes. Nearly three-quarters of
expenditure on domestic services relates to television. The BBC meets the cost of
local radio stations but some local education authorities help to make educational
programmes. The BBC’s External Services are financed by a grant determined
each year by the Government.
The
Independent
Broadcasting
Authority
The Programme
Companies
The IB A’s constitution and finances are governed by statute. Its members (three of
whom have responsibility for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland) are
appointed by the Home Secretary. The IBA does not produce radio or television
programmes; these are provided by commercial programme companies. Its main
functions are to appoint the companies, supervise programme arrangements,
control advertising and build, own and operate transmitting stations. The chief
executive officer of the IBA, the Director General, is supported by a headquarters
and regional office staff covering all technical and administrative services.
The IBA is advised by a General Advisory Council, by Scottish, Northern
Ireland and Welsh committees, and by committees on educational broadcasting,
religious broadcasting, charitable appeals and advertising. A specialist panel advises
on advertisements of a medical nature. Local committees advise on local radio
services.
The IBA’s finance comes from annual rental payments made by the television
and radio programme companies. The television programme companies also pay
to the IBA, for transfer to the Government, a levy related to their profits. A similar
levy on the profits of local radio contractors is to be introduced.
Fifteen television programme companies hold contracts to provide television
programmes in the 14 independent television regions (two companies share the
contract for London, one providing programmes during the week and the other at
the weekend). The IBA has awarded television contracts to run from 1982 to 13 of
the present 15 companies and to two new companies. A contract to provide early
morning television from 1983 has been awarded to another new company. The
companies operate on a commercial basis, deriving their revenue from the sale of
advertising time. The financial resources, advertising revenue and programme
production of the companies vary considerably, depending largely on the size of
population in the areas in which they operate. Although newspapers can acquire an
interest in programme companies, there are safeguards to protect public interest.
In consultation with the IBA, each company plans the content of the
programmes to be broadcast in its area. These are produced by the company itself
and by other programme companies or purchased from elsewhere. The five largest
companies serving London, Lancashire and Yorkshire provide more programmes
for broadcast elsewhere on the national network than do the smaller ones. A
common news service is provided by Independent Television News Ltd., a non-
profit-making company in which all the programme companies are shareholders.
Negotiations for the supply, exchange and purchase of programmes and their co¬
ordinated transmission through the independent television network take place
largely on the Network Planning Committee which consists of representatives of
all the programme companies and of the IBA.
Similar principles apply in the case of independent local radio. The programme
companies are under contract to the IBA, operate under its control and are
financed by advertising revenue. News coverage is supplied as a common service
by Independent Radio News.
TELEVISION AND RADIO
365
Television
Radio
Three television channels are in operation: BBC-i and ITV broadcast on both 405
lines very high frequency (vhf) and 625 lines ultra high frequency (uhf); BBC-2
broadcasts on 625 lines uhf only. About 99 per cent of the population live within
range of both uhf and vhf transmissions, though the latter are to be phased out
between 1982 and 1986. A fourth channel will begin transmitting in 1982.
Apart from a break during the war years the BBC has been providing regular
television broadcasts since 1936. All BBC-2 programmes and the majority of those
on BBC-i are broadcast on the national network. Of the BBC’s 1979-80 television
output over 43 per cent was produced in London and 36 per cent elsewhere in
Britain; over 11 per cent comprised feature films and series, and 10 per cent Open
University programmes. Current affairs, features, documentaries, news, schools,
further education, Open University and religious programmes comprised about
45 per cent of the total.
Through co-ordinated planning on its two services the BBC caters
simultaneously for people of differing interests. While both services cover the
whole range of television output, BBC-i presents more programmes of general
interest, such as light entertainment, sport, current affairs, children’s programmes
and outside broadcasts, while BBC-2 places greater emphasis on minority interests,
providing a larger element of documentaries, travel programmes, serious drama,
music, programmes on pastimes and international films. A BBC working party is
to report on the feasibility of providing an early morning television service. (For
IBA plans to provide a similar service see p 364).
The first regular independent television programmes began in London in 1955.
On average each of the 14 ITV areas transmitted over 100 hours of television
programmes a week in 1980—81, nearly two-fifths of which comprised
informative programmes—including news, documentaries, current affairs,
education and religion. Three-quarters of the programmes are produced by the
programme companies themselves.
A fourth television channel is expected to begin in the autumn of 1982, and,
except in Wales, will be the responsibility of the IBA, operating through a
subsidiary company. The IBA will be expected to ensure that the channel caters for
tastes and interests not normally provided for by the existing independent service.
It must provide a suitable proportion of educational programmes, encourage
innovation and experiment, and include a substantial proportion of programmes
from independent producers. The programme companies will, however, finance
the new service and in return will have the right to sell advertising time in fourth
channel programmes broadcast in their region. In Wales programmes on the
fourth channel will be provided by a Welsh Fourth Channel Authority whose
members are appointed by the Home Secretary. The Authority will be required to
ensure that a substantial proportion of the programmes are in Welsh and that
programmes broadcast between 6.30pm and 10pm are mainly in Welsh.
British television programmes have won many international awards. One of the
world’s foremost exporters of television productions, Britain exported an
estimated ^51 million-worth of television programmes in 1979, and there are few
countries where British programmes have not been shown.
BBC Radio has four national channels. Radio 1 provides a programme of pop
music, while Radio 2 provides light entertainment and music as well as being the
principal channel for the coverage of sport. Radio 3 provides mainly classical
music and in the evening also offers adult education programmes and works of
artistic and intellectual interest. Radio 4 is the main speech programme, providing
the principal news and information service and a wide range of drama, music,
talks, entertainment and schools broadcasts.
366
Cable Services
External
Services
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Local radio is provided by 22 BBC stations in England and by 26 independent
stations distributed throughout Britain. Another 18 independent stations are being
established and 25 more stations for the IBA and 10 for the BBC have been
proposed. Local broadcasts provide a comprehensive service of local news and
information, music and other entertainment, education, consumer advice and
coverage of local events, and offer residents a chance to air their views, often by
using the phone-in technique.
Nearly 14 per cent of households with television rely on cable systems for the
reception of programmes. The systems are usually used to improve reception
quality, to avoid ‘screening’ by buildings or the local topography, or because
external aerials are not allowed on some residential buildings. There are cable
networks in almost every urban area. Commercial relay operators are represented
by the Cable Television Association of Great Britain. All operators of cable
systems are licensed by the Home Secretary and the Post Office.
In the past few years several experiments have been authorised for local stations
to distribute locally originated television and sound-only programmes by cable
systems to subscribers. One local community cable television and six local
community cable sound-only stations are in operation. These enable people both
to see and hear programmes about local topics and issues and to participate in
making the programmes. Cable operators are to be licensed to provide
subscription television (‘Pay-TV’) services in a number of areas for an
experimental period of two years.
The BBC External Services broadcast by radio to most countries overseas, using
English and many other languages. The main objectives are to give unbiased news,
reflect British opinion and project British life, culture and developments in science
and industry. News bulletins, current affairs programmes, political commentaries
and topical magazine programmes form the main part of the output. A full sports
service, music, drama, and general entertainment are also included.
The languages in which the External Services broadcast and the length of time
each is on the air are prescribed by the Government. Apart from this the BBC has
full responsibility and it is completely independent in determining the content of
news and other programmes. A plan to improve audibility has been announced,
with some of the costs being met from current operations. As a result of cuts in
government expenditure several language services are to be discontinued, leaving,
however, a weekly broadcast total of nearly 670 hours.
The BBC World Service broadcasts for 24 hours a day in English and is
supplemented at peak listening times by programmes of special interest to Africa.
BBC news bulletins and other programmes are re-broadcast by the radio
services of many countries. Re-broadcasting involves direct relays from BBC
transmissions and the use of recorded programmes supplied through the BBC tape
and disc transcription service. There are some 3,000 re-broadcasts weekly of
World Service programmes in about 50 countries. The Transcription Service,
which the Government hopes will become self-supporting, offers programmes to
about 110 countries.
The BBC’s English by Radio and Television Service is the most extensive
language teaching undertaking in the world. English lessons are broadcast weekly
by radio with explanations in 26 other languages, and recorded lessons are supplied
to 280 stations in 90 countries. English by Television programmes are shown in
more than 60 countries.
Another part of the External Services, the Monitoring Service, listens to and
Advertising
Parliamentary
and Political
Broadcasting
Technical
Developments
TELEVISION AND RADIO 3*57
reports on foreign broadcasts, supplying a daily flow of significant news and
comment from overseas to the BBC, the press, and the Government.
Radio for overseas is also produced by the radio services of the Central Office of
Information (COI). A wide range of recorded material is sent to radio stations in
over 70 countries. COI television services provide material such as documentary
and magazine programmes for distribution to overseas television stations.
The BBC does not give publicity to any firm or organised interest except when it is
necessary to provide effective and informative programmes. It must not broadcast
any commercial advertisement or sponsored programme.
Advertisements are broadcast on independent television but there is no
sponsoring of programmes by advertisers. Advertisements must be clearly
distinguishable and separate from programmes, and the amount of time given to
them must not be so great as to detract from the value of the programmes as a
medium of information, education or entertainment. Advertising is normally
limited to seven minutes in any one hour of broadcasting time and averaged over
the day’s programmes must not exceed six minutes per hour. The independent
local radio stations are normally limited to a maximum of nine minutes of
advertising each hour. The IBA has a code governing standards and practice in
advertising on television and radio and giving guidance about the types and
methods of advertisement which are prohibited; this includes advertising with a
political or religious object or on behalf of cigarettes or betting. Advertisements
may not be inserted in certain types of programme, such as broadcasts to schools.
Government publicity material to support non-political campaigns may be
broadcast on independent radio and television. It is prepared through the COI and
broadcast and paid for on a normal commercial basis. Short public service items,
mainly about health, safety and welfare, are also produced by the COI for free
transmission by the BBC and independent television and radio. The Government
has no general privileged access to radio or television.
Parliamentary reporting includes a daily factual and impartial account of
proceedings in Parliament. Proceedings, including those of committees, are
broadcast on radio, some live and others in recorded form in radio and television
news and current affairs programmes.
Ministerial and party political broadcasts are transmitted periodically on radio
and television under the rules agreed between the major political parties, the BBC
and the IBA.
Research into technical problems is carried out by scientific and engineering staffs
of the BBC, the IBA, the Home Office, other government departments and the
radio industry. One of the most important recent developments has been the
introduction of smaller, lighter cameras and video recorders for use on location.
Electronic news gathering equipment, whereby pictures can be transmitted
directly to a studio or recorded on videotape on location, reduces significantly the
time before an item can be broadcast. Other developments include the use of
magnetic tape on videotape recorders, the increasing use of computers to generate
graphical shapes such as captions and credits, and the improvement of the quality
of videotape pictures.
Advances by the BBC have included the electronic conversion of monochrome
and colour television pictures between the European and the American systems,
and the development of a sound-and-vision system known as ‘sound-in-sync’
which enables the television sound and picture to be carried over a single 625-line
vision circuit, eliminating the operational complexity and expense of a separate
circuit for sound. IBA engineers were the first in the world to introduce a fully
368
International
Relations
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
digital field rate standards converter to improve the interchange of programmes
between areas using the 525-lines system and those using the 625-lines system.
Current IBA research projects include the further development of the first digital
video tape recorder with economical use of tape, and a programme of research into
the future use of space satellites for broadcasting.
An official study1 into the implications of establishing a direct broadcasting
satellite service in Britain by about 1985, or, alternatively, by about 1990, covered
the technical, financial and resource implications of such a service, the implications
for the existing broadcasting system and services, the possible industrial benefits
and likely developments in Europe.
Both the BBC and IBA have produced ‘teletext’ systems, known respectively as
CEEFAX and ORACLE, which allow the broadcasting of simple graphical
information to television receivers fitted with special adaptors. Both systems
enable viewers to select a display of‘pages of written information on the television
screen; the system also allows sub-titles to appear in conjunction with
programmes, which is of great benefit to the deaf and hard of hearing. British
Telecom’s public viewdata service, Prestel, offers a wide range of information
which is transmitted via the telephone and may be viewed on the screen of a
television receiver (see p 284).
The BBC and the IBA are active members of the European Broadcasting Union
which manages Eurovision, is responsible for the technical and administrative
arrangements for co-ordinating the exchange of programmes over the Eurovision
network and intercontinental satellite links, and maintains a technical monitoring
station where frequency measurements and other observations on broadcasting
stations are carried out. The Union also provides a forum linking the major public
services and national broadcasters of Western Europe and other parts of the world
and co-ordinates co-operation in radio and television.
The BBC is a partner in Visnews, which supplies world newsfilm to 134
television organisations in 94 countries and is the most widely used newsfilm
agency in the world. The BBC is also a member of the International Television
Federation (Intertel), which produces information programmes which are ex¬
changed overseas. United Press International, Paramount Pictures and Independent
Television News jointly provide an international newsfilm service to more than
100 overseas television organisations via the Eurovision network and by satellite.
The BBC is an associated member of the Asian Pacific Broadcasting Union, and
belongs to the Commonwealth Broadcasting Association whose members extend
to each other such facilities as the use of studios, recording channels, and
programme contributions. The BBC also provides technical aid, particularly in
training the staff of other broadcasting organisations throughout the world;
members of the BBC’s staff are seconded for service overseas.
The Government finances a number of overseas students on the broadcasting
training courses at the British Council (see p 67), the BBC and the Thomson
Television College which is based in Glasgow.
The BBC and the IBA participate in the work of the International
Telecommunications Union, the United Nations agency responsible for
regulating and controlling all international telecommunications services
(including radio and television), for allocating and registering all radio frequencies
and for promoting and co-ordinating the international study of technical problems
in broadcasting. The BBC is also represented on the United Kingdom Committee
of the International Special Committee on Radio Interference.
1 Direct Broadcasting by Satellite. Report of a Home Office Study. HMSO, £4S°- ISBN o 11 340740 8.
24 Sport and Recreation
ORGANISA¬
TION AND
PROMOTION
Sports
Councils
Britain invented and developed many of the sports and games which are now
played all over the world, and there is widespread interest in almost every kind of
sport throughout the country. Large crowds attend occasions such as the
association football Cup Final at Wembley Stadium, the international rugby
matches at Twickenham, Murrayfield and Cardiff Arms Park, the Wimbledon
lawn tennis championships, the classic horse races, Grand Prix motor racing and
the cricket Test Matches; millions also watch them on television. Many people
take part in active recreation such as climbing, rambling, riding, boating, angling
and other water-based sports, keep fit, movement and dance activities. Indoor
sports like darts and snooker are also popular.
A Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State in the Department of the Environment
co-ordinates government policy on sport and active recreation. The Secretaries of
State for Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland have similar responsibilities in
their areas.
The Government provides financial and other assistance through a number of
official bodies. Some of these, such as the Sports Councils (see below) and the
Countryside Commissions, have specific responsibilities for sport and recreation,
and help other public and private bodies to provide facilities. Others, for example,
the Forestry Commission, the British Waterways Board, the Nature Conservancy
Council and the regional water authorities, provide recreational amenities in
addition to their main functions.
Government assistance to the development of sport in Great Britain is channelled
through three independent bodies—the Sports Council (for England and for
general matters affecting Britain as a whole), the Sports Council for Wales and the
Scottish Sports Council. The Councils allocate government funds (in 1981—82
amounting to some ^27 million) subject only to general ministerial directives.
They award grants for sports development, coaching and administration to the
governing bodies of sport and other national organisations, and administer the
national sports centres. Grants and loans are made to voluntary organisations and
local authorities to assist the provision of sports facilities. In some circumstances
grants are also given to commercial organisations. The Councils also assist British
representatives at international sports meetings and encourage links with
international and overseas organisations. The Sports Council consults with the
Central Council of Physical Recreation, comprising members of the national
governing and representative bodies of sport and physical recreation in England.
There are nine regional councils for sport and recreation in England, on each of
which are represented the sporting, countryside and local authority interests of the
region. The Scottish Sports Council consults with the Scottish Standing
Conference of Sport which comprises representatives of the national governing
bodies of sport in Scotland; and in Wales the governing bodies of sport come
together in the Welsh Sports Association and form a committee of the Sports
Council for Wales. In Northern Ireland the Department of Education finances the
Sports Council for Northern Ireland, and gives financial help to local authorities
370
Organisations
The British
Olympic
Association
The National
Playing Fields
Association
Sport for the
Disabled
Private
Sponsorship
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and voluntary sports bodies for the provision of facilities. Apart from grant aiding
facilities the Sports Council for Northern Ireland has the same range of functions as
the other Sports Councils.
A bibliographic service about sport is provided by the National Documentation
Centre, set up by the Sports Council and based at the University of Birmingham.
The Council also has an information centre providing data on a wide range of
sports topics; similar services are provided by the Sports Council for Wales, the
Scottish Sports Council and the Sports Council for Northern Ireland. The Sports
Council’s Technical Unit for Sport gives advice on the design and layout of sports
halls and playing areas and carries out research.
Individual sports are run by independent governing bodies whose functions
usually include drawing up rules, holding events, regulating membership,
selecting and training national teams and promoting international links.
There are also organisations representing people who take part in more informal
physical recreation, such as walking, or cycling; others, for example the National
Trusts (see p 161), are involved in leisure interests as part of a wider concern.
The British Olympic Association, founded in 1905, organises the participation of
British teams in the Olympic Games. The Association’s committee consists of
representatives of the 26 sports in the programme of the Olympic Games (summer
and winter). It determines the size of the British team, raises funds, makes all the
arrangements and provides a headquarters staff for the management of the team.
The National Playing Fields Association encourages the provision of playing
fields, playgrounds and recreational facilities, specialising in the play and
recreational needs of children and young people, including the young
handicapped. The Association maintains a Technical Advisory Service and an
Information Centre in London, runs the Midlands Resource Centre in
Birmingham, and publishes the magazine Play Times. Eight regional officers in
England and Wales promote and advise on the provision of play opportunities.
The Association is a national charity established by Royal Charter and depends
mainly on voluntary contributions. There are affiliated associations in Scotland,
Northern Ireland and in the counties of England and Wales.
The British Sports Association for the Disabled, founded in 1961, encourages
greater sporting and recreational opportunities for the physically handicapped.
The Association receives an annual Sports Council grant and provides advice on
physical recreation for the disabled, arranges sports meetings and encourages the
provision of facilities throughout the country. The first sports stadium in the world
designed for the disabled was opened at Stoke Mandeville, Buckinghamshire, in
1969, and is owned and maintained by the British Paraplegic Sports Society.
Annual national and international paraplegic games are arranged by the British
Paraplegic Sports Society. In Scotland and Northern Ireland there are similar
associations which co-ordinate activities and facilities, and in Wales there is a
Welsh Sports Association for the Disabled. The Sports Council has been
instrumental in forming the United Kingdom Sports Association for People with
Mental Handicap. This brings together organisations concerned with mentally
handicapped people in order to increase their opportunities to take part in sport.
Increasing numbers of sports receive financial sponsorship from commercial
organisations. Sponsorship may take the form of financing specific events, or it
may be granted to individual sports organisations.
A Sports Aid Foundation raises and distributes funds from industry, commerce
SPORT AND RECREATION
371
PROVISION
OF
FACILITIES
Sports Centres
and private sponsors in order to assist the training of talented individual sportsmen
and sportswomen. The Foundation makes grants on the recommendation of the
governing bodies of sport. In Wales the Welsh Sports Trust fulfils a similar
function and in Northern Ireland this is done by the Ulster Sports and Recreation
Trust. The Sports Council also runs a sponsorship advisory service.
Local authorities are the main providers of land and large-scale facilities for
community recreation; their total expenditure on sport and outdoor recreation in
England amounted to some ^530 million in 1980—81, in Wales ^38 million and in
Scotland about £87 million. The facilities provided include parks, playing fields,
sports halls, tennis courts, golf courses, lakes, swimming baths and sports centres
catering for a wide range of indoor and outdoor activities.
Publicly maintained schools must provide for the physical education of their
pupils. All (except those solely for infants) must have a playing field, or the use of
one, and most secondary schools have a gymnasium. Some have other amenities
such as swimming pools, sports halls and halls designed for dance and movement.
In many areas, schools’ facilities are available to the community outside school
hours. Sport and recreation facilities are likewise provided at universities (some of
which have departments of physical education), and there are ‘centres of sporting
excellence’ at universities and other colleges enabling selected young athletes to
develop their talents and also providing for their educational needs.
Opportunities for outdoor recreation in national parks, nature reserves, forest
parks and country parks are provided by public bodies (see p 163). Water-based
activities on canals, rivers, lakes and reservoirs are increasingly popular.
In addition to the recreational facilities provided by public authorities, many
facilities are made available by local voluntary clubs. Some cater for indoor
recreation, but more common are those providing sports grounds, particularly for
games such as cricket, association and rugby football, hockey, tennis and golf.
Clubs linked to business firms often cater for a wide range of activities, and in many
cases make their facilities available to members of the public. Commercial facilities
include tenpin bowling centres, ice- and roller-skating rinks, squash courts, golf
courses and driving ranges and riding stables.
National sports centres, some of which were initially financed by funds from
voluntary sources, are run by the Sports Council, and provide a range of
competition and training facilities. As well as offering residential courses lor
national teams, coaches and enthusiasts from all over Britain, the centres are used
extensively by local sports clubs and the local community.
There are six national centres in England and Wales, financed mainly by the
Sports Council. Combined facilities for a range of sports are provided at three
centres: Crystal Palace in south-east London, Bisham Abbey in Buckinghamshire
and Lilleshall in Shropshire. Crystal Palace provides major competition venues for
athletics and swimming and a variety of indoor sports and Lilleshall is also the
training headquarters of the Football Association. The other three are specialist
centres: the National Sailing Centre, Cowes, Isle of Wight, the National Water
Sports Centre at Holme Pierrepont, Nottinghamshire which caters for rowing,
canoeing and water-skiing and the Plas-y-Brenin National Centre for Mountain
Activities in North Wales. Crystal Palace and Holme Pierrepont also receive
financial support from the Greater London Council and the Nottinghamshire
County Council. The Sports Council for Wales operates the National Sports
Centre for Wales in Cardiff, and is constructing the National Outdoor Pursuits
Centre at Plas-y-Deri in North Wales which is expected to be completed in 1982.
The Scottish Sports Council operates three national sports training centres:
372
POPULAR
SPORTS
Association
Football
Athletics
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Glenmore Lodge near Aviemore for outdoor sports, Inverclyde at Largs for
general sports, and a national water sports training centre in Cumbrae Isle on the
Firth of Clyde. The Sports Council for Northern Ireland operates one national
faculty, the Northern Ireland Mountain Centre at Tallymore in Co. Down.
Other centres (such as the Meadowbank Sports Centre administered by
Edinburgh District Council) cater for a wide range of recreational activities and
often attract more than purely local interest. Over 450 indoor sports centres serve
local rather than national needs; more are planned, some as ‘dual’ projects on
school sites. Several centres cater for specialised interests, for example the National
Equestrian Centre, run by the British Equestrian Federation, and the Ludwig
Guttmann Sports Centre for the Disabled, Stoke Mandeville, run by the British
Paraplegic Sports Society (see p 370).
Northern Ireland has 15 major indoor sports centres of which 14 include
swimming pools. In addition there are 21 public swimming centres. Recreation
halls are planned as extensions at 16 of these locations.
Some of the major sports in Britain are mentioned below. Sportsmen may be
professionals (paid players) or amateurs. Some sports, such as rugby union, hockey
and rowing, are entirely amateur but in others the distinction between amateur
and professional status is less strictly defined, or does not exist.
Probably the most popular spectator sport is association football, which was first
developed and codified in England during the nineteenth century, and is
controlled by separate football associations in England, Wales, Scotland and
Northern Ireland. In England over 350 clubs are affiliated to the English Football
Association (FA) and some 40,000 clubs to regional or district associations. The
principal clubs in England and Wales belong to the Football League (92 clubs) and
in Scotland to the Scottish Football League (38 clubs); the clubs play in four
divisions in England and Wales and three in Scotland. During the season
attendances at Football League matches total about 23 million. The Football
Association, formed in 1863, and the Football League, formed in 1888, were both
the first of their kind.
The annual competitions for the FA Challenge Cup, the Football League Cup,
the Scottish FA Cup, the Scottish League Cup and the Irish Cup are organised on a
knock-out basis, and the finals are played at Wembley Stadium, London, at
Flampden Park, Glasgow, and at Windsor Park, Belfast.
National teams representing England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland
compete against one another annually and take part in European competitions, the
World Cup competition and other international matches.
Attempts have been made to give football clubs closer links with the
community in order to overcome problems of hooliganism. The Sports Council,
using specially allocated funds, has made grants to a number of clubs to enable
them to modernise or expand football and other sporting facilities which will
attract young people.
In England amateur athletics (including track, road and cross-country running,
relay racing, jumping, vaulting, hurdling, steeplechasing, throwing and race
walking) are governed by the Amateur Athletic Association (which, formed in
1880, was the first national governing body for athletics) and by the Women s
Amateur Athletic Association. Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland have their
own associations. The various organisations encourage the development of the
sport, establish uniform rules and regulations and promote regional and national
championships. Hundreds of clubs are affiliated to the various national associations.
SPORT AND RECREATION
373
The Highland
Games
Boxing
Cricket
International athletics and the selection of British teams are the concern of the
British Amateur Athletic Board which is composed of representatives of the
national associations. For the Olympic Games one team represents the United
Kingdom but England, Wales, Scotland, Northern Ireland, Jersey, Guernsey and
the Isle of Man compete separately in the Commonwealth Games and also organise
their own international meetings. The Board also administers coaching schemes.
The Scottish Highland Games, at which sports (including tossing the caber,
putting the weight and throwing the hammer) and dancing and piping
competitions take place, attract large numbers of spectators from all over the
world. Among better-known Highland Games are the annual Braemar Gathering
(traditionally attended by the Royal Family), the Argyllshire and Cowal
Gatherings and the meeting at Aboyne.
Boxing as a British sport is one of the oldest, probably originating in Saxon times.
Its modern form, also adopted in many overseas countries, dates from 1865 when
the Marquess of Queensberry drew up a set of rules eliminating much of the
brutality that had characterised prize fighting and making skill the basis of the
sport. Boxing is both amateur and professional; and in both, strict medical
regulations are observed.
The Amateur Boxing Association controls all amateur boxing in England
including schoolboy, club and association boxing, and boxing in the armed
services. There are separate associations in Scotland and Wales. Northern Ireland
forms part of the Irish Boxing Association. The associations organise various
amateur boxing competitions, and teams from England, Wales, Scotland and
Northern Ireland take part in international competitions.
Professional boxing is controlled by the British Boxing Board of Control,
founded in 1929. The Board appoints inspectors, medical officers and
representatives to ensure that regulations are observed and to guard against over¬
matching and exploitation.
Cricket is among the most popular of summer sports and is sometimes called the
English national game. It is known to have been played as early as the 1550s.
Among the many clubs founded in the eighteenth century is the Marylebone
Cricket Club (MCC) which was founded in London and which reframed the laws
of the game. Cricket in Britain is now governed by the Cricket Council which
consists of representatives of the MCC, the Test and County Cricket Board
(representing first-class cricket) and the National Cricket Association (representing
club and junior cricket).
The game is played in schools, colleges and universities, and in most towns and
villages there are amateur teams which play weekly games from late April to the
end of September. In the Midlands and the North of England there is a network of
League cricket contested by teams of Saturday afternoon players reinforced by
professionals, some of whom come from overseas.
Some of the best supported games are the annual series of five-day sponsored
Test Matches played between England and a touring team from Australia, New
Zealand, India, Pakistan or the West Indies. A team representing England usually
tours one or more of these countries in the British winter. One-day international
games also attract large crowds. A World Cup is played every four years, with
some of the smaller cricketing nations as well as the major countries competing.
There is also a sponsored First Class County Championship of three-day games
played by 17 county teams who also take part in three one-day sponsored
competitions-—two knock-out competitions and the Sunday League.
374
Field Sports
Golf
Lawn Tennis
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL FIANDBOOK
Cricket is also played by women and girls, the governing body being the
Women’s Cricket Association, founded in 1926. Women’s cricket clubs have
regular week-end fixtures, and junior sides play largely six-a-side competitions.
Test match series are played against Australia, India, New Zealand and the Whst
Indies and other international games take place.
The British Field Sports Society looks after the interests of all field sports
(including hunting, fishing, stalking, game shooting, falconry and hare coursing).
The Society is a member of the British Shooting Sports Council which is the
representative body for the recreational use of firearms.
Fox hunting on horseback with a pack of hounds is the most popular British
hunting sport but there is also stag hunting, and hunting the hare. The fox hunting
season lasts from early November to April; there are over 320 packs of hounds of
all kinds in Britain. The sport is not without its critics, but a large number of people
take a keen interest in it.
Game shooting as an organised sport probably originated in the early part of the
nineteenth century. Game consists of grouse, black-grouse, partridge, pheasant
and ptarmigan, species which are protected by law during a close season when they
are allowed to breed on numerous estates supervised by game-keepers. It is
necessary to have a licence to kill game, and a certificate must be obtained from the
local police by anyone who possesses a shot gun. The Game Conservancy, formed
by landowners, farmers and others interested in game conservation, collects
information and studies factors controlling game population.
The most popular country sport is fishing, and there are about 4 million anglers
in Britain. Many fish for salmon and trout particularly in the rivers and lochs of
Scotland, but in England and Wales the most widely practised form of fishing is for
coarse fish such as pike, perch, carp, roach, dace, tench, chub and bream. Angling
clubs affiliate to the National Federation of Anglers and many clubs organise
angling competitions. National championships are organised by the Federation
which also enters a team in the World Angling Championship. Freshwater fishing
usually has to be paid for; most coarse fishing is let to angling clubs by private
owners, while trout and salmon fishermen either rent a stretch of river, join a club,
or pay for the right to fish by the day, week or month. Coastal and deep sea fishing
are free to all (apart from salmon and sea trout fishing which is by licence only). In
Northern Ireland the Ulster Provincial Council of the Irish Federation of Sea
Anglers, the Ulster Coarse Angling Federation and the Ulster Angling Federation
look after the interests of the sport. In Wales all angling is the responsibility of the
Welsh Anglers Council.
Golf originated in Scotland where it has for centuries borne the title of the Royal
and Ancient Game, the headquarters of the Royal and Ancient Golf Club being
situated at St. Andrews on the east coast. The Club is the international governing
body of the sport. Golf is played throughout Britain and there are golf courses in
the vicinity of most towns, some of them owned by local authorities. The main
event of the golfing year is the Open Golf Championship; other important events
include the Walker Cup match for amateurs and the Ryder Cup match for
professionals, both of which are played between Britain and the United States.
The modern game of lawn tennis was first played in England in 1872 and the first
championships at Wimbledon in 1877. The controlling body in Great Britain, the
Lawn Tennis Association, was founded in 1888. The main event of the season is the
annual Wimbledon fortnight, widely regarded as the most important tennis event
in the world; this draws large crowds, with the grounds at the All-England Club
375
Motor Sports
Racing
Riding
SPORT AND RECREATION
accommodating over 30,000 spectators. There are also county championships and
national competitions for boys’ and girls’ schools. International events include the
Davis Cup and Kings Cup for men and the Federation Cup for women. Women
from Britain and the United States compete for the Wightman Cup. In Northern
Ireland the Ulster Council of the Irish Lawn Tennis Association controls the game.
Among the most popular spectator sports are motor racing and motor rallying.
The governing body, RAC (Royal Automobile Club) Motor Sports Association,
issues competition licences for a variety of motoring competitions and organises
the RAC Rally, an event in the contest for the World Rally Championship. It also
organises the British Grand Prix which counts towards the Formula One World
Motor Racing Championship.
Motor cycle racing is governed by the Auto-Cycle Union and the most
important events of the year are the Isle of Man Tourist Trophy races, the British
Grand Prix, and the TT Formula One World Championship. Motor cycle
speedway racing is governed by the Speedway Control Board.
Horse racing takes two forms—flat racing (from late March to early November)
and steeplechasing and hurdle racing (from August to June). The Derby, run at
Epsom, is the outstanding event in the flat racing calendar. Other classic races are:
the Two Thousand Guineas and the One Thousand Guineas, both run at
Newmarket; the Oaks, run at Epsom; and the St. Leger, run at Doncaster. The
most important steeplechase and hurdle race meeting is the National Hunt Festival
Meeting at Cheltenham. The Grand National run at Aintree near Liverpool is the
best known steeplechase and dates from 1837.
The Jockey Club administers all horse racing in Britain. Its rules are the basis of
turf procedure and it also licenses racecourses. Racing takes place on most
weekdays throughout the year and about 12,000 horses are in training. British
thoroughbreds continue to be a source of the world s best bloodstock.
The racing of greyhounds after a mechanical hare (considered to be among
Britain’s most popular spectator sports) takes place at 105 tracks licensed by local
authorities. Meetings are usually held two or three times a week at each track, up to
a maximum of 130 days a year. The rules for the sport are drawn up by the
National Greyhound Racing Club, which is the sport s judiciary body. The
Stewards of the Club are also responsible for overall administration and
organisation. The representative body for the sport is the British Greyhound
Racing Board.
The authority responsible for equestrian activities (other than racing) at
international level is the British Equestrian Federation which co-ordinates the
work of the British Horse Society and the British Showjumping Association.
At national level the British Horse Society promotes the welfare of horses and
ponies, the interests of horse and pony breeding and the art of riding. It provides
information, publications, a film library, courses and examinations and, together
with riding schools approved by it, helps to promote horsemastership. It also runs
the British Equestrian Centre at Kenilworth, Warwickshire, where activities take
place throughout the year. With some 30,000 members the Society is the parent
body of the Pony Club and the Riding Club movement. These hold rallies,
meetings and competitions, culminating in their annual national championships at
the British Equestrian Centre.
Horse trials are held during the spring and summer under the auspices of the
Society. The three-day events held each year are at Badminton (Avon) in April,
Windsor (Berkshire) in May, Bramham (Yorkshire) in June, Burghley House
376
Rugby
Football
Sailing
Swimming
GAMBLING
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
(Lincolnshire) in September, and Wylye (Wiltshire) in October, and include
dressage, cross-country riding and showjumping.
Show jumping is promoted by the British Show Jumping Association which
draws up competition rules and prescribes the general standards and height of
obstacles. The Association keeps a register of horses and ponies taking part in shows
and seeks to improve the standard of jumping and to provide for British
representation in international competitions. It has over 16,000 members and 1,250
shows are affiliated to it. The major showjumping events each year include the
Royal International Horse Show, the Horse of the Year Show, and the
Birmingham International Showjumping Championships.
Rugby football is played according to two different codes: Rugby Union (a 15-a-
side game) is played by amateurs while Rugby League (a 13-a-side game) is played
by professionals as well as amateurs.
Rugby Union is played throughout Britain under the auspices of the Rugby
Football Union (in England), the Welsh Rugby Union, the Scottish Rugby
Union and the Irish Rugby Football Union. International matches between
England, Scotland, Wales, Ireland and France are played each year and there are
tours by international teams.
Rugby League is played mostly in the north of England. The governing body of
the professional game is the Rugby Football League which sends touring teams to
Australia and New Zealand. Annual matches are also played against France. The
Challenge Cup Final, the major match of the season, is played at Wembley
Stadium in London. The amateur game is governed by the British Amateur
Rugby League Association. An international championship is played annually
between England, Wales and France.
Sailing has always been popular in Britain. The Royal Yachting Association has
over 14,000 affiliated clubs, and 60,000 personal members; some 500 recognised
teaching centres in the country including the National Sailing Centre at Cowes in
the Isle of Wight offer Royal Yachting Association courses in all branches of the
sport. One of the world’s principal regattas takes place each year at Cowes, and
major events are held at other British sailing centres.
Swimming is enjoyed by millions of people in Britain, many of whom learn to
swim at public baths, schools or swimming clubs. Instruction and coaching is
provided by qualified teachers who hold certificates awarded by the Amateur
Swimming Association, to which over 1,700 clubs are affiliated. The Association
also draws up and enforces regulations for amateur swimming, diving,
synchronised swimming and water polo championships and competitions in
England. Separate associations control the sport in Scotland and Wales. Northern
Ireland forms part of the Irish Amateur Swimming Association.
Underwater swimming (sub-aqua) is governed nationally by the British Sub-
Aqua Club which promotes underwater exploration, science and sport. Formed in
1953, the club has become the largest in the world with some 30,000 members and
more than 4,000 branches in Britain and overseas.
Various forms of betting and commercial gaming are permitted under strict
regulations and the total money staked in Great Britain in 1980 was about ^5>990
million. It is estimated that some 94 per cent of adults gamble at some time or
another, 39 per cent regularly.
Gaming includes the playing of casino and card games, gaming machines and
licensed bingo, thought to be played by about 5 to 6 million people on a fairly
SPORT AND RECREATION
377
regular basis. Betting takes place mainly on horse and greyhound racing, and on
football matches (usually through football pools). Racing bets may be made at
racecourses and greyhound tracks, or through some 12,000 licensed off-course
betting offices which take nearly 90 per cent of the money staked. A form of pool
betting (totalisator betting) is organised on, and off, course by the Horserace
Totalisator Board (HTB). Bookmakers and the HTB contribute a ‘betting levy’ to
the Horserace Betting Levy Board which promotes the improvement of horse
racing and horse breeding and the advancement of veterinary science.
In addition legislation allows local authorities and certain other bodies to hold
lotteries.
Appendix i
Currency
The unit of currency is the pound sterling divided into too new pence (p). There are six
denominations: 5op; top; 5p; 2p; ip; and ^p. A 2op coin is to be issued later in 1982 and a
£1 coin in 1983.
Bank of England notes are issued for sums of X1* XI0> X20 an<^ £5°-
Length
Area
Capacity
Weight
(Avoirdupois)
Double
Conversion
Tables for
Measures and
Weights
Metric Equivalents for British Weights and Measures
1 inch
12 inches = 1 foot
3 feet = x yard
1,760 yards = 1 mile
144 square inches
9 square feet
4,840 square yards
640 acres
2 pints
4 quarts
8 gallons
8 bushels
1 pint
= 1 quart
= 1 gallon
= 1 bushel
= i quarter
16 oz.
14 lb.
112 lb.
20 cwt. (2,240 lb.)
2,000 lb.
2-54 centimetres
30-48 centimetres
0-914 metre
1-609 kilometres
1 square inch =
1 square foot =
1 square yard =
1 acre =
1 square mile =
0-568 litre
1- 136 litres
4-546 litres
36-37 litres
2- 909 hectolitres
1 ounce (oz.)
1 pound (lb.)
1 stone (st.)
1 hundredweight (cwt.)
1 long ton
1 short ton
6-451 square centimetres
929-03 square centimetres
0-836 square metre
0-405 hectare
2-59 square kilometres
28-35 grammes
0-454 kilogramme
6-35 kilogrammes
50-8 kilogrammes
1 016 tonnes
0-907 tonne
(Note: the central figures represent either of the two columns beside them, as the case may
be, for example, 1 centimetre = 0-394 inch, and 1 inch = 2-540 centimetres.)
Centi¬
metres
inches
Metres Y ards
Kilo¬
metres
Miles
Hec¬
tares
Acres
2-540 1 0-394
5-080 2 0-787
7-620 3 i-i8i
io-x6o 4 x-575
12-700 5 1-969
15-240 6 2-362
17-780 7 2-756
20-320 8 3-150
22-860 9 3-543
25-400 10 3-937
0-914 1 1-094
1- 829 2 2-187
2- 743 3 3'28i
3- 658 4 4-374
4'572 5 5-468
5- 486 6 6-562
6- 401 7 7-655
7- 315 8 8-749
8- 230 9 9-843
9144 10 10-936
1-609 1 0-621
3- 219 2 1-243
4- 828 3 1-864
6-437 4 2-485
8- 047 5 3-107
9- 656 6 3-728
11- 266 7 4-350
12- 875 8 4-971
14-484 9 5-592
16 094 10 6-214
0-405 1 2-471
0-809 2 4-942
1 -214 3 7-4I3
1- 619 4 9884
2- 023 5 12-355
2-428 6 14-826
2- 833 7 17-298
3- 237 8 19-769
3- 642 9 22-240
4- 047 10 24-711
APPENDIX
379
Thermometrical
Table
Kilo- Av.
grammes Pounds
Litres
Pints
Litres Gallons
Metric Hun-
Quintals dred-
per weight
Hectare per Acre
0-454 i 2-205 0-568 1 1-760 4-546 1 0-220 1-255 1 0-797
0-907 2 4-409 1-136 2 3-520 9-092 2 0-440 2-511 2 1-593
1-361 3 6-614 1-705 3 5-279 13-638 3 o-66o 3-766 3 2-390
1- 814 4 8-8i8 2-273 4 7-039 18-184 4 o-88o 5-021 4 3'i86
2- 268 5 11-023 2-841 5 8-799 22-730 5 i-ioo 6-277 5 3’983
2- 722 6 13-228 3-409 6 10-559 27-276 6 1-320 7-532 6 4-780
3- 175 7 15-432 3-978 7 12-319 31-822 7 1-540 8-787 7 5-576
3- 629 8 17-637 4-546 8 14-078 35-368 8 1-760 10-043 8 6-373
4- 082 9 19-842 5-114 9 15-838 40-914 9 1-980 11-298 9 7-169
4-536 10 22-046 5-682 10 17-598 45-460 10 2-200 12-553 10 7-966
o° Centigrade = 320 Fahrenheit.
ioo° Centigrade = 212° Fahrenheit.
To convert “Fahrenheit into “Centigrade: subtract 32, then multiply by f; “Centigrade into
“Fahrenheit: multiply by f; then add 32.
Bank and Public Holidays in Britain, 1982
Bank Holiday
Bank Holiday (Scotland only)
St Patrick’s Day (Northern Ireland only)
Good Friday
Easter Monday (England, Wales and Northern Ireland only)
Early May Bank Holiday
Spring Bank Holiday
Orangeman’s Day (Northern Ireland only)
Bank Holiday (Scotland only)
Summer Bank Holiday (England, Wales and Northern Ireland
only)
Christmas Day
Boxing Day
Extra day because Christmas Day falls on a Saturday
Friday 1 January
Monday 4 January
Wednesday 17 March
Friday 9 April
Monday 12 April
Monday 3 May
Monday 31 May
Monday I2july
Monday 2 August
Monday 30 August
Saturday 25 December
Monday 27 December
Tuesday 28 December
Appendix 2
Chapter 1
Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
Chapter 6
Chapter 7
Chapter 8
Chapter 10
Chapter II
Chapter 12
Chapter 13
Chapter 14
Chapter 15
Guide to Sources
The principal official periodical sources used in the preparation of this edition are given
below:
Land and People
Social Trends, Population Trends, Regional Trends, Employment Gazette, Census 1981:
Preliminary Report-England and Wales, Census 1981: Scotland Preliminary Report
Overseas Relations
British Aid Statistics
Defence
Statement on the Defence Estimates
Justice and the Law
Criminal Statistics, England and Wales, Criminal Statistics, Scotland
Social Welfare
Health and Personal Social Services Statistics for England, with summary tables for Great Britain
Education
Statistics of Education
volume 1 Schools, volume 2 School Leavers, CSE and GCE, volume 3 Further Education,
volume 4 Teachers, volume 5 Finance and Awards, volume 6 Universities
The Environment
General Household Survey, National Household and Dwelling Survey, Housing and
Construction Statistics, Great Britain, Digest of Housing Statistics for Northern Ireland, Digest of
Environmental Pollution Statistics
National'Economy
National Income and Expenditure
Framework of Industry
National Income and Expenditure, British business
Manufacturing and Service Industries
Report on the Census of Production, Monthly Digest of Statistics, Business Monitor MQ10:
Overseas Trade Analysed in Terms of Industries, Employment Gazette, British business
Energy and Natural Resources
Digest of United Kingdom Energy Statistics, Development of the Oil and Cas Resources of the
United Kingdom, United Kingdom Mineral Statistics
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
Annual Review of Agriculture
Transport and Communications
Transport Statistics, Great Britain
APPENDIX
381
Chapter 16
Chapter 17
Chapter 19
Chapter 20
Employment
Employment Gazette, New Earnings Survey
Public Finance
Financial Statement and Budget Report, The Government’s Expenditure Plans
Overseas Trade and Payments
Monthly Review of External Trade Statistics, United Kingdom Balance of Payments, British
Business
Promotion of Science and Technology
Economic Trends, British business
Full purchasing details of these and other British Government publications can be obtained
from the annual list Government Publications issued by Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
(HMSO), which has agents overseas. The list includes all Bills and Acts of Parliament and
the official parliamentary report Hansard, White Papers, annual reports, reports of official
committees and most publications of government departments including the Central
Statistical Office, which publishes a Guide to Official Statistics. HMSO also sells in Britain
many titles published by international organisations such as the United Nations and the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
A Catalogue of British Official Publications not published by HMSO, published by Chadwyck-
Healey, lists the more specialised departmental publications. Details of this and other
commercial publications are available from bookshops or, overseas, from the British
Council.
Index
Bold type in a sequence of figures indicates main references.
As the main purpose of this book is to inform readers overseas about Britain,
organisations and societies are generally indexed under their subject matter
rather than under Association of, British, National, Royal, etc. (that is, Accidents,
Royal Society for the Prevention of; Archives, National Register of). In cases where
the first word is not separable, however (for example, Royal Air Force, Royal
Society), entries will be found appropriately.
Items are indexed under England, Northern Ireland, Scotland or Wales only
where they are matters peculiar to these countries; otherwise they are indexed
under the relevant subject headings.
A
Aberdeen 12, 13, 14, 143, 262, 276, 282,
35i
Abingdon 238
Abortion 121
Academic Awards, Council for
National 144
Accepting houses 316
Accession Council 31
Accidents:
Industrial 130—1
road users 267, 268
Royal Society for the Prevention of
(RoSPA) 267, 302
Administrative:
Staff College 188
tribunals 112—3
Adoption see Children
Adult Education see Education
Advertising 162, 226, 291, 355, 363
Association 226
broadcasting 363, 364, 365, 367
Advisory Committees and Councils see
relevant subject matter
Advocates 100, 115
Faculty of (Scotland) 115
Aerodromes 279, 280, 281, 282
Aero-engines see Aircraft
Aeronautical Research 210, 211, 342
After-care:
prisoners 105, 106, 107
young offenders 107-8, 109
Age concern 135
Age distribution see Population
Agricultural:
and Horticulture Co-operation, Central
Council for 257
colleges and institutes 260, 263
Agricultural—contd.
Common Policy (CAP) 68, 72, 252, 256,
257-8, 329
Credit Corporation Ltd. 253
Development and Advisory Service
(ADAS) 258, 259, 260
Engineering, National Institute of 337
Export Council 256
Guidance and Guarantee Fund, European
(FEOGA) 73, 257
industry 4, 8, 174, 252, 253, 256
Inspectorate 258
International Show 256
Intervention Board for, Produce 257
Land Tribunal 258
machinery industry 6-8, 208, 252-3
Mortgage Corporation Ltd. 253, 318
Research Council (ARC) 260, 335, 337,
338
Scientific Services Station 259, 337
Training Board 260
wages boards 300
workers:
earnings 300
health and safety 258, 300
numbers 174, 252
protective legislation 257, 258, 301
Agriculture 13, 62, 68, 72, 174, 178,
252-64
advisory services 258, 259
animal:
Disease Control 254, 337, 359
Welfare 258-9
artificial insemination (AI) 253, 254
chemicals, toxic 8, 13, 166, 168, 259
crops 13,252,253,255-6,337
dairying 8, 13, 253, 254
education and training 260
employment in 174, 252, 263, 264
INDEX
383
Agriculture—contd.
exports 252, 256, 257
farms, number, size and types 8, 252
feedingstuffs 252, 255
Fisheries and Food, Ministry of 50, 53, 124,
177, 250, 256, 257, 260, 262, 263, 337
food supplies, home grown 174, 253, 254,
255- 256
grassland 8, 13, 252, 255
hill farming 8, 13, 252, 253, 254, 258
horticulture 8, 256, 257
infestation control 259, 337
Investment 252
levies 257
livestock n, 253-4, 256, 257, 258, 259
imports 259
marketing boards and schemes 256—7, 258
mechanisation 206, 252-3
milk production and distribution 254
pest clearance 259
plants 259
policy of Government 257, 259
see also European Community,
Agricultural
price guarantees 73, 257, 258
production 174, 253-4
research see Research, scientific
smallholdings 258
subsidies and grants 257—8
veterinary services 259
Aid to overseas countries see Finance
Air:
Force see Defence and Royal Air Force
freight traffic 279, 282
operators certificate 281
pollution, prevention of 50, 123, 166,
167-9, 3°i, 337
safety 280—1
traffic:
control of 281-2
Services, National 281
Transport see Civil Aviation
Aircraft:
and aero-engines industry 184, 209, 210,
211
aerospace industry 209—11, 342
British Aerospace (BAe) 209, 210, 211
Society of British Aerospace Companies 211
civil 279-82, 342
military 92—3, 210, 211, 278, 281
research 211, 342
Airmail services see Civil Aviation
Airports see Civil Aviation
Airways, British 279, 280
Albert Hall, Royal 346
Alcoholics:
drink:
consumption 25
duties on 308, 311
treatment for 120
Aldeburgh (festival) 344
Aldergrove 282
Allied Command Europe Mobile
Forces 90
Ambulance services 121
Amlwch 235
Ancient Monuments 161, 343
Society 161
Angle Bay 235
Anglican:
Communion 171
Consultative Council 171
Roman Catholic Commission 173
See also Church: of England
Angling 369, 374
Animals 29, 253-4, 259, 337
Animal:
Breeding Research Organisation 337
control of diseases 254, 259
Diseases, Institute for Research on 337
Physiology, Institute of 337
Appellate courts 101, 102, 103, no, in
Appleton Laboratory 335
Archbishops 35, 46, 170, 171
Architects 161
Institute of British, Royal (RIBA) 161
Architectural Heritage Fund 161
Architecture 142, 144, 161
Archives, National Register of 354
Area Boards:
electricity 242, 243, 246
gas 238
Argyll 2
Armed Forces see Defence
Armenian Church 173
Arms control and disarmament 78-9,
89
Army 89, 90, 91, 92
arms and services 90, 92
equipment 92
Museum 350
Reserve Forces 91
Staff College 91
See also Defence
Airports 279
See also Civil Aviation
Arson 104
Art:
collections 350
and exhibitions 350—2
Fund 351
colleges and schools 142, 143, 144, 145,
343,352
Commissions, Royal Fine 161
galleries and museums 9, 50, 60, 350
market 350
National Exhibition of Children’s 352
Royal College of 350, 352
Society for Education through 352
Pictures for Schools Exhibition 352
Artists 9,11
Arts 343-55
Business Sponsorship 344, 347, 351
centres 345
Council of Great Britain 343“4, 345, 346,
347, 350, 35i, 352
festivals 343, 344
Government support for the 53, 343, 344,
345, 346, 347, 348, 349, 350, 351, 352
regional associations 399, 344
384
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Arts—contd.
Royal Academy of 352
Royal Society of 339
Ashridge College of Management 188
Asian Pacific Broadcasting Union 368
Associated Press Ltd. 359
Associations see relevant subjects
Astronomy 335-6
Athletics 372-3
Atomic:
Energy Authority, United Kingdom
(UKAEA) 50, 243, 245, 246, 247
Energy Community, European
(EURATOM) 68, 247
see also Nuclear energy
Attendance centre (young offenders)
108
Attorney-General 46, 51, 100, 101, 102,
114
Auction Houses 229
Automation 187, 206, 207, 219, 240, 285
Automobile Club, Royal (RAC) 375
Automobiles see Motor
Avebury 1
Aviation see Civil Aviation
Aviemore 13, 372
Avonmouth 204
Ayr 13
B
Bacon-curing industry 215
Bail 99, 100
Bakery products 214
Balance of Payments 174, 175, 176, 179,
322, 324, 330-2
Ballet and ballet companies 9, 347, 348
schools 9, 348
Baltic Exchange 276
Bank:
credit cards 223, 225, 315
Deposit 313, 3I4-5. 316
discount market 316
of England 177, 303, 313-4
European Investment 196
loan guarantee scheme 196, 314
Merchant 316
National Girobank 283, 286, 315
National Savings 316
notes 313, 378
Overseas 316
rate 314
Trustee Savings 316
bank holidays 379
Banking and Financial Institutions 9,
313-21
Baptist Church 10, 171
Barbican Centre 345, 346
Barristers 100, 114, 115
Bath 143, 343, 344
Bedford and Bedfordshire 271, 337, 340
Belfast 14, 16, 21, 143, 157, 159, 210, 211,
266, 269, 282, 337, 344, 350, 351
Belvoir, Vale of 152
Ben Nevis 12
Berkeley Laboratories 246
Berkshire 375
Betting and Gambling 51, no, 308, 311,
376-7
Beverage industries 214, 215-6
Bicycle industry see Cycle industry
Billingsgate Market 226
Bills, parliamentary see Parliament
Biochemistry 337, 340
Biology 336, 337
Biotechnology 187
Birmingham 21, 143, 209, 227, 271, 282,
321, 341, 346, 347, 351, 354, 370
Birth Rate 18, 19—20
Births, registration of 19, 23
Biscuit and cake industry 214
Bisham Abbey Sports Centre 371
Bishops 35, 170, 171
Blackpool 269
Black Rod 36
Blind:
education 139
National Library for the 354
Royal National Institute for the 135
Blood transfusion service 121
Board of Customs and Excise see
Customs and Excise
Board of Inland Revenue see Inland
Revenue
Boating 369, 376
Boilers and boilerhouse plant 205
Book:
Development Council 353
exhibitions 353
League, National 353, 354
Books 219, 353
See also Libraries and Publishing
Booksellers’ Association 353
Borough Councils see Local
Government, councils
Borstal institutions and training 108,
109
Boston Spa 353
Botanic Gardens, Royal 340, 341
Botany 340-1
Bothamsall 235
Boundary Commissions 36,58
Bournemouth 346
Boxing 373
Boys’ Clubs, National Association of
149
Bracknell 91
Bradford 21, 143
Bread and flour confectionery
industry 214
Brewing industry 184, 215
Brickmaking industry 218, 249
Bridges and tunnels 205, 221, 270, 273
Brighton 227, 344
Bristol 21, 143, 271, 274, 346, 351
Britain:
area and definition of 4, 17-18
climate 18
historical outline 1-3
INDEX
385
Britain—contd.
physical background 17-18
population 18, 19-23, 158, 287, 322, 337
seas 18
social framework 18-29
soil 252
see also England, Scotland, Wales and
Northern Ireland
Britannia Royal Naval College 91
British:
Academy 339, 352, 353
Airways 189, 279, 280
See also Civil Aviation
Army of the Rhine (BAOR) 89—90, 91, 92
Association for the Advancement of
Science 340
Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) 9, 46,
141, 146, 148, 284, 344, 363-4, 365, 366,
367, 368
Ceefax 368
English Services 366,
External Services 364, 366-7
Monitoring Service 366-7
orchestras 344
radio services 365-6
Transcription Service 366
World Service 366
See also Broadcasting
Council 37, 67, 147, 148, 342, 344, 353,
368
scholarships and fellowships 85, 148
Isles, historical outline 1—3
Library 353
Museum 341, 350, 352
Overseas Trade Board 67, 329
Standards Institution (BSI) 188
Telecoms 283-5
see also Telecoms
For other organisations with British as first
word of their title see relevant subject
Broadcasting: television and radio
28-9, 141, 144, 146, 148, 227, 344, 363-8,
advertising on 228, 363, 364, 365, 367
advisory councils and committees 363, 364
authorities 363, 364
channels 365, 366
colour transmission 363, 364
Councils, National 363
educational 141, 144, 146, 148, 228, 363,
365, 366
Eurovision 368
films 228, 343, 348
frequencies 365, 367—8
international relations 368
licences 363, 364
local stations 363, 364, 366, 367
political 40, 367
press and 360, 361, 366
programme companies 360, 364
publications 364
regional 364, 365
religious 363, 364, 365
research 367—8
services:
cable television 366
Broadcasting: television and
radio—contd.
services—contd.
domestic television and radio 28, 146, 363,
364, 365, 366, 367
external 366, 368
independent radio 356, 364, 366
local radio 356, 363, 364, 366, 367
television 28, 29, 141, 144, 146, 364, 365
transcription 366
technical developments 367—8
‘Teletext’ 208, 284
Training in 368
viewing 28, 363
See also British: Broadcasting
Corporation and Independent: Television
Brush industry 220
Buckingham 144
Palace 33, 351
art gallery 351
Buckinghamshire 225, 251, 371
Buddhists 173
Buddhist Society 173
Budget 303, 306-7, 308, 309
Community 72
Building:
Agency, National 222
Agrement Board 222
Centres, Association of 222
and civil engineering 221
contractors’ plant 222
design and construction 50, 142, 154, 155,
205,221
employment in 221
industrialised 142, 221, 222
by local authorities 155—6, 158
new towns 158
overseas 222
private 154, 221, 222
Property Services Agency 50, 221
Regulations 154
research 222
Establishment (BRE) 64, 85, 222
school 142
societies 154, 319
standards 154
National House Building Council (NHBC)
154
safety regulations 301
See also Construction and Engineering,
Civil
Bus and coach services 269, 270
National Company 189, 269
Business services 228-9
By-elections 36
Byker 166
By-laws 51, 95
c 
COI see Information, Central Office of
Cabinet 30, 37, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 177
Office 47—8, 67
Central Policy Review Staff 47
386
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Cabinet—contd.
Office—contd.
Central Statistical Office 47, 48
Historical Section 47, 48
Secretariat 47
Cable:
Television Association of Great Britain 366
Cables see Post Office
Cables and wires (insulated) industry
207,217
Caernarfon Castle 10
Cairngorm Mountains 13
Calder Hall 8, 245
Calibration Service, British 188-9
Camborne 247
Cambridge 45, 96, 143, 336, 338, 351,
353,354
Cambridgeshire 255
Canals 274
Canning industry, see Food, processing
Canterbury, Province of 170
Canvey Island 239
Capenhurst (research centre) 246
Capital gains tax see Taxation
Caravan:
and camping sites 163
manufacturing industry 209
Cardiff 10, 21, 274, 278, 346, 347, 350,
35i, 357, 360, 369, 371
Carnegie United Kingdom Trust 347
Carpets industry 8, 217
Cars see Motor vehicles
Car tax 311
Catering trades 9, 11, 205, 227, 228
education 144
Catholic see Church, Roman
Ceefax 368
Cell Biology and Disorders Board 336
Celtic language 10
Cement industry 218—9
Census of:
Population 52, 170
Production 200
Central:
Computer and Telecommunications 283
Council of Physical Recreation 369
Criminal Court 100, 114
Directorate on Environmental Pollution
166
Policy Review Staff 48
Statistical Office (CSO) 47, 48
Centres:
Arts 345
Conference 229
Cereals:
crops 8, 253, 255
preparations 215
Chambers of Commerce 185
Association of British 185
Chancellor see Lord Chancellor
Chancellor of the:
Duchy of Lancaster 46, 47
Exchequer 46, 306
See also Finance, Exchequer
Chancery Division (High Court) 110
Channel Islands:
area 18
legislature 30, 34, 45
relationship with UK and Crown 4, 22,
30, 34, 45
See also Guernsey and]ersey
Chapel Cross 245
Charity Commission 131
Charter services (aircraft) 279, 280
Cheltenham 343, 344
Chemical:
industries 184, 186, 201, 202, 212-3
plants 205
See also Engineering
Cheque cards 315
Cheshire 235, 238, 246, 335
Chichester 344
Child:
benefit 127, 128, 129
special allowance 129
Children:
adoption of no, 127
allowances for 127, 129
art, drama, films and music 346, 348, 349,
352
care 107, 108, 125, 126-7
child guidance 121
cinema attendance and clubs 348
employment 293
foster homes 108, 126
handicapped 125, 135
National Society for Mentally Handicapped
135
health centres and clinics 119, 121
homes for 126, 127
in care 108
in trouble 102, 107-9, 126
National Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to 127, 134
nurseries 125
orphans 126,129
school transport 141
voluntary child care organisations 127, 134
Children’s Film Foundation 349
Chilton 335, 336
China:
clay industry 8, 219, 249, 274
manufacture 8, 221, 249
Chiropodists 119, 123
Chocolate and confectionery 214, 215
Christian Scientists 172
Church:
Anglican Communion 171
Anglican Consultative Council 171
Commissioners 171
in Ireland (Presbyterian) 172
in Scotland, Episcopal (Anglican) 171
in Wales (Anglican) 10, 171
of England 31, 35, 37, 41, 170-1
appointment of senior clergy 46, 170
archbishops 35, 46, 170, 171
bishops 35, 46, 170, 171
Children’s Society 135
clergy 37, 170
colleges 170, 171
INDEX
387
Church—contd.
of England—contd.
ecclesiastical courts 171
finance 171
General Synod 170
Laity 170
Lambeth Conference 171
parishes 170
parochial councils 170
provinces and dioceses 170, 171
relations with Monarch 31, 170, 171
relations with State 170
schools 138, 140, 170, 172
of Ireland (Anglican) 14, 37, 170
of Scotland (Presbyterian) 12, 37, 172
General Assembly 171
relations with Monarch 171
social and welfare work 135
of Wales (Presbyterian) 172
Roman Catholic 12, 14, 32, 170, 172
archbishops 172
parishes and dioceses 171
schools 138, 140, 172
social and welfare work 135, 173
Churches 170-3
British Council of 173
co-operation among 173
Council of Christians and Jews 173
Free (non-conformist) 171-2, 173
Free Church Federal Council 173
social and welfare work 135
World Council of 173
Churchill Scholarships 148
Cinemas 29, 348, 349
Citizens
Advice Bureau 116, 135, 198
band radio 363
Citizenship 22-3, 51
Civic Trust 161
Civil:
Courts 110-12
Defence 93
college 93
See also Defence
engineering see Engineering
Justice 109—13
law 95, 109—10
science 333, 334, 335
Service 46, 49, 50, 55-7
administration 49
Arbitration Tribunal 299
categories and classes 5 5—7
College 56
Commission 56
conditions of service 56—7
Department 46, 49, 50
earnings 57, 294
manual workers 55, 56
political and private activities 57
recruitment and training 56
security 57
staff associations 57
structure 55—6
Civil Aviation 8, 52, 279-82
aircraft 212, 279, 280
Civil Aviation—contd.
aircrew qualifications 281
air freight 279, 280, 282
airports 279, 282
ownership and control 282
air services 279, 280, 281
Authority (CAA) 279, 281, 282
Airworthiness Division 281
Bristow helicopters 280
British Airports Authority (BAA) 282
British Airways 279, 280
Divisions:
European 280
Overseas 280
Travel 280
British Caledonian Airways 280
charter operations 280, 281
earnings 279, 282
government responsibility 279, 282
helicopter service 209, 280
independent airline companies 280
licensing 281, 282
ministerial responsibility for 52, 279, 282
National Air Traffic Services 279,-281—2
navigational aids 207, 208, 210, 282
noise control 169, 279
safety measures 280-1, 282
traffic control 279, 281-2
training 281
See also Aircraft and Research
Clean air 167-9
Alkali and, Inspectorate 168, 301
Clerk:
of the House of Commons 36
of the Parliaments 36
Clerks to the Justice 101
Cleveland 246
Climate 18
Climbing 369
Clinical Research Centre 336
Clinics 121, 135
Clock and watch industry 200, 208
Cloth industry 13, 216, 217
Clothing:
industry 7, 8, 16, 216, 217, 218
shops 223, 226
Clubs:
social 25, 125
youth 149
Clyde and Clydeside 21, 159, 243, 274,
275
Coal:
and Steel Community, European (ECSC)
68, 73
Board, National (NCB) 189, 230, 240, 242
non-mining activities 240
capital investment 240, 242
coalfields and mines 10, 230, 240, 242
consumption 174, 231, 242
exports and imports 242
financial structure 240
industry 174, 230, 240, 242, 273
co-operation with European Community 231,
242
production and manpower 68, 186, 240
388
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Coa\—contd.
research 242, 301
associations and establishments 242
Coastal preservation 162
Coastguard Service 167, 278
Coinage 313, 378
Coke 230, 242, 273
Coleraine 143
Colleges 136, 137, 142, 143, 144, 145, 147
agricultural 260
arts 343, 347-8, 352
correspondence 142
Instructor Training 291
of education 136, 137, 142, 143, 144, 145,
148, 352
residential (adult education) 145-6
Secretarial 142
Services 91
technical 145, 146, 224, 334, 338, 340, 341
theological 170, 171
World, United 148
See also Education
Combine harvesters 252, 255
Commercial:
Banking Systems 314-6
policy 327-8
premises, health and welfare in 300, 301
Commissioners:
of Irish lights 278
of Police 96, 97
Committees see relevant subjects
Commodity:
composition 322-5
Markets 321
prices 323
Common:
Agricultural Policy (CAP) 68, 72, 256,
257, 258
fisheries policy 263, 264
Market see European Community
Services Agency (Scotland) 122
Commons and village greens 164
Commonwealth, The 66, 73-6
Action Programme of Industrial Co¬
operation 75
ACP countries 72
Aid 75, 83-5
for the, Teaching of Science Scheme 75
Arts Association 76
banks 318
Broadcasting Associations 76, 368
citizens 27, 36
consultation 74
co-operation:
and developing countries 75, 82—7, 328
education 74, 75, 146, 147
financial and trade 82—5, 328
Development Corporation (CDC) 84, 85,
318
Development Finance Company Limited
(CDFC) 318
Education Conferences 74
Education Liaison Committee 147
Foundation 75
Fund for Technical Co-operation 74, 75
Commonwealth, The—contd.
Games 76, 373
immigration 22-3, 27-8, 51
Institute 75
journalists 360
Medical Conferences 74
member states 30, 73-4
Parliamentary Association 76
Press Union 76, 360
Queen as Head of 30, 73
Royal, Society 75, 354
Scholarship and Fellowship Plan 75, 85,
148, 360
Secretariat 74
Statute of Westminster 73
Technical Co-operation 85
Trade with 175
Universities, Association of 147, 148
Youth Exchange Council 76
Communications see Post Office,
Research and Telecommunications
Community:
relations councils 28
homes for children 108, 126
Service Volunteers 135, 150
Company law 199
Comprehensive education 138
Comptroller and Auditor General 305,
306
Computer:
Aided Design Centre 188, 191
services 226—7
Computers 141, 186, 187, 207, 265, 283,
284, 285, 335, 358
See also Data and Post Office
Concert Halls 344, 346
Confectionery industry 215
Confederation of British Industry 185,
297, 299, 300
Conference Centres 227
Helsinki 71, 77
Conservation 159-65
areas 159, 161
Council, Nature 164
councils and societies 24, 164
unit 340
Conservative Party 6, 38, 43
Consolidated Fund 303, 305, 306
Constabulary, Inspectors of 96, 98
Construction:
employment in 4
equipment 208
industries 50, 178, 183, 221—2
research 50, 222
materials 247, 249-50
work overseas 222
Consumer:
advice and information 198—9
Council, National 198
councils 198-9
expenditure see Expenditure
goods industries 213, 214, 215, 216, 217,
218
See also individual industries
Groups, National Federation of 199
INDEX
389
Consumer—contd.
Minister for Consumer Affairs 52, 197
organisations 198-9
protection 60, 197, 198
Fair Trading, Director of 197, 198
Consumers Association (CA) 199
Contemporary Arts, Institute of 352
Convalescent homes 119
Conversion tables 378-79
Co-operative:
Bank 223, 315
marketing (agricultural) 256
societies 223
Wholesale Society (CWS) 223
Copyright, authors’ 345
Cornwall 1, 6, 33, 204, 219, 249, 284
Coronation 31
Coroners’ Courts 104
Corporation tax see Taxation
Cotswolds 6
Cotton:
industry 216, 217
textiles 216
Councils of counties, districts, etc. see
Local Government
Councils, Other, see relevant subject
Counsel, see Law, legal profession
Counsellors of State 33
Countryside:
access to 163-4
Commissions 162, 163, 369
responsibility for 50
County courts no, 112
Court of:
Appeal 102, 103, in, 113, 116
Justice (European Community) 95
Session (Scotland) in—2, 113, 114
Courts of Law see Law
Covent Garden:
Market New 225
Covent Garden Opera 347
Coventry 21, 268
Crafts 352
Council and Centres 352
Cranwell 91
Credit:
Cards 223, 225, 315
Unions, 319
Cricket 369, 371, 373-4
Criminal:
Central, Court 100, 114
Courts no-ii
Injuries Compensation 96
Investigation departments 98—9
law 51, 95, 100
Law Revision Committee 116
records 96, 99
Criminals, treatment of 51, 99-100,
I04“9
Criminological Research and Studies
96
Crofters’ Commission 258
Crown:
Agents for Overseas Governments and
Administrations 67
Crown—contd.
Courts 101, 102, 103, no, in
Dependencies, 30, 76
mineral rights 230
Office, Edinburgh 53, 101
Crown, The see Monarchy and Royal
Family
Cruden Bay 235
Crystal Palace National Sports Centre
37i
Culham Laboratory 246, 247
Cultural and social life 9-10, n, 13-14,
17
Cumbernauld 13,
Cumbria 6, 245, 246, 250
Currency 175, 181-2, 378
See also Finance
Customs and Excise:
Board of 49, 50, 307, 310
duties see Taxation
Cutlery and flatware industry 206
Cycle and motor cycle industry 209
D
Dancing 343, 344, 346, 347, 348
Royal Ballet and School 348
Daresbury (nuclear physics) 335, 336
Darlington 270, 356
Dartmouth 91
Data:
Datapost 286
Processing 208, 278, 284
See also Computers and Post Office
Deaf 13 5
Deans 170
Death:
causes of 20, 104, 267
duty see Taxation, estate duty
grant and allowances 131
rate 19
registration of a 19
Deeside 11
Defence 48, 50, 88—94,
Armed Forces 50, 90-93, 287
officers in 90—91
boards 33
Civil see Civil Defence
colleges 91
combat forces 91-3
deployment 88-9
engagements 90
expenditure 88, 91, 93, 94, 303
fire services 63
Forces vote 37
international projects 94
manpower 90—1
Ministry of and Secretary of State for 48,
50, 67, 90, 93, 94, 278, 279, 281, 333, 334,
342
Mobile Force (UK) 90
National Defence Industries Council 94
national projects 94
NATO strategy 88—9, 90, 91, 92, 94
390
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Defence—contd.
See also North Atlantic Treaty
Organisations
nuclear power 89
disarmament 78-9, 89
Stategic Force 89, 91
Ordnance Factories, Royal 55, 94
overseas commitments 89, 90, 91
Helsinki Conference 71. 77
Five-Power, Agreement 77
personnel 90
policy and commitments 50, 88, 90
Procurement 93-4
production 94
ranks 90—1
research and development 93-4, 333> 342
European Programme Group 94
reserve and auxiliary force 91
Sales Organisation 94
Staff colleges 91
strategic force 89, 91
Studies, Royal College of 91
training 90-1
warning systems 92, 93
weapons and equipment 89, 91-3, 212
collaborative projects 94
export controls 329
women’s services 90
See also Army, Royal Air Force, Royal
Navy and Research
Dental services 118, 119, 122, 123
British Dental Association 122
dentists 118, 123
for school children 121
General Dental Council 123
Dependencies and Associated States 72,
76
population 76
Deposit banks see Banks
Derby and Derbyshire 240, 273
Design:
awards for 188
Centres 188
Computer Aided Centre, 188, 191
Council 188, 350
education in 144, 352
Registry 199
Detention centres 108, 109
Detergents 212, 213
Devaluation see Sterling
Development:
Agencies 195
areas and districts 192, 193, 196
Boards, Regional 195
See also Economic and Research
grants and loans 187, 189, 192, 193, 196
organisation see Industry
plans 151-2
Devon 6, 221
Dinorwic 11, 223, 245
Dioceses see Church of England,
provinces and
Diplomatic Service 56, 329
Director of Public Prosecutions 97,
100,114
Disabled:
British Sports Association for the 370
education 139, 147
employment of 290
housewives 131
mentally handicapped 119, 120, 125, 139,
370
physically handicapped 120, 125, 139, 370
rehabilitation of 120, 125, 290
sports stadium 370, 372
welfare services for 117, 125, 129
Disablement:
benefit 125, 132
mobility allowance 24, 131
pensions (war) 132
Resettlement Service 290
Vocational training 290
Disarmament 78
Committee on 78
Arms control and 77, 78-9
Helsinki conference 71, 77
Discount market and houses 316
Diseases, control of 119, 124
Distributive trades 178, 223-6
District courts (Scotland) see Law and
Local Government
District Nurses 119, 122
Divorce 20, no, 112, 115
rate 18, 19, 20
Docks see Ports
Dockyards, naval 94
Doctors:
British Medical Association 122
Family practitioner services 119
in industry 302
in National Health Service 120, 122, 123
Documentation Centre, National 370
Domestic:
electrical appliances industry 209
help 125
product gross 88, 137, 174, i75> I7<5, I77»
178, 183, 185, 200,221,222
Doncaster 166, 274
Dorset 235, 245
Dounreay 245, 246
Dover 275, 277, 278
Strait 278
Drama 343, 344, 345“<>
Censorship 345
Conference, National 346
schools and colleges 346
See also Theatres
Dramatic Art, Royal Academy of 346
Drinks industries 186, 201, 214, 215
Drugs 51, 120, 122, 215
Committee on Safety of Medicines 122
dependence 120
Dry Cleaning 229
Dublin 321
Duchy of Lancaster 33, 46
Duchy of Cornwall 34
Dudley 340
Duke of Edinburgh 33
Duke of Edinburgh’s Award Scheme
149
INDEX
391
Dumbarton 243
Dumfries 245
Dundee 12, 14, 143, 217, 276, 351, 358
Dungeness 245
Dunstable 340
Durham 143
Dyestuffs 213
E
Earnings 4, 179, 293-4
See also Wages
East Anglia 1,7, 143
East Kilbride 13
East and West Relations 76-9
Economic:
and Social Affairs 80—1
and Social Pattern 23-9
Co-operation and Development,
Organisation for (OECD) 81, 84, 231, 327,
34i
Development 174-6
Development Council, National (NEDC)
177, 185, 297, 299
growth 6—9, 174-5
Integration with Europe see European
Community
Management 177
planning, regional 192, 193, 196
policy 176-7
recession 176
Economy, national 174-82
economic development 174-6
external position 179—80, 182
gross domestic product 4, 88, 137, 174,
175, 176,177, 178, 183, 185, 200, 221,222
gross national product 1, 66, 82, 83, 137,
200, 221, 222
incomes and prices 176, 177—9
investment 175, 179
measures against inflation 176-7, 331
personal incomes and expenditure 26-7,
177-9. 293-4
policy 40, 176-7, 189, 197
See also Balance of Payments, Finance,
Industry and Trade
Edinburgh 12, 13, 14, 21, 53, 102, m,
143, 271, 282, 286, 335, 336, 338, 340, 341,
343, 344, 346, 350, 351, 352, 354, 372
Education 18, 50, 61, 106-7, 136-50, 187
administration 137
adult 142, 143, 145-6, 365
Literacy and Basic Skills Unit 146
National Institute of 146
agricultural 6—8, 260
and Science, Department of and Secretary
of State for 50, 137, 140, 142, 333, 334,
342,343,351
architectural 144
art and design 144, 343, 350, 352
broadcasting to schools 141, 363, 365, 367
building programme 142
Business, Council 145
colleges see Colleges
Education—contd.
commercial and management 144, 145
curricula and courses 140, 143, 144, 145.
146, 147, 148, 187, 260, 343
correspondence 142, 144, 145
day release 56, 143, 360
sandwich 142, 143, 145, 260
secretarial 142, 145
development 136
evening classes 145, 146
examinations 141, 143, 144, 145
finance of 136-7, 138, 141, 142, 143, 145,
146, 147, 148, 149, 150
forestry 263
‘further’ 137, 141, 142, 143. HS. H6, 148,
181, 343, 352, 365
advanced courses 144-5
General Certificate of see examinations,
above
grants see finance of, above 141
higher 136, 137, 142, 143-5, H6, H8
inspectorate 140
local education authorities 60, 136, 137,
138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143, 145, 146, 148,
149
Microelectronics 136, 141
music 9, 347-8
National Certificates and Diplomas 144-5
physical and games 107, 109, 141, 371
polytechnics 136, 137, 142, 144, 145, 146,
187,343,350,352
priority areas 136
prisoners 106—7, 109
religious 138, 140
research on 140, 146
scholarships and awards 136, 139, 140, 141,
142, 143, 144, 145
schools 136, 137-9
community 145, 147
comprehensive 138, 139
Council 146
Council for Curriculum and Examinations 140
county 138, 140
denominational 138, 140, 170, 172, 173
fees 136, 137, 139
‘first’ 136, 137, 138
health and welfare 125, 126, 141
independent (public) 136, 137, 138, 139
leaving age 136, 137
management 138
meals service 135, 141
‘middle’ 138
nursery 125, 138
preparatory 139
primary 136, 137, 138
pupil numbers 136, 137, 138
secondary 137, 138—9, 140
voluntary 137, 138, 140, 142
special educational treatment 139
teachers 106, 136, 137, 139-40, 141, 146,
147, 149
exchange schemes 147
training 137, 144, 148, 149
Teaching Council for Scotland, General
144
392
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Education—contd.
Teaching Methods 146
technical and technological 142, 145, 334
Technician Education Council 145
See also Industry, education and training
for
trade unions and 296
visual aids in 141, 146
vocational 106, 109, 136, 145, 146, 291
See also Universities
Educational:
Aids 141,146
Assistance programme 71, 146—7
Research, National Foundation for 146
Scientific and Cultural Organisation
(UNESCO) 341
Visits and Exchanges, Central Bureau for 147
Eggs 254
Egmanton 235
Eisteddfod 344
Elderly people:
Age Concern 135
homes for 125
housing for 125, 155, 156
proportion in population 21, 22, 23
welfare 117, 119, 124, 125
See also Pensions
Elections:
to the European Parliament 70
local government 58-9
parliamentary 34, 35, 36—8
Electrical:
appliances industries 174, 207, 208
engineering see Engineering
industry 189, 207
See also Electronic
Electricity 178, 186, 209, 230, 242-5
alternative sources of 247
area boards and councils 242, 243, 246
Board, South of Scotland (SSEB) 243,
246
consumption 231, 243
Council 242, 246
Dinorwic 11, 223, 245
Generating Board, Central (CEGB) 243,
246,251
generation 209, 230, 243, 245
manpower 230, 242
North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board
(NSHEB) 242, 243, 246
power stations 221, 243, 245, 246
hydro-electric 231, 242, 243
nuclear 230, 245—7
production 186
research 246, 247
Service (NI) 243, 246, 247
structure of industry 242-3
transmission lines 242
Electronic:
British Telecom 283, 284
equipment:
industry 183, 184, 207
microelectronics 183, 184, 200, 205, 206,
208,265,283
post office 286
Electronic—contd.
equipment—contd.
X-ray scanner systems 208
Ellesmere Port 238
Emigration 22-3
Employers’ organisations 184-5, 297,
298
Employment 4, 27-8, 49, 55, 183, 185,
186, 192, 200, 202, 211, 221, 223, 225, 227,
230, 252, 263, 264, 271, 273, 274, 287-302
Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration
Service (ACAS) 297, 299
arbitration and conciliation 297, 298, 299
average weekly earnings 4
Careers Service 291
Central Arbitration Committee 298, 299
community enterprise programme 289
Department of and Secretary of State for
49, 50, 177, 202, 289, 292, 293, 294, 295,
299, 300
Disablement Resettlement Service 120, 290
Economic and Social Division 8-9
additional benefits 294-5
health in 295, 300—2
holidays 9, 29, 294
industrial relations 298-300
Statutory Joint Industrial Council 300
Instructor Training Colleges 291
Jobcentres 290
Job search schemes 290
Law 292—3, 297—8
manpower:
deployment 4, 288, 290
mobility 0/68, 192, 290
Services Commission (MSC) 52, 54, 120,
185, 289-90, 291, 292, 297, 301
Medical Advisory Service (EMAS) 300,
30T 302
offices 291
of immigrants 292-3
permits 292, 293
Professional and Executive Recruitment
290, 291
protective legislation 287, 292, 293, 294,
295,_ 297, 298, 299, 300
redundancy 292, 294
safety in 300—2
regulations 300
sex discriminatioiT27, no, 293, 299
sheltered 290
Skill centres (SCs) 291, 292
Training Opportunities Scheme (TOPS)
291
training services 291, 292
colleges 292
‘Open Tech’ 291
Transfer Scheme 290
trends in 287-8
women 27, 287, 293, 294, 299
work, hours of 294
Work Research Unit 295
working conditions 292—3, 294
See also individual industries, Manpower,
Trade Unions, Unemployment,
Wages and Work: hours of
INDEX
393
Employment—contd.
Youth Opportunities Programme 289
Energy:
conservation 231—2, 335
advisory council on 232
measures 232—3
consumption 230, 236, 239, 242
Department of and Secretary of State for
50, 167, 177, 230, 231, 232, 240, 247, 301
efficiency 230
Government’s policy 231
industries 230, 233, 234, 238, 239, 240, 242,
245
employment in 230, 232, 233, 234, 235, 239
European Community co-operation 231
international relations 235
and Natural Resources 174, 230—51
production and distribution 233, 234, 235,
238-9, 240, 249
renewable sources of 247
research and development 235, 238, 239,
242, 246,251
advisory council 232
Offshore Energy Technology Board 238
sources of 230, 233, 238, 240, 243, 245,
246,247
Standing Commission on the
Environment 166
technology support unit 232
See also Coal, Electricity, Gas, Hydro¬
electric, Nuclear energy and Petroleum
Engineering 4,7,8, 11, 13, 184, 188, 209,
210
aeronautical 209, 210
chemical 6, 340
civil 221
Council 188
electrical 184, 207
electronic 184, 207, 208, 335
Fellowship of 340
Institutions, Council of 340
Instrument 208
Laboratory, National 191
mechanical 202, 206, 340
Engines, industrial 205
England: 1, 6-10
area 17-18
cultural and social life 9-10
economy 6-9
Government 6
historical background 1
population, figures 4, 21, 22
English:
Association 353
Channel 1, 6
language 27-8, 69, 70, 140, 142, 148, 366
Music Theatre Company 347
National Opera 347
Tourist Board 193
Entertainment:
cinemas 9, 348, 349
museums and galleries 9, 11, 13, 50, 52, 53,
60, 350-2
music 9, 11, 13, 344, 346-7
recreation centres, 9, 162, 163
Entertainment—contd.
sport 9, 369-77
television and radio 9, 363-8
theatres 9, 343, 344, 345, 346
Enterprise:
Board, National 191, 196
Zones 159
Environment, The 151-70
architecture 161
coast 162
Countryside Commission 162, 163, 369
Department of the and Secretary of State
for 49, 50, 54, 58, 60, 64, 151, 152, 154,
156, 159, 161, 162, 164, 166, 167, 177, 250,
251,267,334
green belts 162
land:
reclamation 165
registers 165
Nature conservation 164
outdoor advertising 162
Property Services Agency 50, 221
Research Council, Natural (NERC)
337
tree preservation 161-2
Environmental:
Amenity Societies 164
Conservation, Council for 164
control of pollution 24, 162, 165-9
Administration 166
clean air 167-9
land 165, 166
marine 167, 337
noise 169
radioactivity 169
recycling 166
Royal Commission on 166
water 50, 124, 162, 165, 167, 250, 251
protection 161-5
Equal opportunities 26-7, 293
commission 27
complaints 27
Equipment Leasing 229
Equity Capital for Industry Ltd 318
Essex 143, 245
Estate Duty see Taxation
Ethnic relations see Race relations
Europe, trade with 68, 198, 202, 204,
205, 214,218,219,231
Council of 81
European:
Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee
Fund (FEOGA) 73, 257
Atomic Energy Community
(EURATOM) 68, 247
Broadcasting Union (EBU) 370
Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) 68,
73, 196, 202
Communities 34, 43, 44, 202, 297
Act 68
Communications Satellite 284
Convention on Human Rights 82
Co-operation in Science and Technology
(COST) 341
Council 70, 71
394
AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
BRITAIN 1982:
European—contd.
Court of Justice 70, 95
Currency Units (ECUs) 182, 257, 314
Economic Community (EEC) 67,
70-1
Exchange Risk Guarantee Scheme 196
Free Trade Association (EFTA) 328
Investment Bank 72, 73, 196
Molecular Biology Laboratory 341
Monetary:
Co-operation Fund 72, 182
Fund 73, 182
System 72, 176, 180-2
Organisation for Nuclear Research
(CERN) 335, 336, 341
Parliament 33, 34, 70
Patent Convention 199
Programme Group 94
Regional Development Fund 73, 196
Science Foundation (ESF) 339
Social Fund 73, 192
Space:
Agency (ESA) 210, 211, 284, 335, 341,
342
programme 342
Trade Union Confederation 297
See also subject headings
European Community, The 34, 43, 44,
66, 68-73, 123, 133-4, 146, 147, 175, 180,
182, 189, 198, 204, 211, 217, 220, 231, 256,
257, 258, 261, 262, 320, 326, 327, 328, 329,
33T 332
Accession, Treaty of 68
Agricultural 68, 72
Guidance and Guarantee Fund (FEOGA)
73
policy 68, 72, 256, 257-8, 329
Budget 72, 327
coal and steel 68, 73, 96
Commission 70, 71, 198
President of 70
Common Customs Tariff 68, 310, 328
Community law 70
Court of Auditors 70
Court of Justice 70, 95
courts of appeal 70
Company law 199
Council of Ministers 68, 70, 71
currency 73, 182
Economic and Social Committee 71
educational co-operation 146, 147
external relations 71—2
finance:
aid to Commonwealth and developing
countries 71-2
capital movement 82
grants and loans 82, 196, 257—8
insurance 320
fisheries policy 261—2
institutions 68, 70—1
internal policies 72-3
legislation 34, 42, 43, 95, 199, 269
Lome Convention 72, 87, 256, 328
manpower:
mobility of 68, 293
European Community, The—contd.
manpower—contd.
training 73, 293
Membership 68-73, 322
monetary system 72, 176, 180-2
nuclear energy activities 68, 341
Parliament, European 34, 70
policies 265
reciprocal agreements, health and social
security 123, 134
regional development 72, 196
Fund 196,327
Representatives, Committee of Permanent
(COREPER) 70
revenue:
budget 72, 327
sources of 72
Scientific and Technical Research
Committee (CREST) 341
schools and colleges 147
tariffs 68, 87, 328
trade:
agreements 68, 87, 262, 327-8
development 68, 219
generalised scheme of preferences 71, 87
price controls 257-8, 328-9
restrictive practices, control of 198
transport policy 265
treaties 68, 198
Exchange:
control 175
Equalisation Account 314
rates 175, 176, 179
reserves 180
risk guarantee scheme 196
Telegraph Company Ltd (Extel) 359
Exchequer see Finance
excise duties see Taxation
Exeter 143
Exhibition Centre, National 209, 227
Expenditure:
committees 43, 307
consumer 177, 178, 179, 227
estimates 305
pattern of 23
public 50, 88, 95, 136, 137,'155, 177, 179,
303-5
public authorities 117, 179
royal income and 33-4
Surveys, Public 305, 306
Taxes on 310—11
See also Defence, Finance, Research,
Agriculture: subsidies, and Housing:
subsidies
Export 174, 175, 176, 179, 200, 202, 204,
205, 207, 209, 212, 213, 214, 215, 216, 217,
218, 231, 252, 256, 275, 322, 324, 329, 330,
364, 365
controls 329, 350
Credits Guarantee Department (ECGD)
51, 7T 329-30
insurance 51, 329—30
licensing and restrictions 3 50
Overseas Trade Board, British 67, 329
See also Trade and individual industries
INDEX
395
F
Factories:
building 158, 192
Inspectorate 301, 302
legislative provisions 300, 301, 302
See also Employment and individual
industries
Fair Trading 197, 198
Falkirk (newspaper) 358
Families 23-4
welfare services for 117, 119, 124, 125, 132
Family:
Division (High Court) 109, no, in
Income Supplement 132
planning 121, 122
Practitioner Services 119
Royal see Monarchy
Welfare Association 134
Farming see Agriculture
Farnborough 211
Fauna 164-5
Fawley 235
Felixstowe 274, 275
Fen district 255
Fertilisers 212, 213
Festival Hall, Royal 346
Field Sports 374
Fife 239
Film:
Archive, National 349
Authority, British 348
Catalogue of British 349
Censors, British Board of 348
children’s foundation 348, 349
Council, for Educational Technology,
Scottish 349
Eady Levy 228, 348
Festivals 348, 349
National Panel for 349
Finance Corporation, National 230, 348
Fund Agency, British 230, 349, 350
Industrial and Scientific Film Association,
British 228, 349
industry 228, 348
Institute, British 348, 349
library 349
production 228, 348, 349
quota system 348
School, National 350
and television industry 229-30
Theatre, National 349
Films 343, 348-50
children’s 228, 349
documentary 349
educational 228
feature 348
licensing 349
Finance see Public Finance
Finnart 235
Fire:
Central, Brigades Advisory Council 63, 64
equipment 64
Joint, Prevention Committee 64
personnel 64
Fire—contd.
prevention research 300
Research, Joint Committee on 64
Research Station 64
Services 53, 63-5
Fishing:
European Community:
Common Fisheries Policy 261, 262
Limits 262
fleets 261
freshwater 262-3, 337
grounds 8, 18, 262
Herring Industry Board 261
industry 261
employment in 260—1
government aid 261
imports and exports 261
landings 261
licences 263
marketing 262
ports 274
research 262, 337
rights 262
Sea Fish Industry Authority 261
sport 374
White Fish Authority 261
Float glass 219
Floor coverings 218, 220
Flour milling 214, 255
and Baking Research Association 214
Fog 167-9
Folkestone 274
Food:
biscuits 214
bread 214
chocolate and confectionery 214, 215
consumption 7, 25, 179
exports 214, 215, 256, 257
frozen 25, 214, 215
home grown supplies 252, 253, 254, 255,
256
imports 257, 322, 323, 324
industries 186, 214, 215
poisoning, control of 124
processing 7, 205, 214, 215
purity 124
safety of 124
sales 6, 214, 223, 224
Food and Agriculture Organisation
(FAO) 80
Football 29, 369, 371, 372
Rugby 369, 371, 372, 376
Footpaths and bridleways 164
Footwear:
inco^stry 206, 218, 220
shops and repairers 229
Foreign:
and Commonwealth Office 56, 66, 67, 329
Diplomatic Service 56, 66-7
Exchange Market 321, 327> 330, 332
Policy 76—9
See also Overseas
Foreigners:
employment of 292
naturalisation of 51
396
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Forensic science 98
Forest:
area 8, n, 13, 163, 164, 252, 263, 264
parks 163, 371
Forestry 4, 8, 11, 163, 164, 263-4, 369,
374
Commission 163, 164, 263, 264
education, training and research 263-4
Princes Risborough Laboratory 264
Training Council 263
employment in 262
policy 263
Forth:
river and firth 274, 275, 276
Forties Field 233
Fowl pest 259
Fox hunting 374
Fraud Squad 99
Freezing (food) 207, 217
Freight:
Company National 189, 269
services 52, 62, 265, 269, 273, 274, 275,
276,277
Freshwater Biological Association 337
Friendly Societies, Registrar of 319
Frigg (gasfield) 238, 239
Fruit and vegetable products and
preserves 215, 256
Fruit, production and distribution 215,
225,256
Fuel and Power see Energy, Coal,
Electricity, Gas, Hydro-electric,
Nuclear energy. North Sea, Petroleum
and Research
Furniture and Timber
Industry Training Board 263
Furniture Industry 213, 220
G
GATT see General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade
Gaelic 13, 140
Gainsborough 235
Gambling see Betting and Gambling
Games equipment industry 222
Game shooting 374
Gardens, Royal Botanic 340—1
Gardening 29
Gas 7, 12, 16, 174, 176, 178, 186, 230,
238-42
British 189, 238, 239
consumption 239
employment 42' .
natural 7, 12, 230, 231, 238, 239, 276
development and production 7, 238-9
indigenous supplies 239, 247
location 238, 239
operations 230, 239
pipeline system 239
production and distribution 174, 238—9
research and development 239
structure 238
terminals 239, 276
Gas—contd.
turbines 243, 245
transmission and storage 239
Gateshead 270
Gatwick (airport) 8, 279, 282
General:
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT)
71, 81, 216, 327, 328
Electric Company 184, 201, 218
Register Offices 54
Registrar 54
Geological:
Museums and Surveys 341, 350
Sciences, Institute of 85, 249, 251, 337, 341
Society 354
Geology 17-18, 51, 165, 337, 341
Geophysics 335
Georgian Group 161
Gin industry 217
Girl Guides 135
Girobank National 313, 315
Glasgow 12, 14, 21, 102, 143, 159, 169,
173, 270, 271, 280, 282, 321, 346, 347, 351,
354, 368
Glass industry 8, 212, 219
Glenrothes 13
Gloucester and Gloucestershire 242,
246, 275, 344
Glyndebourne (opera) 347
Godaiming 242
Gold and convertible currency
reserves 182,330,331
Gold and silver ware industry 206
Gold Market (London) 321
Golf 371, 374
Goonhilly 284
Government 6, 12, 30-65
Actuary, Department of 49
advisory committees and councils 49
Administration 6, 10, 12, 15
Chemist, Laboratory of 191
composition of 45
departments of 30, 48—54
economic management 177
employment services 287—92
National Loans Fund 63, 303, 306, 312
organs of 30
relations with industry 51, 183, 189—96,
243, 287-92
relations with overseas countries 50, 51, 52,
34T 342
Statistical Service 48, 52
See also Civil Service, Expenditure,
Finance, Local Government,
Ministers, Monarchy, Parliament,
Privy Council and Research
Grampians 12
Grangemouth 235
Grants see Education, Housing, Local
Government and Industry
Great Britain:
area 1, 17-18
definition 1, 17-18
historical outline 1—3
population 4, 21-23
INDEX
397
Great Britain—contd.
statistics, general 4
See also England, Wales and Scotland
Greater London Council see London
Green Belts 162
Greenwich 13, 91, 335, 336
Greyhound racing 375 > 377
Grimsby 274
Grocery trade 223, 224, 225
Guardian’s allowance 129
Guernsey see Channel Islands
Guided weapons 92, 209, 210
Gymnastics HL 37i
Gymnasts, remedial 120, 123
Gwynedd 235, 245
H 
HMSO see Stationery Office
Habeas Corpus too
Hadrian’s Wall 1, 2
Hairdressing establishments 229
Hamilton (newspaper) 358
Hampshire 213
Handicapped persons see Disabled and
Welfare
Hand tools industry 208
‘Hansard’ 40
Harbours see Ports
Harpenden 337
Harrogate 229, 344
Hartlepool 246, 274, 275
Harwell 246
Harwich 274, 275
Hayward Gallery 352
Health 25, 117-24
advisory councils and other committees
118, 119, 120, 121, 124, 300-2, 335, 336
and Safety
at work 300, 301, 302
Commission 300—1, 302
Executive 168, 169, 258, 301
and Social Security, Department of 51, 114,
118, 122,123, 124, 127,131, 132, 133, 141
and social services 117—35
authorities and boards 109, 117, 118,
121-2, 123,124
area 117, 118
centres 119, 120
community services 117, 119—22, 123, 124
control of infectious diseases 124
education 119, 121-2
Employment Medical Advisory Service
300, 301, 302
environmental 123-4
home nursing 119, 120
laboratories 124, 301
primary, care 119
private medical treatment 118, 123
professions 122-3
public 51, 58, 117, 118, 119, 124
research 122, 124
and Safety Executive 294, 301
safety of medicines 122
Health—contd.
School:
children 121, 125—6, 141
service 121
Service Commissioners 118
Service, National 11, 51, 53, 117—27
administration 117-8
agreements with other countries 117, 123
authorities 118
charges 118-9
commissioners 118
finance 118—9
general practitioner services 119, 123
community physicians 124
group practices and health centres 119
help to families 125
hospital and specialist services 119-20
mental services 125
Northern Ireland 117, 118, 119, 121
specialist services 119, 120
Social Security Advisory Committee 127
Heathrow (airport) 8, 280, 282
Heating appliances 205, 206, 207
Hebrides 18
Helicopters 93, 209, 278, 280
air-sea rescue 278
Henley-on-Thames 188
Herbaria 340
Hereford 344
Heritage Coasts 162, 163
Hewett 238
Heysham 246
High Court of Justice 99, 101, 102, 103,
no, 113
High Court of Justice (Northern
Ireland) m
High Court of Justiciary (Scotland)
100, 101, 102, 104, in, 114, 115
Highland Games 373
Highlands and Islands, Scotland 12, 14,
193,252,282
aerodromes and airways 282
Development Board 52, 193
Highway Code 267
Highway construction 60, 221, 267, 268
See also Roads
Hindus 173
Hire purchase finance companies 317
Historical Manuscripts Commission
354
Historic buildings and monuments 54,
161, 343
building preservation notices 159, 161
Council 161
Monuments, Royal Commission on 161
Hockey 371, 372
Holidays 29, 294, 379
Hollow-ware industry 206
Holyhead 274
Home help 125
Homeless people 157 •
Home:
Office and Home Secretary 51, 60, 63, 96,
97, 98, 106, 108, 113, 114, 116, 122, 356,
363, 364, 365, 366, 367
398
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Home—contd.
Office Voluntary Service Unit 134
Honours 31, 46
Horse:
racing 369, 375, 377
riding 375-6
showjumping 375
trials 375
Horsemanship 375
British Equestrian Federation 372, 375
Horserace:
Betting Levy Board 377
courses 375
Totalisator Board (HTB) 377
Horticulture see Agriculture
Hosiery and knitwear industry 218
Hospices 120
Hospital:
Friends, Leagues of 135
laboratories 121, 124
Hospitals:
and specialist services 119
construction 119
maternity services 119
number of 119—20
ophthalmic services 119
prisons 107
private 123
psychiatric 107
staff 120
teaching 122—3
voluntary help in 134, 135
Hotels and Catering 230
Households 23-4, 153
House of Commons 6, 31, 34, 36, 37, 38,
39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 46, 47, 48, 114, 170
broadcasting proceedings 40
committees 42, 43
election to 36, 37
financial control 39, 44
officers 36, 39, 42
party composition 38-9
privileges 44
See also Parliament and Speaker
House of Lords 31, 34, 35-6, 37, 38, 39,
40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 48, 102, 103, in, 113,
114, 116
Appellate Committee of 43
as Court of Appeal 102, 103, 111, 116
committees 42-3
eligibility to 35, 36
officers 35, 3<5, 39
privileges 44
Record Office 40
Housing 23-4, 60, 61, 152-4
action areas 157
administration 154
advisory centres 135
associations and societies 153, 156
assured tenancies 156
authorities, local 151, 152, 154-5,
construction and design 23-4, 50, 153, 155,
158,223
Co-ownership 156
Corporation 156
Housing—contd.
enterprise zones 159
finance 50, 61, 154-5, I58-9
Homeloan Scheme 155
home ownership 23, 153, 154
improvement 23, 156-7
ministerial responsibility for 50, 154
mortgages 154, 319
National Mobility Scheme 156
new towns 158
number of dwellings 153, 154, 156, 157
Option Mortgage Scheme 155
partnership programme 159
policy 23-4, 153, 154, 158-9
privately rented 153, 156
public authorities 155, 156
renovation grants 156—7
rent allowances 156
rent restrictions 156
research and development 154
shared ownership 154
sheltered 155
‘shorthold’ letting 156
slum clearance 61, 157—8, 159
standards 154
subsidies 61-2, 158-9
town development schemes 158
urban programme 158-9
Hovercraft 277
British Rail Hovercraft Ltd 277
Hoverlloyd Ltd 277
Hull 143, 268
Human Rights 80
Commission on 80
Humber and Humberside 6, 206
bridge 223
Hunterston 245
Hunting 374
Hydraulics Research Station (HRS)
85,251
Hydrocarbons tax 309
Hydro-electric:
Board, North of Scotland (NSHEB) 13,
242, 243, 246
power 231, 242, 243
See also Electricity
Hydrological research 251, 337
J 
IBA see Independent Broadcasting
Authority
Ice skating 371
Immigrants:
Commission for Racial Equality 28
Community Relations 28
Culture 27-8
Race Relations 28, 51, 293
Immigration 6, 22-3, 27-8, 51
Immingham 274
Immunisation 124
Imperial Chemical Industries Ltd 184,
212
Imperial War Museum 350
INDEX
399
Imports 174, 175, 211, 231, 257, 259, 263,
279,322, 324
licensing and restrictions 51, 259, 328-9
See also individual industries and Trade
Improvement grants, housing 156—7
Income:
and expenditure, national 174, 177~9
local government 58, 61—3
personal 25, 177-8, 179, 293, 294
sources of 179, 293-4
Incomes and prices 176, 177-8, 293, 294
Income Tax see Taxation
Indefatigable (gasfield) 238
Independent:
airline companies 279-81
Broadcasting Authority (IBA) 141, 284,
344, 356, 363, 364, 365, 366, 367, 368
Television 146, 228, 364, 365, 367
advertising 229, 363, 364, 367
local radio 356, 363, 364, 366, 367
News Ltd 364, 368
Oracle 368
programme companies 364
Radio News 364
Industrial:
Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration
Service (ACAS) 299
Arbitration Committees 299
Artists and Designers, Society of 188
association 184-5
automation 187, 205, 206
building 188, 192, 205, 223, 224
design 188, 350
Councils 188, 350
Development 187, 189, 190, 191, 192, 193
Advisory Agencies 193
Advisory Boards 193
Boards, Regional 192, 196
Fund, European Regional 196
Unit 196
disputes 299
Estates corporation 192
films 349
injuries benefits 127, 130
minerals 249
negotiating machinery 298, 299-300, 301
organisation 183—9
plant and steelworks manufacture 200,
202, 205
policy 51, 176-7, 183, 189-92, 196
property 199
relations 51, 184-5, 298—300
councils and committees 299, 300, 301
research establishments 190-2, 208, 211,
238, 242, 246, 251, 333, 334, 341
Safety regulations 300—1
Industry 51, 52, 174, 175, 176, 183-99,
200-229
advisory councils and committees 177
associations 184-5
Confederation of British (CBI) 185, 297,
299, 300
Department of and Secretary of State for
51, 177, 187, 188, 189, 190, 192, 193, 196,
202, 333
Industry—contd.
development areas and districts 7, 192—6
development organisations 189-90, 192,
193
education and training for 136, 144-5.
187-8, 291-2
Enterprise Board, National 191, 196
Films and Television 229-30
finance corporations 7, 318
grants and loans to 189, 190, 191, 192, 193,
196, 318
health and welfare services 300-2
investment in see Investment
location 151, 192, 193, 196
management 187—9, 189—90
British Institute of (BIM) 187
Consultancy 228
Institute of Directors 185
training for 187-8
manufacturing 51, 174, 177, 183, 184, 185,
200-229
employment in 183, 186, 283—5
mergers and re-grouping 177, 197
microelectronics 187, 205, 291
organisation 183-96
regional 192, 193, 196
ownership 183, 189—90
plant and machinery 7
production and productivity in 117, 183,
185-6, 200, 202, 204, 206, 207, 208, 209
210, 211
public enterprise 189—90
relations with Government 51, 183,
189-91, 289-92
restrictive trade practices 197, 198
Fair Trading 197, 198
safety in 300—2
small firms 195-6, 314
standards in 188—9
structure 183—5
technological advance 186
training 187-8, 291, 292
boards 291, 301
in industry 291, 292
Instructor, Colleges and Units 291, 292
Manpower Services Commission (MSC) 52,
54, 120, 185, 289-90, 291, 292, 297, 301
Opportunities Scheme (TOPS) 291
Skillcentres (SCs) 291, 292
See also Employment, Exports,
individual industries, Public
corporations, Research and Trade
Infectious diseases, control of 20, 124
Inflation see Finance
Information:
and advice to exporters 329
Central Office of 49, 51, 349, 367
Technology Year 187
Inland Revenue:
Board of 49, 51, 307
sources of see Taxation
Inland transport 52,265-74
Inland waterways 265, 274, 371
British Waterways Board 274
development 274
400
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL FIANDBOOK
Inland Waterways—contd.
recreation 371
Inns of Court 115
Inquests 104
Insecticides 213, 337
Insects 337
Inspectorates:
constabulary 96
factory 301, 302
fire service 301
mines and quarries 301, 302
Nuclear Installations 169, 301
railway employment 301
wages 300
Institutes and Institutions see relevant
subjects
Insurance 9, 175, 178, 319-20
Association, British 320
brokers 175, 320
companies 154, 319-20
export credit 51, 329
international services 320
marine 320
market 319
underwriters 175, 320
See also National Insurance
Instrument engineering 208
Inter-Governmental Maritime
Consultative Organisation (IMCO) 167
International:
Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC)
34i
agricultural research centres 337
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) 78, 247,
34i
Civil Aviation Organisation 169
Confederation of Free Trade Unions 296
Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU) 339
Criminal Police Organisation (Interpol) 99
data communications 284
Development:
Association 85
Issues (Brandt Report) 86
Economic Co-operation 86
Energy Agency (IEA) 231, 242
Fellowship Scheme 339
Institute of Applied Systems Analysis 339
Labour:
Conference 297
Organisation 50, 80
Machine tools exhibition 205
Maritime Satellite (INMARSAT)
Organisation 211, 284
Monetary:
agreements 312
Fund (IMF) 81, 86, 312, 327, 331
Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) 314, 331
North-South Dialogue 86-7
peace and security 76—9
Royal Institute of, Affairs 354
Telecommunication Union (ITU) 368
Telecommunications Satellite
Organisation (INTELSAT) 211, 284
peace and security 76-9
telegrams 285
International—contd.
telephone services 283
Television Federation (Intertel) 368
Telex Exchange, London 285
Voluntary Service 150
Inter-University Council for Higher
Education Overseas 67
Investment 174, 175, 179, 185-6, 190,
192, 193-6, 199, 201-2, 204, 218
Bank, European 196
in fuel and power industries 230, 240, 242
grants and loans 189, 190, 191, 192, 193,
196
in industry 179, 189, 193, 196, 201, 202,
204,230, 234
National Enterprise Board 192
overseas 175, 326, 327, 330, 331-2
private sector 183, 184, 331-2
Product and Process Development Scheme
190
trust companies 318-19
See also individual industries and Savings
Invisible transactions see Trade
Irish Republic 14-15, 17, 59, 97, 238,
277, 359
citizens’ status in UK 14, 22
citizens’ voting rights in UK 15, 37, 59
population: migration 6, 27
stock exchanges 321
trade with UK 222, 238, 326, 359
Iron:
and steel
exports 202, 204
industry 8, 202, 204
castings 8, 204
See also Steel
Ironbridge Gorge Museum 351
Irvine 13
Isaac Newton optical telescope 336
Islamic Centres 173
Isle of Man:
area 18
citizenship 22
legislature 30, 34, 45
races (TT) 373, 375
relationship with UK Government and
Crown 4, 22, 30, 34
Tynwald Court 34
Isle of Wight 18, 277, 371, 376
Isles of Scilly 18, 280
1 
Jams and marmalades industry 215
Jersey see Channel Islands
Jewellery industry 206
Jewish:
schools 173
Welfare Board 135
Jewry 172-3
‘Jobcentres’ 290
Job Search Scheme 289
Jockey Club 375
Jodrell Laboratory 341
INDEX
401
Joint European Torus (JET) 247
Journalists:
Institute of (IOJ) 360
National Council for the Training of
(NCTJ) 360
National Union of (NUJ) 360
Sec also Press
Judges 31, 95, 99, 100, 101, 102, 105,
110-1, 112, 114-5
Judicial Committee of the Privy
Council 45
Judicial procedure 103-4, 110-1, 114
Judiciary see Law
Jury see Law
Justice:
administration of 51, 109-16
and the Law 95-116
Criminal 95-110
Civil 110-3
Court of (European Community) 70, 95
See also Law
Justices of the Peace 101, 102, 115
Jute industry 217
Juvenile Courts 101, 102, 107, 109
informal children’s hearings (Scotland)
102, 108-9
K 
Keele University 143
Kent 6, 143, 235, 236, 241, 255, 277
Kew:
Observatory 168
Royal Botanic Gardens 340
Kielder Reservoir 8, 221, 251
Kimmeridge 235
King George’s Jubilee Trust 150
Kingsnorth 243
Knighthoods 31
Knitwear industry 13,218
L 
Labour see Employment
Labour Party 38, 43, 296
Lagan 14
Lake District 9
Lakes 9, 14
Lancashire 246
Lancaster:
Duchy of 33, 46
University 143
Land:
acquisition and disposal 61
drainage 274
and people 1-29
Registers 165
Resources Development Centre 85
use 6, 10, 12, 14, 151, 158, 162, 163, 164-5,
252, 253, 254, 255,256
Lands Tribunals 258
Language 10, 11, 67, 70, 140, 145, 147,
148
Laundries and launderettes 231
Law 30, 31, 46, 53, 95-116
administration of the 46, 51, 53, 54, 113-6
arrest, law of 98, 99—100
civil justice 12, 109-13
Commissions 54, 116
common 6, 30, 31, 34, 95
Community 70, 95
Court of Justice 70, 95
courts (criminal and civil) 51, 100-4, io5>
110-3, 116
district (Scotland) 12, 102, 114, 116
Restrictive Practices 112
criminal appeals 101-2
Criminal Injuries Compensation Scheme
96-7
criminal justice 95-109
divorce 110, 112, 115
employment 25, 297-8
equity 6
evidence, rules of 103-4, 111-2
expenditure on 115—6
Family Division 109, no, in
General Council of the Bar 115
Habeas Corpus 6, 100
Judges’ Rules 6, 99
judiciary 30, 31, 45, 46, 101, 102, no, in,
112,113,114
jury 101, 102, 103, 104, 112
legal
aid and advice 12, 51, 103, 113, 115, 116
profession 115
system 6, 12, 15
legislation see Parliament
Officers’ Department 51
Officers of the Crown 46, 51, 54, 114, 115
Official Solicitor 46, 51
penalties 104-9
press (legal requirements) 356, 361-2
prosecutions 100—1, 103, 104
Reform Committees 116
Society 115
Society of Northern Ireland, Incorporated
US
Society of Scotland 115
sources of 95
Statute Law Committee 45
trials and verdicts see prosecutions, above
Lawn Tennis 369, 37T 374-5
Lawyers 115, 116
Learned societies 338—9, 352, 353
Leatherhead (laboratories) 246
Leather industry 218, 220
Leeds 21, 143, 347, 351, 354
Leicester and Leicestershire 143, 351
Leisure trends 28-9
Leith 276
Leman Bank 238
Lerwick 13, 18, 276
Letcombe Laboratory 337
Liberal Party 6,38
Libraries 50, 52, 53, 60, 67, 340, 343, 344,
349, 352-5
Arts and, Office of 343
Aslib 354
402
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Libraries—contd.
mobile 354
private collections 354
public 60, 344, 352-4
university 353, 354
Library:
Association 354
Boards 137, 138, 354
British 353
co-operation 354
Film 349
National:
of Scotland 354
of Wales 52, 354
Licences:
aircrews, aircraft and aerodromes 280, 281,
282
animals 259, 285, 329
betting 51, no, 376, 377
broadcasting 286, 363, 364
cinemas and films 348
clubs 51, 110
driving 267, 268
drugs 51, 120
firearms 51
fishing 263, 374
game and gun 51, 374
gaming and lotteries 51
import 50, 257, 329, 376
issue of, by Post Office 285, 286
motor vehicles 267, 268, 269, 270, 285
oil and gas prospecting 233
public houses 51, no
race courses 377
works of art 350
Life:
expectation of 19
peerages 35—6
Lifeboats 278
Royal National Life-boat Institution 278
Lighthouses 278
Lilleshall National Sports Centre 371
Limestone 249
Lincolnshire 235, 255
Linen industry 16, 217
Literary societies and prizes 352
Literature 352-5
associations and societies 353, 355
awards 352
Royal Society of 354
Litter 166
Liverpool 21, 143, 159, 270, 274, 275,
32L 35i
Livestock see Agriculture
Living Standards 25-6
Livingstone 13
Llandarcy 235
Llangollen 344
Llantrisant n
Lloyd’s, Society of 320
Local Administration, Commission
for 63
Local Government 9, 30, 50, 51, 57-63
authorities, types of 9, 57—63, 117, 118,
123, 124
Local Government—contd.
Boundary Commissions 36, 58
complaints system 63
councillors 58, 59, 61, 63
councils:
borough 59, 60, 155
community 58, 60
county and metropolitan county 58, 59, 60,
151, 152, 164
district 58, 59, 60, 62, 63, 124, 151, 152,
155
London see London
parish and rural areas 58, 60
regional authorities and islands 58, 60, 1x8,
124
election 58-9
employment in 61, 299
environmental health 58, 60, 124
finance 61-3, 118,305
functions and services 59—60, 118
grants 61-2
internal:
committees 60—1
organisation 60—1
labour relations 299
loans 63
officers and employees 61
rates 62
relations with central Government 62,
117
responsibility for:
amenities 59—60
arts, encouragement of 60, 344, 345, 346,
347, 352
child care 107-8, 125-6
education see Education
fire services 63-5
handicapped 125
health 58, 60, 61, 118, 122, 123
housing and planning 60, 61, 62, 123,
151-9, 165
licensing of films 348
mentally ill 125
pollution control 165-9
public libraries 60, 344, 354
roads 60, 61, 267
social services 60, 61, 118
sport 371
traffic control 60
welfare 300, 301
youth services 148-50
Locomotives:
industry 211, 273
types in use 273
Lome Convention of 72, 87, 256, 328
London:
airports 280, 282
art, drama, music 343, 345, 346, 347, 348,
349, 350, 35i, 352, 353, 354
schools and colleges 346, 347-8, 350, 352
Bankers’ Clearing House 315
bishop of 35, 170
borough councils 58, 151
Business Studies, Graduate School of 143
Central Mosque 173
INDEX
403
London—contd.
City of 6, 8, 30, 58, 63, 97, 99, 114, 151,
175,283,316, 319, 320, 321
Corporation of the 60
police 97, 99
Commodity Exchanges 321
design centre 188
Discount Market 321
food markets 224, 225, 226
Gold Market 321
Greater London 58, 60, 63
area 21
Greater London Council (GLC) 58, 59, 60,
151,155, 166
housing and planning 60, 154
libraries 353, 354
Lord Mayor 30, 59
museums and art galleries 350, 351
newspapers 355. 356, 357
police 60, 96, 97, 98, 99
population 6, 21-2
port of and docks 274, 275
religious centres 173
Sports Centre 371
Stock Exchange 320-1
taxicabs 270
Telegram Transmission Centre 285
telephone information service 285
television companies 364
theatres 345, 346, 347
traffic 266, 267, 268
Transport 270, 271
Underground rail services 270
Universities 50, 143, 352, 354, 360
libraries 354
Zoo 340
Longannet 243
Lord:
Advocate 46, 53, 100, 108, 113, 114, 116
Chancellor 35, 36, 45, 46, 47, 51, 101, no,
in, 113, 114, 115, 116
as Speaker of the House of Lords 35, 46
Chancellor’s Departments 46
Chief Justice (England) 46, no
High Commissioner 46, 171
Justice Clerk 102, in
Justice General (Scotland) 102, in
Lieutenants of Counties 46
President of the Council 46
President of the Court of Session in, 113
Privy Seal 46
Lords:
Commissioners (Treasury) 39, 46
House of see House of Lords
Justices of Appeal 46, in
of Appeal 46, in
Spiritual 31, 35
Temporal 31, 35
Lothian 13
Lotteries 377
Loughborough 143
Lough Neagh 14
Luncheon voucher schemes 295
Luton 282
Lutheran Church 173
M 
Machine Tool:
industry 205
Trades Association 205
See also Tools
Magazines see Periodicals
Magistrates and Magistrates’ courts 46,
51, 99, 101, 102, 103, no, in, 112
Mail order sales 224
Mallaig 13
Malting industry 215
Malvern 344
Management see Industry
Manchester 8, 12, 143, 235, 269, 274, 275,
282, 321, 336, 351, 354, 356, 358, 360
Man-made fibres 184, 200, 216, 217
Manpower 183, 185, 186, 218, 252, 263,
264, 265, 287, 288, 289, 290—2
Conciliation and Arbitration Service 299
distribution of 289, 290
Economics, Office of 299
Qualified 290-1, 340—1
Service Commission (MSC) 52, 120,
289-90, 291, 292, 301
See also Employment and individual
industries
Manslaughter 104
Manufacturing:
companies 203
establishments, size of 183, 184
industries:
output and exports 7, 174, 175, 178, 186,
202-29
See also Industry and Individual industries
Marchwood (laboratories) 246
Marine:
Biological Associations 337
Dumping at sea 167
Engineering see Engineering and
Shipbuilding
Pollution 167, 337
Safety and Welfare 261, 278
Technology 335, 337
Maritime:
Institute, National 191
International, Satellite Organisation
(INMARSAT) 211, 284
MARECS (maritime series of
communications satellites) 213
Museum, National 350
Market gardening see Agriculture
Market research 228
Markets:
commodity 321
discount 316
exchange 327
fish and fish meal 226, 261
food (London) 224, 225, 226
gold 321
insurance 319
Marriage 19, 20, 23
guidance centres 134, 135
rates 20, 23
Marshall Scholarships 148
404
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Martlesham Heath 285
Master of Rolls 111
Maternity services 119, 121, 128, 129
Matrimonial proceedings (law) no,
112
Mayors and Lord Mayors 31, 59
Meadowbank Sports Centre 372
Meals, provision of :
at place of employment 295
for old people 125, 135
for school children 131, 141
Mechanical engineering 202, 205, 206
handling equipment 206
Medical:
Advisory Service, Employment 301, 302
Association, British 122
Council, General 122
Electronic X-ray scanner systems 208
private insurance schemes 123
profession see Doctors
research 334, 336
Council (MRC) 122, 295, 334, 336
National Institute for 336
in universities 336
schools 141, 143, 336
services:
in industry 300, 301
in prisons 107
for school children 121, 141
social workers 120, 127
Medicines
Commission 122
safety of 122
Medmenham 251
Medway 274
Mental health services 107, 125, 134
Merchant:
banks 316
Fleet 276
ownership 276
shipbuilding 211-2
Merseyside 21, 159, 192, 269, 336
Metal manufacture 8, 186, 202-4, 2°6
Meteorological Office 251
Methodist Church 172
Metric conversion tables 378
Metropolitan Police Force 97, 98, 99
Midlands 6, 21, 22, 192, 204, 235
Midwifery 119, 122
Midwives:
Board 122
Royal College of 122
Migration 22
Milford Haven 11, 235, 274, 275
Milk:
in schools 141
marketing 256-7
Boards 256-7
production 214-5, 254
safety regulations 124
Milton Keynes 225
Minerals 8, 230, 240, 337
industrial 8, 230, 240, 249
indigenous resources 249
non-fuel 230, 247—50
Minerals—contd.
non-fuel—contd.
exploration 249
ownership 230
production 230, 249-50
trade 249, 250
Mines and quarries:
employment in 4, 230, 240, 249
industry 8, 230, 240, 242
Inspectorate 300, 301
mining machinery 8, 208
research 247, 301
safety measures 301
See also Coal
Mining Research and Development
Establishment 242
Ministers:
Council of 70, 71
of the Crown 31, 33, 34-9
ministerial responsibility 33, 45-6, 48, 177
salaries 46-7
of State 46, 47, 52, 53, 54
See also Prime Minister and individual
government departments
Monarchy 30-4
accession 31
ceremonial 33
Civil List 33
pensions 46
coronation 31
history of 1-3
Privy Council 31, 34, 44-5
relations with:
armed forces 31
churches 31, 46, 170, 171
Commonwealth 30, 31
foreign governments 31, 33
judiciary 31, 113, 114
Parliament 31, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 39, 4C
44, 45, 46, 47
Royal:
income and expenditure 33-4
Prerogatives 33, 34, 45
Proclamations 45
title 30
succession 31
See also Royal family
Monetary Policy see Finance and
Economic, National
Monopolies 197
and Mergers Commission 177, 197, 356
Montrose 276
Motor:
cycle racing 375
cycles 209
dealers and repair services 223, 228
Manufacturers and Traders, Society of 209
racing 369, 375
shows 209
sports 375
vehicles:
design standards 267
industry 7, 174, 184, 207, 209
licensing 267, 268, 269, 270
noise levels 169
INDEX
405
Motor—contd.
vehicles—contd.
numbers licensed 229, 269
owners 23, 24
parking 60, 225, 268
safety measures 267-8
taxation 311
tests 267
Motorways 8, 52, 266
Mountains 6, 10, 12, 14
Mourne 14
Murder 100, 104, 116
Museums 9, 50, 52, 53, 60, 350-2
and Galleries Standing Commission on 351
Association 352
finance 351
Music 344, 346-7
Amateur, Standing Conference for 347
choral societies 346—7
college and schools 347-8
Committees, County 347
concerts 344, 346
festivals 344, 346
folk 346
jazz 346
Library, Central 354
Master of the Queen’s 346
orchestras 343, 344, 346, 348
‘pop’346
records 354
Royal Academy of 354
Societies, National Federation of 347
Muslims 173
N
NATO see North Atlantic Treaty
Organisation
National:
Debt 312, 314
Office 49
Economy see Economy and Finance
Enterprise Board 191, 196
Equestrian Centre 372, 375
Exhibition Centre 209, 227
Gallery 350
Insurance
benefits and allowances 128-34
contributions 128
pension scheme 128, 129, 130, 132-3
reciprocal agreements 133-4
stamps 128, 285
supplementary benefits 131-2
surcharge 307, 311
Investment and Loans Office 312
Loans Fund 63, 238, 303, 306, 312, 316—7
Maritime Museum 350
parks 163-4, 371
product, gross (GNP) 1, 66, 82, 83, 137,
200, 221, 222, 333
Savings 316-7
bank 316-7
certificates 317
Trusts 161, 162, 351
National—contd.
Trusts—contd.
See relevant subject matter for organisations,
etc. having National as first word of their titles
Nationalised Industries 174, 183,
189-90, 191, 202, 210, 211, 230, 231, 234,
235, 238, 239, 240, 242, 243, 245, 246, 247
finance and investment 231, 235, 238,
240-2
labour relations of 297, 299
research 235, 238, 239, 242
See also individual industries
Nationality 22-3, 51
Natural:
beauty, areas of 163-4
Environment Research Council (NERC)
251.334, 335,337
gas see Gas and Energy
History, British Museum 334, 341
Institute of Terrestrial Ecology 337
resources 230-51
Sciences 144
Naturalisation 22, 23, 51
Nature:
Conservancy Council 163, 164, 369
conservation 161—5, 34°
voluntary organisations 164
reserves 163, 371
Navigational Aids 207, 208, 278, 281,
282,284
Navy see Defence, Ministry of,
Merchant Fleet and Royal Navy
Neurobiology and Mental Health
Board 336
Newburgh 243
Newcastle upon Tyne 159, 225, 270,
271, 346, 350
New
Covent Garden 225
Opera Company 347
Newhaven 274
Newport 10, 274, 357
News Agencies 359
Newspaper:
Circulation 355, 356-7, 358, 359
Editors:
British Association of Industrial 361
Guild of British Newspapers 361
industry 52, 355
new technology 358
owners 355-6
Publishers Association 359, 360
Society 360
See also Press
Newspapers:
evening 356, 357, 358
national 355, 356, 358
regional 355, 356-7, 358
Newsprint, supply pf 355
New Towns 50, 158
Development Corporations 158
Noise:
abatement 167
zones 169
control of 169, 279
406
AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
BRITAIN 1982:
Non-ferrous metals industry 184, 204
North Atlantic Treaty Organisation
(NATO) 66, 77, 78, 79, 88-90, 91, 92, 94,
210,335
Britain’s contribution to 88-90, 91
Strategic Air Reserve 90
Strategy 88-9
Northern Ireland (see also subject
headings)
administration 15-17, 54
agriculture and horticulture 54, 252, 253,
254, 255,257
Airports Ltd 282
area 4, 17-18
art, drama and museums 343, 344, 346,
349, 350, 35i
Arts Council of 344, 349
broadcasting 17
councils and committee 363-4
Chamber of Commerce and Industry 185
Civil Service 54, 55
Commissioner for Complaints 63, 118
constitution 54
Constitutional Convention 54
Co-ownership Housing Association 155
Council for Educational Research 146
Courts of Law 102, in, 114
cultural and social life 17
Development Agency 152
Economic Council 152
economy 16-17
education 54, 136, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141,
142, 143,144, 145,146, 149
Electricity Service 241
employment 15, 16
Equal Opportunities Commission 27
Fire Authority and Services 63
forestry 54, 264
gas supply 238
Government departments 49, 54
Department of Agriculture 54, 164, 258,
259, 260, 262, 264
Department of the Civil Service 54
Department of Commerce 54, 329
Department of Education 54, 137, 140, 142,
344,369
Department of the Environment 49, 54, 58,
60, 151, 152, 154, 158, 161, 166, 167, 251,
267
Department of Finance 54
Department of Health and Social Services 54,
109, 118, 127
Department of Manpower Services 54, 120,
289, 302
Government
background to civil disturbance 14-15
direct rule and political initiatives 15-16
health and welfare services 121, 123
Loans Fund 63
Historic Buildings Council 161
Housing 15, 154, 157
Association 155
Executive 155
Industrial
Development Board 195
Northern Ireland—contd.
Industrial—contd.
safety 302
industry 16, 192, 193, 196
Local Enterprise Development Unit
(LEDU) 196
law courts 102, in, 114
legislation 54, 95, 97
libraries 54, 60, 354
library boards 143, 354
local government 54, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63
maintenance of law and order 90, 95, 97,
98, 99, 100
motorway system 267, 269
music, opera and dance 17, 346, 347
national insurance 127
national parks 163
Nature Reserve Committee 164
Newspapers 17, 358, 360
new towns 158
Nurses and Midwives, Council of 122
Office 54, 105, 114
poets 17
police 96, 97—9
population 14
press 17, 358, 359, 360
railways 270
registers 54
representation in United Kingdom
Parliament 16, 54, 266, 267
roads 54, 60, 266, 267
Secretary of State 54,97, 114, 116, 117,
343, 369
social services 17, 54, 60, 118, 124, 127, 134
Advisory Committee 127
Sport 17, 369, 370, 37L 372, 373
Sports Council 17, 370
Tourist Board 195
trade unions 297
transport 54, 267, 269, 270
Transport Holding Company 270
unemployment 16, 17, 289
universities and colleges 143, 144, 145
voting 36, 59
water pollution 167
water supply 54, 60, 250, 251
workers 289
See also Ulster
North:
of England Open Air Museum 351
of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board
(NSHEB) 242, 243, 246
Sea 12, 162, 167, 174, 176, 204, 231, 234,
235, 239, 265, 325, 330, 338
See also Gas, Petroleum and Energy
Nottingham and Nottinghamshire 227,
240
Nuclear:
Fuels Ltd., British 243, 246
Disposal, Radio Active Waste 246
Installation Inspectorate of Health and
Safety Executive 169
Weapons and equipment see Defence
Nuclear Energy:
advisory committees and boards 232, 336
INDEX
407
Nuclear Energy—contd.
Agency (NEA) 341
Industry 230, 245, 246-7
international agencies 247, 341
power stations 8, 11, 205, 221, 245, 246
Programme 230, 245-6
reactors 205, 246
research 246-7, 336
Sec also Atomic Energy Authority
Nursery schools see Education
Nursing and Nurses 119, 122
associations 122
Council of Nurses and Midwives 122
General Nursing Councils 122
in the home 119, 125
Royal College of Nursing 122
o
Observatory:
Edinburgh, Royal 335> 336
Royal Greenwich (RGO) 335, 336
Occupational therapists 120, 123
Oceanography 337
Offenders:
children 102, 107-9
treatment of 95, 104-7, I13> I][4
Office:
machinery industry 206
of Fair Trading 117, 229
Offshore:
buoy 278
Energy Technology Board 238
equipment industry 212, 233
oil and gas 167, 233
Supplies Office 233
Oil see Petroleum
Old people see Elderly
Olympic Games 370, 373
British Olympic Association 370
Open University 9, 106, 144, 145, 146,
365
Opera 343, 346, 347-8
Companies 347-8
English Music Theatre Company 347
English National 347
Kent 347
New 347
North 347
Royal Opera House 347
Training 347-8
Ophthalmic services 119, 123
Opposition, parliamentary 37, 38, 43,
57
Optical 186
fibres 285, 302
observatories 335
and radio astronomy 335, 336
telescopes 336
Opticians 119, 123
General Optical Council 123
Opto-electronics 187
Orders in Council 45
Ordnance Survey 51, 54
Organisation for Economic Co¬
operation and Development (OECD)
81, 84, 231, 327, 332, 341
Orkney Islands 18, 58, 60, 247, 258, 274,
275,277
Overseas:
aid programme 82-3, 84-7
banks 316
broadcasting 365, 366, 368
constructional work 222
dependent territories, public services 56
detente 77
Development Administration 51, 56, 67,
84
educational assistance 67, 75, 146-7
North-South Dialogue 86-7
Pest Research Centre 85
refugees 86
relations 66-87
Administration 66-7
Britain and the United Nations 79“8i
Commonwealth 73—6
development co-operation 82-7, 342
international peace and security 76—9
membership of the European Community
68-73
scientific 342
students 146—8
Affairs, UK Council for 147
Surveys Directorate 85
teachers’ exchange schemes 146, 147
Trade Board, British 67
See also Trade
Voluntary agencies 86
Oxford 9, 45, 143, 238, 341, 35T 354
P
Packaging 206, 219, 223
Paint industry 212, 213
Paisley 358
Paper and board industry 206, 219
Paraplegic Sports Society, British 370,
372
Paramount Pictures 368
Parks 9, 163, 371
Countryside Commissions 163
forest 163—4
national 163
Royal 161
Science 338
Parliament 6, 30, 31, 33, 34-44, 45, 46,
47, 48, 49, 52, 55, 64, 95, 115, 190, 264,
305, 306, 320, 363, 367
Bills, parliamentary 31, 35, 39, 40-2, 43,
51, 52, 306
procedure 39—42, 43
Royal Assent to 31, 41
committees 42-4, 305, 306
control of:
finance 34, 39, 42, 43, 49, 5T 305, 306
Government in power 37, 38-9, 40, 41-2
public corporations 189—90
dissolution of 31, 33, 34, 35
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
408
Parliament—contd.
duration of 34
elections 34, 36-7, 38
European 34, 70
functions 34
legislation 6, 34, 39, 40-3, 44, 47, 52
meeting of 34
Opposition 37, 38, 43, 57
party system 36, 37, 38, 39
privileges 44
procedure 39-40
prorogation of 31, 35
relations with:
the Church 170, 171
local authorities 58, 60, 62
the Monarchy 30, 31, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 41,
44, 45, 46
sessions 35
Standing Orders Committee 42
State opening of 33
Statutory Instruments 42, 306
summoning of 31, 45
Whips 38, 39, 46
See also House of Commons and House
of Lords
Parliamentary:
Commissioner 42, 44, 118
Committees 42-3, 350
control 43-4, 305, 306
Counsel:
on Bills 52
Office 51
political broadcasting 40, 367
Secretaries 39, 46, 47, 52, 53, 54, 56
Parole Boards 106, 114
Patent Office 199
Paymaster General 47, 51
Peers and Peeresses 31, 33, 35, 37
Pembrokeshire 11
Penal systems 113
Advisory Council 113
Pennines 6, 21
Pensions:
attendance allowance 131
earnings-related pension scheme 128
graduated pension scheme 128
inflation-linked 128
invalidity allowance 129
occupational 128
payment of, by Post Office 285
public service 51
retirement 127, 128
State pension scheme 128
supplementary, old persons 131
war 127, 132-3
widows 129, 130
Penzance 271, 280
Periodical Publishers Association 360
Periodicals 339, 340, 352, 353, 354, 355,
358, 359, 360
Permanent Boundary Commissions
36,58
Personal social services 60, 124—7
Pesticides and other Toxic Chemicals,
Advisory Committee on 300
Pesticides Safety Precautions Scheme
259, 300
Peterborough 13
Peterhead 276
Petroleum and petroleum products
167, 174, 175, 176, 178, 184, 208, 214, 228,
231, 233-5, 238, 275, 282
British Petroleum Ltd 184, 234
chemicals industry 184, 186, 200, 212, 214
equipment industry 205, 212, 233
exports 174, 233, 235, 275, 325, 330
imports and consumption 235, 275
industry 175, 208, 212, 233, 234-5
National Oil Corporation, British
(BNOC) 50, 189, 234
oilfields 221, 230, 231, 233-4, 235, 3°9
Offshore:
equipment industry 212, 233
oil and gas 7, 12, 13, 16, 167, 200, 230,
233,275,282
Supplies Office 233
Technology Board 238
pipelines 235
prevention of sea pollution by 162, 167
production platforms 167, 233
refineries and refining 184, 204, 235, 238
research 235, 238
revenue tax 174, 234, 309-10
tankers 276
terminals 235, 275
Pharmaceuticals 7, 213
Committee on Safety of Medicines 122
Pharmaceutical Society of Great
Britain 123
Pharmacists 119, 123
Philatelic Bureau 286
Photographic:
chemicals 213
equipment 208
Physical Laboratory, National 188-9,
190-1
Physical Recreation, Central Council
of (CCPR) 369
Physically handicapped see Disabled
Physiological Systems and Disorders
Board 336
Physiotherapists 120, 123
Pig industry 254, 259
Pilotage 278
Pipelines:
gas 239
oil 234, 235
Planning:
Appeals Committee 152
boards and councils, economic 152
development areas and schemes 151—2,
192,193-6
environmental 59, 60, 151
inner cities 158—9
inquiry commissions 152
policies 151, 158
public participation 152
regional 151-2, 192, 193-6
Plant health 259, 337, 340, 341
Plastics 212, 213, 220
INDEX
Plas-y-Brenin National Centre for
Mountain Activities 371
Plas-y-Deri National Outdoor
Pursuits Centre 371
Playing fields 141, 370
Association, National (NPFA) 370
Plimsoll line 278
Plymouth 271
Poet Laureate 46, 354
Poetry festivals and societies 11, 354
‘Polaris’ vessels 89, 91
Police 51, 53, 60, 61, 95, 96, 97-9
associations 98
Authorities 97-8
committees 98
common services 98-9
forces 97
Negotiating Board 98
powers of arrest 99
Royal Commission on 95
status and duties 98
Political:
broadcasts 40, 367
party system 37-9
Pollution prevention of:
air 24, 50, 123, 166, 167-9, 30I> 337
land 24, 166
noise 24, 123, 166, 169
research 251, 337
rivers 166, 167, 250, 251
sea (by oil) 162, 167, 278
water supply 50, 124, 166, 167, 250, 251
Polytechnics see Education
Pony Club 375
Poole 21
Population 4, 18, 1^-23, 158, 287, 322,
337
age distribution 20-1
birth and death rates 19—20
censuses 19, 52
and Surveys, Office of 52
Commonwealth 73
density 4, 19, 21—2
Dependencies 76
ethnic minorities 27-8
households 18, 23-6
increase in 19, 24
migration 22
mortality, causes of 19-20
nationalities 22
regional distribution 21—2
sex ratio 20-1
trends 19
vital statistics 24
working 4, 25—6, 200, 221, 223, 252, 287,
359
Portrait Galleries, National 350, 351
Ports and docks 221, 274-6
Associated British Ports 274
authorities 274
container facilities 274
development 159, 275-6
ownership 274
transport industry 274, 275
Portsmouth 274, 275
409
Post Office 189, 208, 270, 283, 285-6, 366
counter services 285
‘Datapost’ 286
Employment 285
‘Expresspost’ 286
‘Intelpost’ 286
mail services 285, 286
mechanisation 285, 286
mini buses 270
National Girobank 286
Postal Consultancy Service, British 286
‘Postbus’ 208, 270
See also Telecommunications
Potato production and marketing 255,
256, 257
Marketing Board 256, 257
Pottery industry 8, 219, 249, 343
Poultry:
diseases 259, 337
industry 254
Power stations see Electricity and
Nuclear Energy
Preservation:
councils and societies 161
ofbuildings 159, 161, 343
of coastal areas 162, 167
of rural amenities 163-4
of trees 161-2, 163-4
Press 355-62
Association Ltd. 359, 360
broadcasting and the 356, 358, 360, 361,
368
Council 361
institutions 360—1
legal requirements 356, 361-2
London 357
‘National’ 355, 356, 357, 358
News Agencies 359
ownership 355-6
Periodical 355, 358-9
regional 356—7
training for journalism 360
Thomson Foundation 360
Prestwick (airport) 282
Price:
guarantees (agricultural) 257
restriction by traders 198
Prime Minister 31, 34, 35, 37, 38, 45, 46,
47, 56, 57, 333
Prince of Wales 2, 10, 33
Printing:
and Publishing Industry Training Board
(PPITB) 360
industry 201, 219—21
Prisons and prisoners 105-7, 109, 113
chaplains 107
education 106
employment 106
medical service 107
privileges and discipline 107
psychological services 107
remission of sentence 106, 109
training and employment 106, 107, 109
visitors 107, 113
boards of 107, 113-4
4io
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Prisons and prisoners—contd.
welfare and after-care 107, 113—4
Privy Council 31, 44-5, 46
Committees 44, 45
Counsellors 44, 45
Probation 104, 105, 107, 109, 113
officers 105, 107, 108
service to the community, scheme 104—5
Procurator General 52
Procurators Fiscal 101, 104
Production and productivity see
Industry
Professional:
and Executive Recruitment (PER) 290,
291
Institutions and associations 335, 339, 340
Property:
Law 109
Service Agency 50, 221
Protection of:
Ancient Buildings, Society for 161
Animals and Birds 164-5
Birds, Royal Society for 164
Rural:
England, Council for 164
Scotland, Association for 164
Wales, Council for 164
Psychiatric social work 105, 107
Public:
Accounts Committee 306
administration 178
authorities 221
corporations 30, 183, 189-90, 191, 334, 338
See also Nationalisation and individual
corporations
expenditure 4, 88, 95, 155, 177, 179
holidays 29, 380
houses (pubs) 25
libraries 60, 344, 354
passenger transport 265, 269, 270, 271, 277
Prosecutions Director of 44, 100, 101
Record Office 47, 54> 35L 353~4
Works Loan Board 63, 155
Public Finance 8, 72, 88, 175, 176, 178,
303-12
aid to overseas countries 51, 82-3, 84-7
banking 8, 313-7
Budget 303, 306-7, 308, 309
cash limits 305
Comptroller and Auditor General 305-6
contingency reserve 306
corporations 318
Council for the Securities Industries 321
currency reserves 182, 330, 331
Equipment Leasing Association 318
estimates 305
European Monetary System 180, 182
Exchange Equalisation Account 314
Exchequer 63, 306
see also Treasury
factoring companies 318
financial institutions 317—21
financing of international trade 316
for Industry Ltd 318
Houses Association 318
Public Finance—contd.
Inflation, measures against 176—7, 313
leasing companies 318
loan guarantee scheme, 196, 314
local government 61-3, 179
monetary policy 176—7
National Debt 312, 314
National Loans Fund 303, 306, 312
public:
Accounts Committee 305, 306
expenditure 177, 303-5
Expenditure Suruey 177, 303-5
sector borrowing 311—2
sources of revenue 307—11
Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) 314, 331
See also Balance of Payments,
Exchange Control, Expenditure,
Income, Investment Revenue,
Sterling, Taxation and Trade
Publishers’ Association 353, 360
Publishing 52, 186, 219-20, 340, 353,
360-1
Pumps and industrial valves 205
2 
Quakers 172
‘Quangos’ 49
Queen see Monarchy
Queen Elizabeth Hall 346
Queen’s:
Award for Export and Technology 189
Bench Division (England and Wales) no
Courts 114
Silver Jubilee Trust 149, 150
University 143, 354
R 
Rabies, precautions against 259
Race Relations 27-8, 50, no, 292, 293
Employment Advisory Service 293
Ethnic Relations Research Unit 28, 338
language teaching 28
Racial equality:
Commission for 28
discrimination 28, no
Radar 208, 210, 278
Radio:
astronomy 336
communications 208, 284, 285
See also Broadcasting, Navigational
Aids, and Satellites
industry 207, 208, 368
International Special Committee on 368
telegraphy 285
telescopes 335
Radioactivity 169
Radiochemical Centre Ltd 213
Radiography 123
Radioisotopes 213
Radiological Protection Board,
National 169
INDEX
411
Radiopaging Service 285
Railways 265, 270-4
Board, British 270, 271, 273, 277
British Rail Engineering Ltd. (BREL) 273
Channel tunnel 273
development 270
diesel traction 271
electrification 270, 271
employment 271, 273
Employment Inspectorate 301
Freight:
Services 265, 273
‘Speedlink’ 273
grants 271, 273
hotels and catering 273
inter-city 271
mechanisation 271
operations 270-1
Processing System, Total 273
passenger service 270, 271
private 273-4
safety measures 301
‘Sealink’ 274
technical centre 273
underground (London) 270
vehicles industry 211, 273
workshops 209, 273
Rainfall 18, 251
Rambling 369
Ramsgate 277
Rates 62-3
rebates 62
support grants 61-2
valuation courts 62
water 250
Raw materials, trade in 174, 247-8
Reactors see Nuclear energy
Reading 143, 351
Recorders (law) 101, no
Recreation 9, 162, 163, 369-77
facilities for 162, 163-4, 371-2
Physical 141, 369, 371-2
Central Council of (CCPR) 369
See also Clubs, Leisure and Sports
Recycling and materials reclamation
166
Red Cross Society, British 135
Referendum on European
Community membership 68
Refineries see Petroleum
Refractory goods 218
Refrigeration machinery 205
Refugees, UK Standing Conference on
86
Refuse, collection and disposal of 60,
123,165,166
Regional:
Arts 343. 344
development 189, 192—6
agencies 193
assisted areas 192—6
grants and loans 189, 192, 193-6
employment incentives 192, 193, 289
industrial:
incentives 192, 193-6
Regional—contd.
industrial—contd.
policy 189, 192
planning boards and councils 151-7
policy, industrial and 189, 192, 193, 196
Water Authorities 250, 369
Registrar:
General of Shipping and Seamen 278
Registrars:
General 54, 127
of births, deaths and marriages 52
Religion see Churches and also
Remploy Ltd 290
Rent:
allowances 133, 156
restrictions 156
tribunals 113
Rescue services, sea and air 278, 281
Research, scientific 333-42
advisory councils and committees 334,
335, 336, 338, 340, 341, 342
agricultural 260, 334, 335, 337
Research Council 337
associations 333, 337, 340
astronomy 335, 336
biological 336, 337, 340
botanical 340—1
building and civil engineering 222, 335,
340
chemical 339, 340
communications 285, 335, 342
construction 222, 340
councils 331, 333, 334, 335
Advisory Board for 334
Council, Science and Engineering (SERC)
335, 336
criminology 96
defence 93-4, 333, 342
ecological 337
electronics 336
engineering 334, 335, 340
environmental 337
establishments 333, 334, 335, 336, 337, 338,
340, 34i
expenditure on 7, 333, 334, 335, 336, 338,
339,342
fellowships and studentships 335, 336, 338,
339,340
fire prevention 301
fisheries 337
forestry 263-4
fuel and power 235, 239, 242, 246, 335, 337
geological 337, 341
Government responsibility 211, 333—42
industry 211, 255, 333, 334, 338
See also individual industries
international collaboration 335
in universities and technical colleges 334,
335,336,338,341 _
land use and planning 337
lectureships and awards 333, 338, 339
medical 333, 335, 336, 338
microelectronic 335
mining 242, 337, 341
nuclear 68, 246, 335, 336, 341
412
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Research, scientific—contd.
optical astronomy 335, 336
pest control 259, 337
petroleum 235, 238
plant 337, 340, 341
policy 333, 334
pollution 166, 251, 337
private institutes for 335, 338, 339
radio-astronomy 335-6
roads 267
social 334, 337, 338
solar energy 247
space 284, 342
technological 332, 334, 335, 340, 341, 342
telecommunications 285
television and radio 467-8
universities 334, 336, 337, 338
veterinary 337
water supplies 251
zoological 340
Restrictive practices 197, 198
Court 112, 198
Fair Trading 197, 198
Retail:
organisation and turnover 223—6
types of 223, 224, 225, 226
See also Shops
trade 223-6
Reuters Ltd 359
Revenue 174, 274, 307-11, 355
Rhodes Scholarships 148
Riding (horse) 369, 375-6
Showjumping 375, 376
Rights of way 164
Risley 246
Road:
freight 265, 268
company National 269
haulage 265, 268
European Community rules 269
passenger transport 265, 269, 270
authorities 269
Research Laboratory, Transport and
(TRRL) 85, 267
Roads 23, 52, 58, 60, 61, 265-6, 267-8
authorities 266-7
classification 265, 266
development and construction 52, 266, 267
motorways and trunk roads 23, 52, 266, 267
Northern Ireland 54, 60, 269
research 267
safety 52, 267—8
transport on 265, 266, 267, 268, 269, 270
Robots 187
British Association 187
Roman Catholic Church see Church
Rope-making 217
Rotherham 274
Rough (gasfield) 238, 239
Royal:
Air Force 89-90, 92-3
College 91
Museum 350
Regiment 91, 92
reserve and auxiliary forces 91
Royal—contd.
Air Force—contd.
Staff College 91
Volunteer Reserve 91
See also Defence
ceremonial 33
Commissions 46, 49, 95, 161, 166
appointment and function of 46
Constitution 30
Dockyards 55, 94
Family 30, 31, 33, 34
income and expenditure 33-4
visits 33
Institution 339-40
Jubilee Trusts 149—50
Marines 90, 92
Reserve 91
Military Academy 91
Mint 11, 49, 55, 208, 313
Naval:
College 91
Reserve 91
Staff College 91
Navy 89, 90, 91, 92,
nuclear submarines 89, 91
See also Defence
observatories 335
Observer Corps 93
Ordnance Factories 55, 94
Prerogatives see Monarchy
Proclamations see Monarchy
Smithfield Show 206
Society 334, 338-9, 34°, 34i
of Arts 338, 339
See relevant subject matter for organisations,
etc., having Royal as first word of their title
Rubber industry 212, 220
Rugby 369, 372
football 369, 372, 376
Runcorn 275
Rural:
amenities, preservation of 162, 163, 164
Councils 193
districts:
councils 58, 59, 60
population 21-2
industries 193—6
Preservation Societies 24, 164
Rutherford Laboratory 335
s 
Sadler’s Wells Company and Theatre
347
Safety:
at sea 278
Commission, Health and 185, 300—1
Health and, Executive 294, 301
measures 258
Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents
(RoSPA) 302
See also Agricultural workers, Civil
Aviation, Mines and quarries,
Railways and Roads
INDEX
413
Sailing 376
National, Centre 376
St Andrews 14
University 143
St. Fergus 239
St.John Ambulance 135
Salford University 143
Salisbury 344
Salmon fishing 262-3, 374
Salvation Army 135, 172
Samaritans 134
Sand and gravel industry 249, 250
Sandhurst 91
Sandstone 250
Satellites 211, 284, 337, 342, 360, 368
Save as You Earn (SAVE) 317
Savings 178, 285, 316-7
National:
banks 285, 316-7
bonds 317
Certificates 310, 316, 317
contractual 316
Department for 49, 55, 316
Investment Accounts 316
Stock Register 316
Scafell Pike 9
Schools see Education
Science:
Advisory Board for Research Councils
334
and Engineering Research Council 333,
334, 335, 336, 342
and Technology:
Council of, Institutes 340
in industry 186, 187
Institutes of 340
awards 333, 338, 339
Department of Education and see
Education
Museum 341, 350, 351
promotion of 333-42
publications 339, 340
Social Science Research Council 334,
337-8
See also Research and Universities
Scientific:
and industrial instruments industry 208
co-operation:
between industry and universities 333, 334,
335,336,338,339
government and industry 333, 334, 335, 341,
342
with overseas countries 341, 342
counsellors 341
Film Association, British Industrial and
349
museums 341, 350
Parliamentary and, Committee 334
research see Research
Scientists:
number employed 333, 338
training of 333, 334, 335, 336, 337-8
Scotland (see also subject headings):
administration 6, 12, 53
aerodromes and airways 279, 280, 282
Scotland—contd.
area 17-18
Arts Council 34, 350
botanic gardens 341
broadcasting councils and committees 363,
364
Church of see Churches
Common Services Agency 122
economic planning 53, 192, 193
Edinburgh International Festival 13, 344
education 14, 53, 137, 139, I4°, I4I, H2,
143, 144, 145, 146, 149
energy 53, 230, 242, 243, 245, 246
Government departments 52, 53
Agriculture and Fisheries 53, 257, 260, 262,
334,337
Central Services 53
Development 12, 53, 162, 251
Economic Planning 53, 152
Education 52, 53, 137, 143, 35C 352
Home and Health 14, 53, 118
Law Officers 52
Lord Advocate’s 46, 53
Record Office 54, 354
Registers of Scotland 54
historic background 2
holidays, statutory 379
housing, action areas 157
industry 12, 53, 192, 193-6, 204, 218
language 13
local government 12, 52, 58, 60, 61, 62, 63
Lord Provost 59
Ministers of State for 52
museums and art galleries 53, 351, 352
music and opera 13, 346, 347
National:
Library of Si, 354
Trust for 161, 162
poets 13
population 12, 21
press 356, 358, 360
river purification boards 166
Royal Observatory 335, 336
Secretary of State 52, 53, 98, 106, 114, 116,
117, 137, 151,152, 154, 159, 161, 163, 250,
263, 343, 369
unemployment 192, 290
water supply 250, 251
Scotland Yard, New 97
Scottish:
Academy of Music and Drama, Royal
346, 347
Agricultural Securities Corporation 253
Amateur Music Association 347
Arts Council 13, 344, 349
Business Education Council 145
Central Institutions 142
Chamber of Commerce 185
Community Drama Association 346
Council:
Development and Industry 329
of Social Service 134
Courts Administration 54, 102, in, 112
Crafts Consultative Committee 352
Crime Squad 99
414
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Scottish—contd.
Daily Newspaper Society 360
Development Agency 52, 62, 192, 193, 352
Development Department 53, 58, 151,
154, 162, 166
Film Council 349
Gallery of Modern Art 351
Grand Committee (parliamentary) 42
Land Court III, 258
Law Commission 54, 116
Newspaper Proprietors Association 360
Office 53, 162, 192
Opera Company 13, 347
orchestras 346
Special Housing Association (SSHA) 155
Sports Council 163, 369, 371
Standing Conference of Sport 369
Tourist Board 13, 193, 229
Transport Group 269
Universities 143, 354
Youth Theatre 346
Scouts 135, 149
Sealink UK Ltd 277
Seamen:
conditions of employment 278
number of qualifications 278
Safety and Welfare 278
training 278
Sea:
Fish Industry Authority 261
safety at 278
transport 274, 275, 276, 277, 278
Seas 18
Seaspeed 277
Selby 240
Service trades 183, 186, 228—31
Severn Bridge 11
Severn river 247
Sewerage and sewage disposal 50, 166,
205,250, 251
Sex Discrimination 27, 51, no, 293, 299
Sheffield 21, 143, 169, 274, 351
Sheriffs and Sheriff Courts 102, 104,
108, in, 112
Shetland Islands 18, 58, 258, 274, 275,
277
Shipbuilders, British 175, 189, 211, 212
Shipbuilding and marine engineering
8, 13, 183, 211-2
Shipowners 276
Shipping 265, 274, 276-8
and Seamen, Registrar-General 278
cargo services 276
coastal 274, 275
conferences 276
container facilities and services 8, 265, 275,
276, 277
dry bulk carrier vessels 276, 277
employers’ and employees’ organisations
276, 277
employment of 278
exports 211
General Council of, British 276
liners, passenger and cargo 276, 277
merchant fleet, composition 276
Shipping—contd.
Navy see Royal Navy
on inland waterways 274
ore terminals 275
organisations 276, 277
ownership 276
passenger services 277
ports 8, 274-5
radar surveillance 278
radio communications 278
relations with Government 277-8
safety 278
tankers and terminals 265, 276, 277
tonnage 276, 277
traffic control and zones 278
tramps 276
shopping centres 225
Shops:
cash and carry, wholesale 226
co-operative societies 223, 226
department stores 223-4
hypermarkets and superstores 224-5
independent 226
multiple stores 223, 224, 225
number of 224, 225, 229
sales promotion 225, 226
self-service 224
supermarkets 24, 224, 225
Shropshire 351
Sickness benefit 129-30, 294, 295
Sikhs 173
Silsoe 337
Silverware 204
Silviculture see Forestry
Skillcentres (SCs) 291, 292
Slieve Donard 14
Small Firms Information Centres
193
Smallholdings see Agriculture
Smithfield Market 226
Smoke control 167-9
Snowdon 10
Snowdonia 10, 11
Soap production 213
Soccer see Football
Social:
attitudes 23-6
life 18-29
Science Research Council (SSRC) 146,
295, 337-8
research units 338
Security 9, 51, 127-34, 177, 295
benefits 127-34
contributions 128
Department of Health and Social Security see
Health
expenditure ok 117
reciprocal agreements with other countries 123
Services 117, 124
Services 124-7, 128, 129-33, 177, 303
personal 51, 60, 117, 124—7
Secretary of State for 117, 127
voluntary organisations 127, 134-5
Training in 127
welfare 9, 117-35
INDEX
415
Social—contd.
Work, Central Council for Education and
Training in 127
workers 120, 127, 134-5
See also Health Service, National and
National Insurance
Soft drinks industry 21 5-6
Soil 252, 337
Solar Energy 247, 339
Solicitor:
General 100, 114
for Scotland 46, 53, 54, too, 114
Solicitors 114, 115, 116
Somerset 245, 350
Southampton 143, 235, 246, 274, 275,
35i
South of Scotland Electricity Board see
Electricity
Sovereign see Monarchy
Space Activities 284, 342
European:
programme 342
National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA) 342
Science and Engineering Research Council
342
Space Agency (ESA) 212, 284, 342
See also Research
Speaker:
House of Commons 36, 39, 43, 44
House of Lords 35, 39
Special constables 98
Spectacles 119
Opticians 119, 123
Speed limits 267
Speedlink Trains 273
Sport 9, 369-77
facilities for 13, 371-2
government responsibility 369
National Playing Fields Association 370
organisation and promotion 369-70
private sponsorship 370—1
voluntary organisations 369, 370
Sports:
Aid Foundation 370
Association for the Disabled, British 370
British Paraplegic Society 370, 372
centres, national 371-2
Councils 163, 369-70, 372, 373, 375
equipment industry 220
popular 372—6
United Kingdom Association for People
with Mental Handicap 370
See also Recreation
Springfield 246
Staff colleges (armed forces) 91
Stafford and Staffordshire 219, 242
Stag hunting 374
Stamp trading 225
Standards Institution, British 188
Standing Committees see Parliament,
committees
Stanhope Bretby 242
Stanlow 235
Stansted (airport) 282
Stationery Office, Her Majesty’s
(HMSO) 49, 52
Statistical Office, Central (CSO) 48
publications 52
Statutory Instruments 42, 305
Steel:
Community, European Coal and (ECSC)
68, 73, 196
Corporation, British (BSC) 184, 189, 202,
205
Producers’ Association British Independent
202
Steelwork plant industry 204-6
Sterling 176, 177, 182, 201, 313, 314, 316,
327,330, 332
exchange rates 176, 179, 332
Stevenage 251
Stirling University 143
Stock Exchange 63, 311, 320-1
Stockton 270
Stoke Mandeville:
Hospital 370, 372
Sports Stadium for the Paralysed and
Disabled 370, 372
Stoke Orchard 242
Stonehenge 1, 9
Stornaway 13
Stanraer 274, 341
Stratford-upon-Avon 9, 245
Strathclyde 12, 13, 245, 258
University (Glasgow) 143
Strikes see Industrial disputes
Students 142—3, 145, 146-7
from overseas 67, 85, 147-8, 335, 339
See also Education and Universities
Submarines 91, 92, 234, 235, 284
Sugar 256
beet 256
Sullom Voe (oil terminal) 221, 275, 276
Sumburgh 278, 282
Sunbury-on-Thames 238
Sunshine 18
Supreme Court of Judicature in
Northern Ireland 111
Surgical instruments 208
Surrey 143
Surtax see Taxation
Sussex 6, 143, 351
Swansea 10, 159, 274, 357
Swimming 371, 376
Synthetic:
fibres 213,217
rubber 213, 220
T 
Tables statistics (in chapter order):
Land and People
General Statistics 4
Size and Population of some of the Main
Urban Districts, April 1981 21
Government
Percentages of Votes Cast and Members
Elected in the May 1979 General Election 38
416
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Tables—contd.
Overseas Relations
Official Development Assistance to
Development Countries igyy—80 84
Justice and the Law
Serious Offences Recorded by the Police per
100,000 Population (England and Wales)
1980 96
Social Welfare
Benefit Rates 129
Sickness, Unemployment and Industrial
Benefit Rates 130
Supplementary Benefits 132
Family Income Supplement 132
War Pensions 133
National Economy
Gross Domestic Product by Industry 178
Framework of Industry
Largest Industrial Organisations 184
Industrial Output and Employment 186
Gross Domestic Fixed Capital Formation in
Major sectors 1976-80 (i975 prices) 186
Manufacturing and Service Industries
Manufacturing: Size Distribution of
Establishments 200
Retail Trades in Great Britain 1979 224
Energy and Natural Resources
Inland Energy Consumption (in terms of
primary sources) 231
Oil Statistics 235
Coal Statistics 240
Generation by and Capacity of Public Supply
Power Stations 245
Production of Some of the Main Non-fuel
Minerals 249
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food
British Production as a Percentage of Total
Supplies 253
Livestock and Livestock Products 254
Main Crops 255
Transport and Communications
Road Mileage 266
Railway Statistics 271
Traffic Through the Principal Ports of Great
Britain 275
Employment
Manpower in Britain 1971—80 287
Analysis of Civil Employment in Britain
1971-80 288
Public Finance
Taxation and Miscellaneous Receipts
1980-81 and 1981-82308
Overseas Trade and Payments
Exports and Imports 1970—80 324
Commodity Composition of Trade 1980 324
Principal British Markets and Suppliers 1980
326
Britain’s Invisible Trade 1980 327
Britain’s Balance of Payments 1970—80 330
Analysis of Investment and Other Capital
Transactions 1978-80 331
The Press
National Newspapers 357
Tachograph 269
Tankers and terminals see Shipping
Tape recorders industry 208
Tariff policy 262, 327-8
Tate Gallery 350, 352
Taxation 25, 40, 51, 174, 176, 179, 303,
306-7, 307-n
betting and gaming duties 308, 310
capital gains tax 307, 308, 310
capital transfer tax 307, 308, 309-10
car tax 308, 311
corporation tax 306, 307, 308, 309
customs and excise duties 49, 307, 308,
3ii
development land tax 308, 310
estate duty 308
expenditure, taxes on 307, 310—2
income tax 177, 306, 307“9
relief and exemptions 308-9
National Insurance Surcharge 307, 308,
3ii
PAYE 308
Petroleum revenue tax 308, 309
protective and revenue duties 307, 308,
310-1
stamp duties 307, 308, 311
surtax 308
value added tax (VAT) 307, 308, 310
vehicle excise duty 308, 310
Taxicabs 270
Tayside 243
Teachers and Teaching see Education
Technical:
assistance 85, 333, 334, 335. 34°
assistance programmes, British 341, 342
British Volunteer Programme 86
education see Education
Technological advance 186-7
Technology see Education, Research,
Science, Universities and relevant
industries
Teesside 6, 21, 274, 275
Telecommunications:
British 283-5
Data processing services 283
Datel services 284
developments 285
earth stations 284
equipment industry 16, 204, 208
Exchanges 283
finance 283
maritime communications 278, 284
Martlesham Heath (Research Centre) 285
microelectronics 283
optical fibres 187, 285, 302
overseas services 283-4
packet switching service 284
‘Prestel’ 208, 284
radiopaging services 285
research 285
satellites 211, 284, 342
submarine cables 207, 284
system ‘X’ 283
telegrams 285
Telegram Transmission Centre 285
telegraphs 285, 361
telephones 208, 283, 285
INDEX
417
T elecommunications—contd.
telephones—contd.
specialised services 283
Teletext 208, 284
Telex 208
Viewdata service 284
Telegraph and telephone equipment
industry 208
Telescopes, optical and radio 335, 336
Television and Radio 363-8
see also Broadcasting Independent
Television and Licences
Temperature 18
Tennis see Lawn
Territorial and Army Volunteer
Reserve (T & AYR) 91
Textile industries 13, 16, 174, 175, 216
machinery industry 16, 205
Thames:
barrier 223
river and valley 6, 21, 255
Theatre Association, British 346, 354
Theatre 343, 344, 345, 346
amateur 346
for young people 346
National Theatre 345
Shakespeare Companies, Royal 345
See also Drama
Thermometrical Tables 378
Thomson Foundation 360
Thomson Television College 368
Timber industry 8, 263-4
Tin industry 8, 249
Tinplate industry 8
Tobacco:
industry 16, 184, 186, 214, 216
revenue duty 308, 311
Toilet preparations industry 213
Tools industries:
exhibition 205
hand 206
machine 205
small (engineers) 206
Topography 51
Totalisators 377
Tourism 9, 11, 13
Tourist:
Association of British Travel Agents 229
Authority, British 193
boards 193, 229
trade 52, 193, 229
Town Development Schemes 158-60
Toy industry 220
Tractors 209,252
Trade 71, 174, 175, 179
associations 184-5, 35°
commercial policy 327-30
controls on 328-9
Department of and Secretary of State for
49, 52, 66, 167, 177, 197, 198, 199, 230,
261, 319, 329,350,356
Marks Registry 199
overseas 71, 179, 200, 201, 204, 205, 206,
208, 209, 210, 211, 212, 213, 215, 220, 222,
233, 322-32
Trade—contd.
overseas—contd.
area distribution 325-6
balance of payments 174, 175, 179, 330-2
Board, British 329
commodity composition 322, 323, 324
exports 174, 175, 177, 204, 205, 215, 220,
222, 231, 235, 322, 324, 328, 329
financing of 330—2
Government assistance to 327-8, 329-30
imports 174, 322, 324, 328-9
international 174, 175, 179
invisible transactions 174, 175, 179, 322,
326-7, 330
markets 325-6, 327-8
pattern of 322, 325-6
statistics 323, 324, 327
tariffs 327, 328
value and volume of 322, 324
restriction and controls 197—9
Fair Trading 197-8
retail 223-5
wholesale 225-6
Cash and Carry Warehouses 226
Trades Union Congress 296-7, 301
Scottish 297
Trades unions 184, 185, 295-6, 297
affiliations 296, 297
Certification Officer 295, 298
Civil Service 299
educational facilities 296
European, Confederation 297
International Confederation of Free Trade
Unions 296
press 360
Trading Director-General of Fair 197,
198
Traffic:
air 279-80
Commissioners 270
congestion 266, 268
control 266, 267, 268
inland waterways 265, 274
in towns 267, 268, 273
London 266, 268
Northern Ireland 267, 269
ports 275
rail and road 265, 266, 267, 268, 269, 270,
27T 273
research and development 267, 269, 275
sea 265, 275, 276, 277
wardens 98
Training:
for industry 136, 144, 145, 185, 187-8, 192,
291, 292
boards 263, 291, 301
Instructor, Training:
Colleges 291, 292
Units 291, 292
Opportunities Schemes (TOPS) 291
Transport 6, 24, 52, 54, 60, 178, 183, 186,
265-82
air 8, 265, 279-82
and Road Research Laboratory (TRRL)
85,267
418
BRITAIN 1982: AN OFFICIAL FIANDBOOK
T ransport—contd.
bus and coach 269
National Bus Company 269
Department of and Secretary of State for
52, 177, 266, 267, 268, 271,334
Docks Board, British 274
Executives 269, 271
for school children 141
Helicopters 278, 280
Holding Company (Northern Ireland)
269, 270
Hotels Ltd, British 273
hovercraft 273, 277
Hoverport 274
inland 265—274
London 211, 266, 268, 270, 271, 280, 282
nationalised 265, 266, 268, 269, 270, 271,
273, 274
National freight Company (NFC) 189,
269
Northern Ireland 54, 269, 270
passenger services 269—70 271
planning 151
policy 265-6, 277-8
rail 8, 52, 270-3
research 267
road 8, 52, 265-70
haulage 268-9
safety measures 267-8, 280-1
tachograph 269
sea 274-8
services, public 265, 268, 269, 270, 271,
273,274,277,280
subsidies and grants 271, 273, 274, 275,
279
taxis 270
traffic in towns 268
See also Civil Aviation and Shipping
Travel see Tourist trade
Treason 104
Treasury 46, 49, 50, 52, 305, 306, 312, 314
bills 311, 312, 314, 316
Chancellor of the Exchequer 35, 45, 46, 47,
5C 306
Chief Secretary to the 46
Counsel 100
Solicitor’s Department 46, 49, 52
Treatment of Offenders 104-7
Trawsfyndydd 11
Treaty of:
Accession 68
Rome 68
Trees 161-2, 163
Tribunals 49, 112-3
Council on 113
Trinity House, Corporation of 278
Trooping the Colour 33
Tropical:
Medicine Research Board 336
Products Institute 85
Trust companies 318-9
Trustee Savings Banks 313, 315
Tunnels see Bridges and
Tyne and Wear 21, 166, 269
Tyneside and Tyne ports 6, 204, 270
u 
Ullapool 13
Ulster:
Architectural Heritage Society 161
Constabulary, Royal (RUC) 97
Countryside Commission 163
Defence Regiment 91
Drama Festivals, Association 17, 346
museums and art galleries 17, 351
New University (Coleraine) 143, 354
Orchestra 346
Polytechnic 137, 142, 144, 145
Sheltered Employment Ltd 290
See also Northern Ireland
Ulsterbus Ltd 269
Underground railways 270
Unemployment 4, 192, 288-9
benefit (insurance) 127, 131, 177
Unicorn Theatre for Young People
346
United Kingdom:
area 4, 18
citizenship 22-3
constitution 30
general statistics 4
historical outline 1-3
physical features 17-18
population 4
See also subject headings
United Nations:
agencies:
Committee on Disarmament 78
Committee on Human Rights 80
Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD) 86, 87, 327
contributions fo 85
Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organisation (UNESCO) 81, 341, 355
Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO)
80
Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative
Organisation (IMCO) 167
International Labour Organisation 80
International Atomic Energy Agency 78,
341
International Telecommunication Union
(ITU) 368
World Health Organisation (WHO) 80
arms control and disarmament 78-9
Britain and the 66, 79“81
budget 80
economic and social affairs 80—1
Forces 80
General Assembly 81
relations with 71, 90, 341
Security Council 66, 80
support for 79
Helsinki conference 71, 77
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
80
voluntary funds 81
United Press International 360, 362
United:
Reformed Church 171, 172
INDEX
419
United—contd.
States:
educational and research co-operation 342
exchange rates 179
nuclear disarmament with 78-9
trade with 204, 211, 215, 220, 236
World College 148
Unit Trusts 317, 318-9
Universities 9, 11, 136, 137, 143, 144,
145, 146, 147, 148, 149, 187, 260, 334, 346,
35C 352, 353, 354
agricultural degree courses 260
degrees, diplomas and certificates 9, 141,
142, 143, 144, 145, 260, 263-4
extra-mural courses 145
finance 136, 142-3
forestry courses 263-4
halls of residence 143
museums and libraries 351, 353, 354
physical education at 371
Privy Council committees for 45
research 96, 335, 336, 338
scholarships and research fellowships 141,
142, 143, 148, 334, 338
Special Commonwealth Awards 147
sport 371
staff 143
students 143-4, I45> I47. 148
technological education 144, 145, 334, 335
University:
colleges 136, 142, 143, 144
Grants Committee 142, 334, 338
interchange schemes 146—7, 341—2
Open 9, 106, 142, 143, 146
Unmarried mothers 125
Urban:
aid programme 158-9
planning 151—9
population 21
transport 265, 269, 270, 274
V 
Vaccination 124, 215, 254, 259
Vaccines 254
Valuation for rating 62-3
Value added tax see Taxation
Valves, industrial 205
Vegetables:
crops 255,256
processing 215, 256
Vegetation 252, 337
Vehicle:
industries 184, 205, 209
licensing 267, 269, 311
safety 52
Vending machines, automatic 206
Ventilation equipment 206
Veterinary:
Laboratory, Central 260
medical products 259
Product Committee 259 1
service and research 259, ^00, 337
state service 259
V eterinar y—contd.
surgeons 259
Victoria and Albert Museum 350, 35i,
352
Victorian Society 161
Viewdata service 225
Viking (gasfield) 238
Virological laboratories 124
Visnews 368
Visual arts 350
Vocational guidance and training 107,
109, 136, 145, 291
Voluntary:
agencies 85, 86
organisations 107, 117, 125, 127, 134-5,
150, 161, 369
childcare 117, 125, 127, I34_5
clubs 371
education 137, 138, 140, 142, 148, 149, 170
preservation societies 161
prisoners’ aid 107
welfare 117, 120, 124, 125, I34_5
youth services 149, 150
Service
International 85
Overseas 85
Unit 134
Volunteer Programme, British 85
Voting:
in House of Commons 39
in House of Lords 39
in local government elections 59
in parliamentary elections 36, 37, 38
w
Wages:
Councils 293, 300
Inspectorate 300
and salaries 4, 177, 179, 294
equal pay 2, 293, 299
negotiations 292, 293, 298—9
statutory regulations 297—8, 299—300
Wales:
administration 6, 10, 52
agriculture 11, 252, 253, 254, 257
area 10, 17-8
Atlantic College 148
broadcasting councils and committees 363,
364
Church see Churches
Countryside Commission 163
cultural and social life 11
development:
Board for Rural 155, 158, 193
Corporation 329
economy 10
employment 4
environment planning 1.51, 154
government 10
historical background 1-2
industry 10-11, 192, 193-6, 204, 206, 235,
242
local government 58, 59, 60, 61
420
AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
BRITAIN 1982:
Wales—contd.
National:
Library 11, 52, 354
Museum 0/11, 52, 351
Sports Centre for 371
Youth Orchestra 343
population 4, 10, 21, 24
ports 274
press 356—7
Prince of 2, 10, 33
Royal National Eisteddfod 344
Secretary of State for 151, 154, 159, 161,
164, 250, 263, 266, 343, 369, 370,371
Sports:
Association for the Disabled 370
Council for 52, 369
Trust 371
Tourist Board 52, 193
Trades Union Council 297
University of 143
See also subject headings
Wallingford 251
War Museum, Imperial 350
War pensioners 127, 132-3
Warrington 335
Warsaw Pact 77, 88, 89
Warwick and Warwickshire 143
Waste:
radioactive 169, 246
reclamation and recycling 166, 246
Water:
authorities 250
companies, statutory 251
conservation 250, 251
consumption 250, 251
Council, National 250
Development Board, Central Scotland 251
pollution 50, 124, 162, 165, 167, 250, 251
rate 250
recreation 162, 369, 371, 374
regional, authorities 250, 369
Research 251
Centre 251
Laboratory 251
sources of 230, 250, 251
supply 50, 54, 60, 124, 178, 251
Waterways Board, British 274, 369
Weald and Downland Museum 351
Wealth, distribution of 25-6, I77~9
Weapons see Defence
Weather 18
forecast services 283
Weedkillers 213
Weed Research Organisation 337
Weights and Measures 378
Welfare:
blind, deaf and disabled 117, 119, 125, 129,
130-1, 134, 135
centres 120, 125
children 107-9, 121, 124, 125-6, 134, 135
Youth treatment centres 108
elderly 117, 120, 124, 125, 134, 135
ethnic minorities 28
family 119, 125, 127, 132
industrial 300—2
Welfare—contd.
mentally ill 117, 120, 125
mothers 128-9, J34
prisoners and probationers 105, 106, 107
Social 117-35
See also National Insurance and Health
Welsh:
Amateur Music Federation 347
Arts Council 344, 347, 349, 352
College of Music and Drama 346
Development Agency 61—2, 192, 193
Film Board 348
Folk Museum 351
Fourth Channel Authority 365
Grand Committee 42
language 10, 11, 140, 358
National Opera Company 11, 347
Office 10, 11, 52, 58, 151, 154, 162, 167,
192, 193
Water Authority 250
Wembley:
Conference Centre 227
Stadium 369, 372, 376
Western Isles 58, 60
Westminster Abbey 31
Whisky industry 13, 215
Whitley Councils, National 57
Whole House, Committee 42
Wholesale trade 227-8
Widows’ benefits and pensions 129,
130,133
Wigmore Hall 346
Winds 18
Windsor 344
Winfrith 245, 246
Wires and cables (insulated) industry
207
Women:
in armed Forces 90
employment 26-7, 222, 287, 293, 294
equal:
Opportunities Commission 27
opportunities 27
pay for 26-7, 293
rights 27, 293
periodicals for 358
proportion in population 20—1, 287
sex discrimination 27, 293, 298
Women’s:
Institutes, National Federation of 146
Royal Voluntary Service 135
Woodlands 161-2, 163, 263
Woodbridge (Suffolk) 283
Wool 8, 13, 254, 257
industry 8-13, 217
Marketing Board, British 257
Sec also Knitwear and Textile industries
Worcester 344
Work:
health and safety at 258, 300—2
hours of 4, 294
See also Employment
Workers:
immigrant 28, 292—3
manual 293-4
INDEX
421
W orker s—contd.
professional, managerial and clerical 185,
187-8, 290-1, 294
Workers’ Educational Association
(WE A) 145-6
Works councils and committees 298
World:
Bank 85
Council of Churches 173
Data Centres (for space research) 284
Health Organisation (WHO) 80
United, Colleges 148
Wrexham 11, 357
Writers 9, 11
Wylfa 11, 245
Y
Yarmouth, Great 276
York 143, 344, 351
Province of 170
Yorkshire 6, 21, 204, 245, 353, 375
Young Men’s Christian Association
National Council of (YMCA) 135, 146
Young offenders 102, 107-9
Young Women’s Christian
Association (YWCA) 135
Youth:
and Music 348
careers service 291
centres and clubs 149
National Association of Youth Clubs 149
Hostels Associations 149
Opportunities Programme 289
orchestras 348
organisations:
voluntary 134-5, 09
services 148—50
National Council for Voluntary (NCVYS)
149
Theatre, National 346
Treatment Centres 108
workers 150
z
Zoological Society 340
library 340
research 340
Zoos and safari parks 340
Printed in England for Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
by Balding + Mansell
Dd 716712 Pro 15923 C175 12/81
ISBN on 701024 3
l—a—iiir      mi D'HHHIWWI
