I
BRITAIN 1995
AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
1 9 4 5 - 1 9 9 5: 5 0 YEARS OF CHANGE
A SPECIAL FOREWORD BY
JOHN HUMPHRYS
■ _
Edinburgh
Glasgow
(S) eed
Liverpoi
Nottingham
Leicester
lirmingh,
.Greater London
Orkney
Islands
Population density
and major urban areas
Population density
(persons per sq km)
over 1500
750-1500
450-749
250-449
150-249
75-149
under 75
Major urban areas
over 1,000,000
population
500,000 - 999,000
population
275,000 - 499,000
population
(1992 estimates)
Shetland
Islands
Newcastle upon Tyne
• Sunderland
ield
The density of population is shown by county
for England and Wales and by region for Scotland.
Urban areas are defined as continuous
built-up sites; they include transport
and mining and quarrying areas and
any sites completely surrounded
by built-up sites. Most of the
named urban areas are
designated by the
largest town
within them.
0
20 40 60 miles
I
r
I
BRITAIN
19 9 5
AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Prepared by the Central Office of Information
London: HMSO
© Crown Copyright 1994
Applications for reproduction should be made to HMSO
First published 1994
ISBN 0 11 701859 7
MV
SCOT*.
Contents
Page
Foreword v\
Britain: 50 Years of Change vii
Britain and its People \
1 Introduction 3
2 England 7
3 Northern Ireland \ j
4 Scotland \~j
5 Wales 22
6 The Social Framework 26
Government and Administration 41
7 Government 43
8 Justice and the Law 79
External Affairs 107
9 Overseas Relations 109
10 Defence 132
Economic Affairs I43
11 Economy I45
12 Overseas Trade I54
13 Employment I75
14 Industry and Government 192
15 Finance and Other Service Industries 210
16 Manufacturing and Construction Industries 230
17 Energy and Natural Resources 247
18 Agriculture, the Fishing Industry and Forestry 268
19 Transport and Communications 285
20 Science and Technology 397
The Environment 325
21 Housing and Regeneration 327
22 Planning and Conservation 342
23 Control of Pollution 355
Social and Cultural Affairs 357
24 Health and Social Services 359
25 Social Security 393
26 Education 499
27 Religion 433
28 The Arts 44Q
29 The Media 4^1
30 Sport and Active Recreation 434
Appendices and Index 505
Government Departments and Agencies 507
Britain’s Economy: Statistical Annex 515
Recent Legislation 517
The Citizen’s Charter Initiative 518
Obituaries 520
Principal Abbreviations 521
Index 522
List of Illustrations
Diagrams
UK Consumption of Fuels for Energy Use 1960 and 1993 viii
Employment by Sector 1948 and 1994 x
Personal Disposable Income and Consumers’ Expenditure 1948-92 xii
Changes in Average Household Food Consumption 1982-92 33
Availability of Durable Goods 55
The Royal Family Tree 45
Planned Receipts and Expenditure of General Government 1994-95 157
Geographical Distribution of Trade 1993 166
Land Use in Britain 269
Agricultural Land Use 1993 269
Public Expenditure under the CAP 275
Type of Accommodation Occupied 528
Broadleaved Tree Planting, 1970-71 to 1991—92 551
Emissions of Sulphur Dioxide and Nitrogen Oxides 563
Health Service Expenditure in England 571
Social Security Expenditure: Great Britain 1993-94 400
Maps
Physical Features |
Population Density l endtatiers
Main Railway Passenger Routes
Motorways and Major Trunk Roads J
Maior Conservation and Recreation Areas t between pp. 290 and 291
Agricultural Land Use 1
Britain 4
The European Union
The Commonwealth 115
The Assisted Areas 199
Oil 252
Gas 255
Electricity 258
Minerals 264
Photographs
Natural History
Multi-cultural Britain
Industrial Heritage
Environmental Design
Rural Development
Computer Technology
Overseas Trade
Channel Tunnel
World War II Remembered
Astronomy
Archaeology
Housing
Education
Medicine
Religion
Food and Drink
Women in Sport
Royal Heritage
Film and Animation
Visual Arts
between pp. 66 and 67
between pp. 130 and 131
between pp. 194 and 195
between pp. 290 and 291
between pp. 322 and 323
between pp. 386 and 387
between pp. 450 and 451
Acknowledgments for the use of photographs appear on p. 530.
Foreword
Britain 1995 is the 46th in the series of
Handbooks prepared by the Central Office of
Information (COI). Drawing on a wide range
of official and other authoritative sources, it
provides a factual overview of Government
policy and developments in Britain.
Handbook is widely recognised as an
established work of reference, not only in
Britain but overseas, where it is an important
element of the information service provided
by British diplomatic posts. It is sold by
HMSO and its agents throughout the world.
New Features
The text has, of course, been fully updated
and revised. There are more pages, more
charts, tables and graphs, and more colour
pictures.
In addition, for the first time in
Handbook's history, we have asked a well-
known commentator on British affairs—the
BBC radio journalist John Humphrys—to
write an introduction giving his impressions
on how Britain has changed in the fifty years
since World War II. We hope this will be the
first of several such ‘guest’ contributions.
Coverage
Every effort is made to ensure that the
information given in Handbook is accurate at
the time of going to press. The text,
generally, is based on information available
up to September 1994.
As far as possible, Handbook presents
information that applies to Britain as a whole.
However, this is not always possible. Care
should be taken when using Handbook to
note whether the information given refers to:
• Britain, formally the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland;
• Great Britain, which comprises England,
Wales and Scotland;
• England and Wales, which are grouped
together for many administrative and
other purposes; or, in some instances,
• England alone.
Aspects of Britain
COI also produces the Aspects of Britain series
of paperbacks, which cover in depth Britain’s
political, economic and social structure, and
its place in the international community.
Appropriate titles are given in the list of
further reading at the end of most chapters.
For further information please write to COI
Reference Services or phone 0171 261 8310.
Acknowledgments
Britain 1995 has been compiled with the co¬
operation of around 250 organisations,
including other government departments and
agencies. The editor would like to thank all
those who have contributed their comments.
Readers’ Comments
We welcome readers’ comments and
suggestions on Handbook. These should be
sent to:
The Editor
Britain: An Official Handbook
Reference Services
Central Office of Information
Hercules Road
London SEI 7DU
Britain: 50 Years of Change
by John Humphrys
I am writing what follows on an ICL personal computer. When I have finished and the spell¬
checker has automatically corrected my many typing mistakes I shall use the external modem to
E-mail my copy to another computer many miles away.
If that strikes you as an odd way to begin an introduction to this, the fiftieth anniversary
edition of the official Handbook,'1 consider what it would have meant to a reader of the first
Handbook: nothing it would have been utter nonsense. Personal computers did not exist and
neither did any of the other amazing gadgets that are making my life as a journalist so much easier.
I he history of the last fifty years coincides almost exactly with the history of the computer.
Never (to misquote the man who still occupied 10 Downing Street when Handbook's ancestor
was first published) has so much been owed by so many to something so insignificant: the
tiny microchip.
Did I say ‘owed’? True, journalists like me have been liberated from the tyranny of the
correcting fluid. But what of the typist who used to make a living retyping my messy
manuscript or the postman who delivered my completed document, or even the manufacturer
of the envelope in which I sent it? The microchip means less work for all of them.
The sliver of silicon, with its unfathomable tattoo of soldered metal that gives my computer
its brain power, has had a greater influence on this country in the past fifty years than all the
massive steam hammers and roaring furnaces of the previous fifty. The silicon chip has proved
to be the ultimate weapon of the technological revolution, just as the musket or the Gatling gun -
was of earlier revolutions. It is an infinitely more powerful force than the sans-culottes in
18th-century France or the Bolsheviks in 20th-century Russia. Its influence has been
all-pervasive: on industry and transport, commerce and culture. It is hard to think of a single
aspect of our national life that has not been affected in one way or another by this technology.
From Coal to Gas
When Handbook was first published, almost half the population of Great Britain worked in the
manufacturing industries. In the tip-scarred valleys of South Wales and the great coalfields of
Nottinghamshire the winding gear of the deep mines turned endlessly, 24 hours a day, seven
days a week, producing coal to warm homes or fuel steel mills and factories.
Now the only collieries left in the Rhondda are museums. Miners, with coal dust still in
their lungs, but none under their fingernails, sell tickets to tourists and serve the heritage
industry instead of the smokestack industries. In the whole of Britain today only 17 deep mines
survive, compared with 850 nearly fifty years ago.
Coal was, quite simply, no longer king. Technology had stolen its throne. First, nuclear
power stations began to feed electricity into the national grid. (Predictions that nuclear
technology would meet all our energy needs proved wide of the mark, but it does supply a
fifth.) Then the engineers and scientists turned to the computer to help them discover and
evaluate vast reservoirs of oil and natural gas under the North Sea.
Although the title Britain Handbook was not used until the 1949-50 edition, COI Reference Services produced books entitled Post-War
Britain in 1946 and 1948. The first handbook, entitled Post-War Reconstruction in Britain January 194/-November 1944 and produced bv
COI’s predecessor, the Ministry of Information, was issued in 1945.
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The effect of North Sea development on the British economy was profound: billions of
pounds pumped into the national coffers in precious foreign earnings, and vast amounts
saved on the national fuel bill. Many a Chancellor of the Exchequer must have offered a
silent prayer of thanks to those great platforms in the North Sea as he studied the figures
for the balance of payments. But if we sold most of the oil, we kept most of the gas, and
that too affected our way of life. For generations, prosperity has marched hand in hand with
pollution. No one living in a big British city for the past fifty years could have escaped the
terrible smog produced by a million coal fires. Technology changed all that, with central
heating in virtually every home and gas the most popular fuel no more pea-soupers.
UK Consumption of Fuels for Energy Use (million tonnes oil equivalent)
%of
total
consumption
Source: Digest of United Kingdom Energy Statistics 1994
But we were rapidly developing a different kind of pollution, and for that too we had
technology to thank. When the war ended only the wealthy and the aspiring middle classes
had motor cars. In 1952 there were just over 2 million cars on Britain’s roads. By 1980 there
were 14.6 million. Now there are more than 20 million. Fifty years ago Britain had no
motorways. When the first short stretch of the Ml opened north of Watford in 1963, we
drove miles to see it and wonder at it—oh, days of innocence! How we yearn for those
relatively car-free days now as we sit on that same stretch of motorway on a Friday evening,
heading north out of London at the speed of an arthritic snail.
Fifty years ago the car was associated with freedom: now Britain, like most other
industrialised nations, has begun to question the great car economy and is wondering where
it will all end. It has proved to be one of the enduring conundrums of the past fifty years:
more and better roads have meant more and bigger traffic jams. And now we have a
different, a more insidious, form of pollution that happens not on the dark days of winter
when coal fires blaze, but on the hot days of July and August, when the sun reacts with car
exhaust fumes. Technology saved us from one form of pollution. Towards the end of the
decade we were asking whether it could save us—with catalytic converters and the like—
from another.
2 The popular name given to thick fogs that were common in British cities until the Clean Air Acts of 1956 and 1968.
viii
BRITAIN: 50 YEARS OF CHANGE
Fifty years ago factory chimneys spewed their waste into the skies above Britain. Today
there are fewer chimneys—and fewer factories. The very same microchip which revolutionised
British industry created new industries in countries on the other side of the world. They ceased
to be our customers and became our competitors. Many ‘Third World’ countries became
‘developing countries’ and then ‘newly industrialised nations’. Exploiting the latest technology
and lower labour costs in brand new factories, the Pacific Rim countries produced steel at a far
more competitive price than could an established mill in Scotland. From the yards of South
Korea came the great ships whose keels were once laid on the Tyne or the Clyde. The decline
of the British motor cycle industry, which once built the fastest and finest machines in the
world, became a metaphor for British industry, driven to extinction by the Japanese, the
venerable BSA giving way to the Kawasaki.
So it was with cars. The cars that now clog our roads no longer bear proudly the names of
British manufacturers: Austin of England, Morris Oxford, Hillman Minx. One after another
they fell victim to international competition and either disappeared altogether or were
swallowed whole. The last great British mass manufacturer, Rover Group, was sold to the
German company BMW in 1994.
The effect of all this on unemployment was dramatic. During the 1950s about a third of a
million people were out of work. By the end of the 1960s the figure had passed half a million;
it peaked at just over 3 million in 1986.
Tourism and Toyotas
Yet it was not all gloom on the jobs front; new service and high technology manufacturing
industries were beginning to replace the old smokestack industries. Britain was changing its role
in the world, from that of a country which made things and sold them abroad, to one which
offered more and more services. The financial sector was a prime example. The City of
London, already an established financial centre, grew rapidly and contributed vast amounts to
the national balance sheet. By the 1980s tourism had become the second biggest industry in
Britain. Only five countries in the world earned more from tourism than Britain—imagine what
we’d have done if the sun shone regularly! In 1950 service industries provided about half our
gross domestic product; by 1993 that had increased to more than two-thirds. The
manufacturing industries had produced more than a third; by 1993 it was less than a quarter.
But the technology which had worked against us could also work in our favour. The
Japanese companies who had proved such stern competitors for our indigenous electronic and
motor manufacturing industries were now beginning to assemble or build television sets and
cars in Europe. Many of them came to Britain, bringing their technology with them, and
discovering a workforce that was more than willing and able to exploit it. From the mining valleys
of South Wales to the industrial wastelands of north-east England, the Japanese had arrived.
Crucial to this new relationship between worker and boss was the transformation in labour
relations wrought during the years when Margaret Thatcher, Britain’s first woman prime
minister, dominated the political scene like no leader since Winston Churchill more than half a
century earlier. New employment laws played their part in persuading workers and unions to
adapt to more flexible working practices, but increasing unemployment and the demands of the
new industries were at least as important.
In 1979 the unions were at the peak of their power—trade union membership stood at
13.3 million and in that year 29.5 million days were lost in strikes. Striking was universally
known as the ‘British disease’.
Now membership of trade unions has fallen to around 9 million (it is still falling) and the
mumber of days lost to industrial action to below 700,000 a year, among the lowest in Europe.
The old mistrust between the TUC and a Conservative government had given way to a
working relationship that even allowed for a Conservative employment minister to address the
TUC on its home turf.
ix
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Once again, technology had played a key role. The pattern of employment which existed in
the 1940s and 1950s had changed beyond recognition fifty years later. During the war millions
of women had left hearth and home, cast aside their patterned pinafores, donned overalls and
worked to keep the wheels of industry turning. Instead of producing scones, they produced
shells. Instead of waiting for their menfolk to hand over their weekly housekeeping allowance
on Friday evenings, they were earning their own money. They were independent for the first
time in their lives, and many of them liked it that way. When the men came home and the
women were once again consigned to the kitchen, many rebelled, and they were to keep
rebelling for the next fifty years. At the start of the 1950s, there were fewer than 7 million
women working in Britain. By the 1990s there were more than 11 million.
For the unions, women were far more difficult to recruit and to organise than their
husbands. Most of them were in part-time work. Many were perfectly happy to accept wages
lower than the traditional going rate for the job because their income supplemented their
husbands’. It wasn’t vital to keep body and soul together, but it helped pay for a new washing
machine or a fortnight in Spain or an evening out. They were, in today’s jargon, ‘flexible’.
Employment by Sector 1948 and 1994
1948 1994
Sources: Britain 1949-50, Department of Employment statistics
The labour market was changing in other ways too. In the 1950s, ’60s and ’70s most men—
certainly skilled manual workers and white collar workers—believed they had a right to a job
for life. They might not expect to stay with the same company from school or university to
retirement, but neither did they expect to move around very much.
The classic example was banking. Get a job with a bank, and your problems were over. You
might—just possibly—move to another bank, but only if you were terribly ambitious and weren’t
being promoted quickly enough. You certainly didn’t expect to be sacked, not unless you’d run
off with the day’s takings. The young lad leaving school clutching his School Certificate who was
lucky enough to become a junior clerk in his local Barclays or Lloyds could reasonably expect to
be an assistant manager or better when the time came for his retirement party 45 years later.
By the mid-1990s that same lad would have much more trouble landing the job in the first
place (his local bank branch might well have been closed down) and if he did, he could expect to
have many more retirement parties. From 1990 to 1994 the big High Street banks had, between
them, reduced their workforce by a staggering 100,000. The concept of a job for life had ceased
to exist.
BRITAIN: 50 YEARS OF CHANGE
Chips with Everything
Once again, technology was the driving force behind the change. You had only to compare a
bank clerk in the 1950s with his Victorian counterpart to understand why. True, he’d have had
a Parker fountain pen instead of the quill employed by Bob Cratchit, ’ but much, if not most, of
his time was spent patiently adding up columns of figures and transferring them to thick,
leather-bound ledgers—not really so different from Cratchit. Fifty years later, the young clerk
needed to be barely more numerate than a rubber band and could almost manage without a
pen. The computer did it for him. The computer also composed and calculated our statements,
and if we wanted to go even further into the red made it so much easier by thrusting money at
us through a hole in the wall. Then it calculated the interest we now owed and sent out the
warning letters. Who needed bank clerks?
And so it was in building societies, insurance companies, social security offices and even the
great departments of state. A curious thing happened to us, the customers, during all this. We
had begun this new age thinking we loved computers. What fun, a calculator that did more
than add up and multiply! You could play games with it and the children could learn so much
so quickly. Then we might receive a bank statement informing us that we owed the bank a sum
approximating to the National Debt, and a bill from the electricity board telling us that we had
used enough electricity in our suburban semi during the past quarter to light the city of
Birmingham for a year, and we began to have second thoughts.
In much the same way as we had discussed the weather—or food rationing after the war—
we talked about how good life had been BC: Before the Computer. After a really bad
experience we would blame all our ills on the blasted computer. Managers complained too.
They had been promised miracles by computer salesmen. ‘Install this very latest mainframe,’
they were told, ‘and your problems will be over.’ Just like cowboys buying magical potions
from snake-oil salesmen in the Wild West, they should have read the label rather more
carefully. They thought they’d instantly be able to produce twice as much with half the
workforce and discovered they couldn’t. They needed whole new departments to handle what
they’d begun to call ‘information technology’.
But that period of transition was relatively short. Now we all take the computer for granted,
even though some parents may curse the inventor of the games of which their children have
become so fond. Oddly enough, we are prepared to stand in the rain outside banks queueing at
the hole in the wall rather than wait in the dry to be served by a real human being. By and
large the bills are accurate and if the statement says you owe more than you thought, you
probably do. And managers could start reducing the workforce. The recession at the end of the
1980s, after a period of unprecedented growth, encouraged them to lose their awe of their
IT departments.
That recession brought in its train another fundamental change to the pattern of
employment in Britain. It was made possible because of the growing realisation that the real
power of computers lay not only in their ability to make billions of calculations a second, but in
their ability to store and deliver unimaginable amounts of information at the touch of a key.
What computerised robots were beginning to do to the man on the assembly line and the
bank clerk, the massive data banks and the terminals which delivered instant access to their
contents were poised to do to their managers. Analysts had already begun to recognise that the
old rule of recession (when it’s over all the jobs will return) could no longer be taken for
granted. And the recession had affected jobs very differently than in earlier slumps: the middle
class—middle managers—were among the victims too, not just in Britain but in most other
industrialised nations. Information technology, deregulation and a much more competitive,
ruthless approach by senior management took a scythe to their ranks. In 1993 the Sunday Times
commissioned an opinion poll which discovered that more than a third of the middle-class men
3 Bob Cratchit was the downtrodden clerk in Charles Dickens’s A Christmas Carol.
XI
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
questioned were worried about losing their jobs over the next 12 months. One in five middle-
class families had had recent experience of unemployment.
But who exactly were the ‘middle class’ and what was happening to the whole class structure
of our society? At the end of the war, it was pretty straightforward. There was a tiny upper
class, a larger middle class and a huge working class. That was how the pollsters (a new breed
of expert) saw it, and that was largely how we saw ourselves. A generation later, the ranks of the
middle classes had swollen and accounted for a third of the nation. Today almost half of us are
categorised as middle class and very, very few of us call ourselves working class or upper class.
Every social historian has his own theory to explain this phenomenon, but you need to be
neither a sociologist nor a pollster to spot some of the causes: in particular, increasing
prosperity and a massive growth in higher education have led to more and more people
challenging the class system in all its manifestations and refusing to accept the status quo.
Personal Disposable Income and Consumers’ Expenditure 1948-92
(at 1990 prices)
£’000
Source: Central Statistical Office
Again, technology and the revolution in communications have played their part. Rich or
poor, duke or dustman, we all watch television, probably the greatest leveller any society has
ever created. So let us step back 50 years—before every home had one—and spend a Saturday
evening with a middle class family who would have considered themselves quintessential
middle class.
The Good Old Days?
Mr and Mrs Green and their three children are sitting in front of the coal fire in their largeish
suburban home, Mr Green sucking on a pipe, Mrs Green puffing rather more delicately on a
cigarette. The smallest of their children has just finished listening to Children’s Hour on their
enormous wireless set with its glowing glass valves. Mrs Green is worrying about whether to let
Elizabeth go to the dance at the Town Hall. Well, she is only just eighteen and the dance goes
on until midnight. Perhaps it will be all right if Father promises to pick her up promptly after
the last waltz. She wonders, idly, if she herself might ever learn to drive. Probably not. Well,
women don’t, do they? And anyway, where could she possibly find the time, what with the
bridge club and the church and Father does get so cross if she’s not at home when he returns
from the office.
xii
BRITAIN: 50 YEARS OF CHANGE
Life is so much more difficult since the maid left to go and work in the local biscuit factory.
Mrs Green can’t imagine why she’s done it. Surely it is so much more pleasant to work as a
maid in a nice middle-class family than in that noisy factory with all those rather vulgar women.
Mr Green ponders on young Charles, their elder son; he’s just done well in the Matric and
might yet make it to university. It would be expensive, but no real problem. After all, he has a
good pension to look forward to and Elizabeth’s bringing in a few pounds a week. Pays for her
keep. Just as well he’d knocked on the head that nonsense of her going to university. Waste of a
good education. She’ll only go off and get married and who needs a degree for that!
A typical middle class family? Well, perhaps not. More a case of bundling several caricatures
together, but it does illustrate how much things have changed in a relatively short time.
Elizabeth would surely not allow her parents to force her to give up her dream of university
because she’s a mere girl. In post-war Britain only a handful of students were women. Today
more than half of them are and employers discriminate at their peril.
The modern Mrs Green wouldn’t even dream about a maid. She might have a daily help, a
nanny or an au pair, but she might equally allow her dishwasher and washing machine to take the
strain—she might even be at work herself! By 1990 nine homes out of ten had a washing machine.
Nor, in all likelihood, would she expect an eighteen year-old daughter to trot home at a
specified time on Saturday night. She would have lived through 1960s Britain and the so-called
sexual revolution, and she wouldn’t be at all surprised to discover that Elizabeth was on the
pill. Nor would she be surprised by the number of single mothers, the tolerance of
homosexuality or many other aspects of modern society that would have appalled the Mrs
Green of the 1940s.
Would she still be going to church? Probably not. Church membership has declined steadily
from the end of the war. If she did, however, she might well expect guitars and a woman
priest. The Church of England is not what it was in 1950.
She would certainly drive, if only to take the youngsters to school. In the past 25 years the
numbers of seven- and eight-year-olds going to school on their own has fallen from 80 per cent
to 9 per cent. Parents’ fear of traffic is one reason, but some may also fear something more
sinister. The Green children would have played in the street or in the woods nearby without
their parents giving a thought to it. Mrs Green would have walked home from church on a
Sunday night through the dark streets of her suburb by herself with scarcely a backward glance.
Today she would be more likely to keep the doors locked in her car and activate the burglar
alarm after she’d got home.
Crime in Britain—burglaries and violent crime particularly—increased steadily throughout
the latter half of the century, just as it did in the United States and every other western
European country. And, as with so many other countries, a growing amount of crime is linked
with drugs. If Mrs Green had talked about drugs she’d have meant aspirins.
Europe and Beyond
Fifty years ago Mr Green’s attitude towards Europe might well have been ‘We don’t need you;
we can look after ourselves. We won the war, after all.’ The odds are that by the mid-80s his
company would have been involved in business all over Europe.
Britain first shunned membership of the Common Market, then tried and failed to become a
member and finally succeeded. By the start of the 1990s the Greens might even have described
themselves as ‘Europeans’. They would almost certainly have stopped taking their holidays in
Bournemouth or Bognor and joined the rest of Britain in Spain or France or Italy. By the end
of the 1980s the old joke headline ‘Fog in Channel: Continent isolated’ had lost its point. We are
all Europeans now even if we still resolutely refuse to speak any language other than our own.
Britain has been at peace for most of the past fifty years. There have been exceptions—the
Suez Crisis, which finally put paid to Britain’s notion of herself as one of the ‘great powers’,
the victory in the f alklands and the Gulf War—but they have been relatively brief episodes and
xiii
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the general population has been largely uninvolved. The battle against the IRA has been
different. British troops were sent to Northern Ireland in 1969 to defend the Catholic minority
against the Protestant majority, and ended up as targets of the IRA. In the years that followed
scarcely a man, women or child has been unaffected by the activities of that tiny group of
terrorists. Some have had loved ones maimed or killed by indiscriminate bombs or bullets, all
of us have had our lives altered to some extent by the security precautions which have flowed
from the bombings, even if only by a tube train cancelled on the London Underground because
of a bomb warning.
Mr Green would have been astonished at the extent to which Britain has become a multi¬
racial society. From 1955 to 1962 about half a million Commonwealth citizens settled in Bntain.
Many of them were followed by their dependants. In the early 1960s some feared that terrible
social conflict would follow mass immigration. Today there are just over 3 million people of
ethnic minority origin in Britain. There has been some racial tension there still is but
popular fears were never realised.
Mr Green would, doubtless, find much else to criticise if he were still with us. He would
certainly not have approved of our growing intolerance of the habit which finally killed him off:
smoking. What would he make of those sad little groups who huddle outside office buildings,
condemned to indulge their nicotine habit outside their ‘smoke-free environment’? As a staunch
disciplinarian he might deplore the fact that headmasters no longer beat their pupils as he was
beaten at school—and that the birch and the hangman’s rope have become museum pieces.
He would approve of the fact that Britain is still a nation of inventors, even if not every
invention is as successful as the computer and the hovercraft, nor every design as enduring as
the mini—the car and the skirt. He would disapprove of the welfare state on the basis that it
encouraged layabouts to expect something for nothing, and he would have rejoiced in saying ‘I
told you so !’ as politicians struggle to grapple with a growing social security budget. But even
he would be forced to admit that people are vastly better off than they were in his day.
When the social scientists seek to define poverty today they do so in terms of whether a
child has to share a bedroom or regularly has a holiday away from home, not whether he goes
to bed on an empty stomach or has a decent pair of shoes. The definition is always being
adjusted—upwards.
The National Health Service was still in its embryonic state when Mr Green was puffing on
his pipe in front of his fire. It, too, is now under enormous pressures, and for much the same
reason as the welfare state: growing demands on finite resources. We spend three times as
much in real terms today as we did in Mr Green’s day, and still there are enormous problems.
But if you are going to be ill and you do not have a huge bank balance, then Britain is still the
place to be.
Mr Green would proudly assert traditional values and insist that all the old traditions are
being eroded. He would be wrong. The monarchy may have lost some of its mystique and mass
appeal—television and a succession of unsuccessful marriages saw to that—but it endures and
the majority want it to continue. Parliament still goes its eccentric way but, though politicians in
opposition may argue for change, the unwritten constitution is still the envy of many a less
confident democracy which has safeguards written into every clause and sub-paragraph.
Mr and Mrs Green had few doubts about their place in society or Britain’s place in the
world. They were, if anything, rather smug and self-satisfied. They would probably not be at
ease in the Britain of fifty years later. Modern Britain is more questioning, less sure of itself. It
is an infinitely more liberal society, infinitely more tolerant. People are less respectful of
authority, less polite to their neighbours. But there is one characteristic the Greens would
certainly have shared with the generations who succeeded them. They would have complained.
A great deal. All the time. Greens past and present would almost certainly have agreed on this
at least: Britain is the worst country in the world to live in—except, of course, for all the others.
xiv
Britain and
its People
\
1
Introduction
Britain comprises Great Britain (England,
Wales and Scotland) and Northern Ireland,
and is one of the member states of the
European Union (EU). Its full name is the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
Physical Features
Britain constitutes the greater part of the
British Isles. The largest of the islands is
Great Britain. The next largest comprises
Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic.
Western Scotland is fringed by the large
island chain known as the Hebrides and to
the north east of the Scottish mainland are
the Orkney and Shetland Islands. All these
have administrative ties with the mainland,
but the Isle of Man in the Irish Sea and the
Channel Islands between Great Britain and
France are largely self-governing, and are not
part of the United Kingdom.
With an area of about 242,000 sq km
(93,000 sq miles), Britain is just under
1,000 km (about 600 miles) from the south
coast to the extreme north of Scotland and
just under 500 km (around 300 miles) across
in the widest part.
The climate is generally mild and
temperate. Prevailing winds are south¬
westerly and the weather from day to day is
mainly influenced by depressions moving
eastwards across the Atlantic. The weather
is subject to frequent changes. In general,
there are few extremes of temperature,
which rarely rises above 32°C (90°F) or falls
below -10°C (14°F).
Average annual rainfall is more than 1,600
mm (over 60 inches) in the mountainous
areas of the west and north but less than 800
mm (30 inches) over central and eastern
parts. Rain is fairly well distributed
throughout the year, but, on average, March
to June are the driest months and September
to January the wettest. During May, June
and July (the months of longest daylight) the
mean daily duration of sunshine varies from
five hours in northern Scotland to eight
hours in the Isle of Wight; during the
months of shortest daylight (November,
December and January) sunshine is at a
minimum, with an average of an hour a day
in northern Scotland and two hours a day on
the south coast of England.
Weather Records in Britain
• Highest air temperature: 37.1°C
(98.8°F) at Cheltenham
(Gloucestershire), 3 August 1990
• Lowest air temperature: -27°C
(_17°F) at Braemar (Grampian), 11
February 1895 and 10 January 1982
• Highest annual rainfall: 6,527 mm
(257 inches) at Sprinkling Tarn
(Cumbria) in 1954
• Lowest annual rainfall: 236 mm
(9 inches) at Margate (Kent) in
1921
• Highest rainfall in a day: 280 mm
(11 inches) at Martinstown
(Dorset), 18 July 1955
• Strongest gust of wind:
278 km/h (173 mph), at Cairngorm
(Highland), 20 March 1986
Source: Meteorological Office.
Historical Outline
The name ‘Britain’ derives from Greek and
Latin names probably stemming from a Celtic
original. Although in the prehistoric timescale
the Celts were relatively late arrivals in the
British Isles, only with them does Britain
emerge into recorded history. The term
‘Celtic’ is often used rather generally to
distinguish the early inhabitants of the British
Isles from the later Anglo-Saxon invaders.
3
Britain
Isles of Scill
Note: The structure of local government is being reviewed,
which may alter certain of the county boundaries.
INTRODUCTION
After two expeditions by Julius Caesar in 55
and 54 BC, contact between Britain and the
Roman world grew, culminating in the Roman
invasion of AD 43. Roman rule was gradually
extended from south-east England to include
Wales and, for a time, the lowlands of
Scotland. The final Roman withdrawal in 409
followed a period of increasing disorder during
which the island began to be raided by Angles,
Saxons and Jutes from northern Europe. It is
from the Angles that the name ‘England’
derives. The raids turned into settlement and a
number of small English kingdoms were
established. The Britons maintained an
independent existence in the areas now known
as Wales and Cornwall. Among these kingdoms
more powerful ones emerged, claiming
overlordship over the whole country, first in
the north (Northumbria), then in the midlands
(Mercia) and finally in the south (Wessex).
However, further raids and settlement by the
Vikings from Scandinavia occurred, although in
the 10th century the Wessex dynasty defeated
the invading Danes and established a wide-
ranging authority in England.
Dates of some of the main events in
Britain’s history are given on p. 6. The early
histories of England, Wales, Scotland and
Northern Ireland are included in Chapters 2 to
5, which also deal with the main aspects
of their social, economic and political life.
Additional material is included on the political
situation in Northern Ireland. Table 1.1 gives a
selection of some of the main statistics for each
of the four lands.
Channel Islands and Isle of Man
Although the Channel Islands and the Isle of
Man are not part of the United Kingdom,
they have a special relationship with it. The
Channel Islands were part of the Duchy of
Normandy in the 10th and 11th centuries and
remained subject to the English Crown after
the loss of Normandy to the French. The Isle
of Man was under the nominal sovereignty of
Norway until 1266, and eventually came under
the direct administration of the British Crown
in 1765. Today the territories have their own
legislative assemblies and systems of law. The
British Government is responsible for their
international relations and external defence.
Table 1.1: General Statistics
Northern United
England Wales Scotland Ireland Kingdom
Population (mid-1992) (’000) 48,378 2,899 5,111 1,610 57,998
Area (sq km)a 130,423 20,766 77,080 13,483 241,752
Population density
(persons per sq km) 371 140 66 119 240
Gross domestic product
(£ per head, 1992) 8,908 7,545 8,616 7,185 8,766
Employees in employment
(’000, June 1993) 18,068 958 1,984 544 21,554
Percentage of employees
(June 1993) in:
services 73.2 70.1 72.2 73.0 73.0
manufacturing 20.5 21.9 18.3 18.2 20.3
construction 3.7 4.1 5.4 4.0 3.9
energy and water supply 1.5 2.0 2.7 1.3 1.6
agriculture, forestry and fishing 1.2 1.9 1.4 3.5 1.3
Unemployment rate
(per cent, seasonally
adjusted, June 1994) 9A T6 92 13.2 9.4
Sources: Regional Trends, Office of Population Censuses and Surveys, Department of Employment
"Figures for area are not on a strictly comparable basis; those for England and Wales include inland water, while those for
Scotland and Northern Ireland are for the land area only.
5
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Significant Dates
55 and 54 BC: Julius Caesar’s expeditions
to Britain
AD 43: Roman conquest begins under
Claudius
122-38: Hadrian’s Wall built
c409: Roman army withdraws from Britain
450s onwards: foundation of the Anglo-
Saxon kingdoms
597: arrival of St Augustine to preach
Christianity to the Anglo-Saxons
664: Synod of Whitby opts for Roman
Catholic rather than Celtic church
789-95: first Viking raids
832-60: Scots and Piets merge under
Kenneth Macalpin to form what is to
become the kingdom of Scotia
860s: Danes overrun East Anglia,
Northumbria and eastern Mercia
871-99: reign of Alfred the Great in
Wessex
1066: William the Conqueror defeats
Harold Godwinson at Hastings and takes
the throne
1215: King John signs Magna Carta to
protect feudal rights against royal abuse
1301: Edward of Caernarvon (later
Edward II) created Prince of Wales
1314: battle of Bannockburn ensures
survival of separate Scottish kingdom
1337: Hundred Years War between
England and France begins
1348^19: Black Death (bubonic plague)
wipes out a third of England’s population
1381: Peasants’ Revolt in England
1455-87: Wars of the Roses between
Yorkists and Lancastrians
1477: first book to be printed in England,
by William Caxton
1534-40: English Reformation; Henry VIII
breaks with the Papacy
1536-42: Acts of Union integrate England
and Wales administratively and legally and
give Wales representation in Parliament
1547-53: Protestantism becomes official
religion in England under Edward VI
1553-58: Catholic reaction under Mary I
1558: loss of Calais, last English possession
in France
1558-1603: reign of Elizabeth I; moderate
Protestantism established
1588: defeat of Spanish Armada
cl590-cl613: plays of Shakespeare written
1603: union of the two crowns under
James VI of Scotland
1642-51: Civil Wars between King and
Parliament
1649: execution of Charles I
1653-58: Oliver Cromwell rules as
Lord Protector
1660: monarchy restored under Charles II
1688: Glorious Revolution; accession of
William and Mary
1707: Act of Union unites England and
Scotland
cl760s-c 1830s: Industrial Revolution
1761: opening of the Bridgewater Canal
ushers in Canal Age
1775-83: American War of Independence
leads to loss of the Thirteen Colonies
1793-1815: Revolutionary and Napoleonic
Wars
1801: Act of Union unites Great Britain
and Ireland
1825: opening of the Stockton and
Darlington Railway, the world’s first
passenger railway
1829: Catholic emancipation
1832: First Reform Act extends the
franchise
1914-18: First World War
1921: Anglo-Irish Treaty establishes the
Irish Free State; Northern Ireland remains
part of the United Kingdom
1939-45: Second World War
1952: accession of Elizabeth II
1973: Britain enters European Community
(now the European Union)
6
2
England
Early History
Government
The Economy
7 Transport 9
7 Cultural and Social Affairs 10
9
England is predominantly a lowland country, although there are upland
regions in the north (the Pennine Chain, the Cumbrian mountains and the
Yorkshire moorlands) and in the south west, in Cornwall, Devon and
Somerset. The greatest concentrations of population (see Table 2.1) are in
London and the South East, the West Yorkshire and north-west industrial
cities, the Midlands conurbation around Birmingham, the north-east
conurbations on the rivers Tyne and Tees, and along the Channel coast.
Early History
In 1066 the last successful invasion of
England took place. Duke William of
Normandy defeated the English at the Battle
of Hastings. Normans and others from
France came to settle. French became the
language of the nobility for the next three
centuries and the legal and social structures
were influenced by those prevailing across
the Channel.
With the final loss of the English Crown’s
possessions in France during the late Middle
Ages, and the union of England and
Scotland in 1707, England’s position as the
most populous part of the British nation state
was established.
Government
England has no government minister or
department exclusively responsible for its
central administration, in contrast to Wales,
Scotland and Northern Ireland. Instead, there
are a number of government departments,
whose responsibilities in some cases also
cover aspects of affairs in Wales and Scotland
(see Appendices).
There are currently 524 English
parliamentary constituencies represented in
the House of Commons. The provisional
recommendations of the current boundary
review (see p. 51) would increase this to 529
after the next general election. In September
1994 England had 316 Conservative Members
of Parliament, 194 Labour, 13 Liberal
Democrat and the Speaker of the House of
Commons. Conservative support tends to be
strongest in suburban and rural areas, and the
Conservatives have a large majority of the
parliamentary seats in the southern half of
England and in East Anglia. The Labour
Party derives its main support from urban
industrialised areas. Liberal Democrat
support in England is particularly strong in
the South West, where the party holds seven
of its 13 English seats.
Local government is mainly administered
through a two-tier system of counties
(see map, p. 4) subdivided into districts.
However, there are some single-tier
authorities. The Local Government
Commission is reviewing the structure of
local government in England (see p. 75).
The English legal system comprises on the
7
rn eg
rg
ce eo
CZ5 I'-
3
Ox
O
Ox
re re O' —|- O' 1 e, [ ^ t^x
ce^o-NegceGOce'—i
C^loc^’— i e i e O
rg
ON
ON
rs °-
r* oj
•e Oh
tn
d
«
Q
C
O
d
a
o
Oh
TS
c
rt
d
o
d
a
o
o-
rg
3
c3
H
Oh
oo eg lo on
•^- eg no re eg
O et- r^- eg lo oo
ce re l/-) lo o> re no
[ '—i .—i eg eg ^-h
ON OO ON O
.—i OO -rj- re
re eg on
NO re ON
— O NO ON
et- O -I-
o o o o o
o o o o o
oc oo on c^-
00>C3CO>00><0!0>
oocooo>oo>o
® re O’ eg i e^ on_ 0_^
ac re- on' re e)- re
vo i ^ i—. —e no 3“ i 'x oo
t^ONet-ONOie el-re
® ® ® ® o CO
O CO O O SO <3)
oo on no no^
on' eh' erf re' re re
OO ON ■—I «e ON re
eg no ej- ® eh no
U
o o o
O O CO
ef ON ON
^e OO O O
eg eh
on i e eh -I-
S t
~ <v
O X X
e3
3
tn
O c^i
o
&
3
o
C/3
33
3
^ 5
o
£
33
C
h
-Q 13 -C
.3 _ i3 33 ^
»d 33 "3 J£ ^hS
^ tx -3 33 o
i*e o ^ *-x -3
w NS O. ^
.>3 r2
o
u
Q Q O
r^3 oj b c^s a>
^ ^ K cn c/^ ^ ^
■J-1 ^ CTJ O ^
o ^ ^ g «
Z u O j S
oo eg o -—i no
O re re no CO
eg on eg >-e
ie eg oo re
eg ie oo re re
re eg oo O
»—i eg r— eg so no
nO NO re O re t^x
eg re re ■—^ eg -3-
re eg
u-> re o eh o eg
NO -h NO re eh eh
O O O O O O
e | O' O I ~' 1^ l ^-
re on o O re
re eh nO re ■—i
o o o o o
o o o o o
e-1 eh^ oo^ eg^ no^
-h eh ■—I NO >—I
r—i oo eg o o
O oo re ^e
o o o o o o
o o o o o o
ON ON^ re^ eh^ <ON^ eh^
eg*' o" o" *—e' x-T oo''
oo i e .—i co Ch eg
O ION ON NO re O
re eg re no
ON OO NO eh
o no no
O CO O <C3 O _
O O CO O O <03
et- —h i ^ eg^ re
on' on' re" *—*' eg"
no re no re eg no
[— t e no t ^ re
33 _
S •- E
^ c
■£ "s -e Jc
O i 3
Z U U Q
5 03
'B ^
JC ^
i S
Le nl r*"*
3= -C
H
^ co
73
33
d
-2 <u
"3 .is
3 «
w Q
. <u
<3
E
H-l 'h-! Z
bt) be
C 33
^ £
7) E
«i r«i
w u
<£
S-H
Z cn
3
xO
be
3
E 3
S C/3
c/3 ec m m w w
Source: Office of Population Censuses and Surveys
ENGLAND
one hand a historic body of conventions
known as ‘common law’ and ‘equity’, and,
on the other, parliamentary and European
Community (EC) legislation. In the
formulation of common law since the Norman
Conquest, great reliance has been placed on
precedent. Equity law derives from the
practice of petitioning the King’s Chancellor
in cases not covered by common law.
The Church of England, which was
separated from the Roman Catholic Church
at the time of the Reformation, is the
Established Church; the Sovereign must
always be a member of the Church and
appoints its two archbishops and 42 other
diocesan bishops.
The Economy
Considerable changes in the economy of
England have occurred during the 20th
century. In the second half of the century,
jobs in service industries have grown and now
account for nearly three-quarters of
employees in employment, with expansion
having been particularly noticeable in
financial and business services. Services
account for over three-quarters of gross
domestic product (GDP) in London and the
South East, and over 20 per cent of
employees in Greater London work in
financial services. London is one of the
world’s leading centres of banking, insurance
and other financial services.
Manufacturing, although declining as a
proportion of the employment base, remains
important in a number of areas. In terms of
GDP, it is most significant in the West
Midlands (where manufacturing accounted
for 30 per cent of the region’s GDP in 1992)
and the North. The region with the highest
proportion of employment in manufacturing
is the West Midlands again, followed by the
East Midlands, Yorkshire and Humberside
and the North.
East Anglia has been the fastest-growing
English region in terms of both population
and employment since the 1960s, although in
the recession of the early 1990s the
unemployment rate rose faster here than in
most other regions. Once largely agricultural,
high-technology industry has in recent years
developed in the region.
In agriculture, dairying is most common in
the west of England; sheep and cattle are
reared in the hilly and moorland areas of the
North and South West. Arable farming, pig
and poultry farming and horticulture are
concentrated in the east and south.
Tourism and leisure now form one of
England’s biggest industries, worth some
£16,600 million in 1992 and contributing
4 per cent of gross national product. Tourism
and leisure also provide many jobs.
Transport
The motorway network comprises four
long-distance routes linking London and the
cities of the Midlands, the North and North
Table 2.2: Percentage Change in Population, Employment and Housing Stock
Population
1981-92
Employment"
1981-93
Dwelling
stock
1981-92
North
Yorkshire and Humberside
East Midlands
East Anglia
South East
South West
West Midlands
North West
England
-0.6
1.7
5.4
10.3
4.1
8.3
1.7
-0.9
3.3
-0.9
2.5
5.4
20.3
-0.2
11.8
0.6
-2.9
2.0
6.6
7.6
11.9
16.6
12.4
15.7
8.3
5.7
10.6
Source: Regional Trends
‘'Employees in employment plus self-employed.
9
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
West, and the South West; the London orbital
route (M25); and over 30 shorter motorways.
In all, there are about 2,700 km (1,700 miles)
of motorway in England, plus about 7,900 km
(4,900 miles) of other trunk roads.
On the railways a major development was
the official opening in May 1994 of the
Channel Tunnel, which links Britain with the
European rail system.
Table 2.3: Attendances at English
Tourist Attractions, 1993
millions
Blackpool Pleasure Beach F 6.7*
British Museum F 5.8
National Gallery F 3.9
Palace Pier, Brighton F 3.5*
Alton Towers P 2.6
Westminster Abbey F 2.5*
Madame Tussaud’s P 2.4
Pleasure Beach,
Great Yarmouth F 2.4*
Tower of London P 2.3
York Minster F 2.2*
Canterbury Cathedral F 2.2*
Pleasureland, Southport F 2.0*
St Paul’s Cathedral P 1.9
Tate Gallery F 1.8
Natural History Museum P 1.7
Source: British Tourist Authority
F Free admission
P Paid-for admission
* Estimated visitor numbers
Cultural and Social Affairs
London has a wealth of cultural centres,
including four major art galleries and
many renowned museums, together with
theatres, ballet and opera houses and
concert halls. Other major cities and
towns also have a broad range of cultural
interests. Many theatres outside London
are used for touring by the national
theatre, dance and opera companies.
Numerous regions and towns have
associations with great English writers and
artists, such as William Shakespeare
(Stratford-upon-Avon), William Wordsworth
(Lake District), Arnold Bennett (Stoke-on-
Trent), the Bronte sisters (Yorkshire),
Thomas Hardy (Dorset) and John Constable
(Essex and Suffolk).
Despite the relatively high population
density and degree of urbanisation, there
are still many unspoilt rural and coastal
areas There are seven National Parks, six
forest parks, 36 designated ‘areas of
outstanding natural beauty’, 22
environmentally sensitive areas, almost
200 country parks approved by the
Countryside Commission, 800 km (500 miles)
of designated heritage coastline, and about
2,000 historic buildings and some
3,600 gardens open to the public. There are
also safari, wildlife and theme parks, all
offering family activities and entertainment.
Further Reading
Regional Trends, annual report. HMSO.
10
3
Northern Ireland
Geography 11
History 11
Government 12
Human Rights 14
Security Policy 15
The Economy 15
Cultural and Social Affairs 16
About half of the 1.5 million people in Northern Ireland are settled on the
eastern coastal region, the centre of which is Belfast, with a population of
some 287,100. Most industry is situated in this eastern part of the province.
According to the 1991 Census 50.6 per cent of the people regarded
themselves as Protestants and 38.4 per cent Roman Catholics. Most of the
Protestants are descendants of Scots or English settlers who crossed to north¬
eastern Ireland; they are British by culture and tradition and committed to
maintaining the constitutional link with the British Crown. The Roman
Catholic population is mainly Irish by culture and history, and the majority
of them favour a united Ireland.
Geography
Northern Ireland is at its nearest point only
21 km (13 miles) from Scotland. It has a 488-
km (303-mile) border in the south and west
with the Irish Republic. At its centre lies
Lough Neagh, Britains largest freshwater lake
(381 sq km, 147 sq miles). Many of the
principal towns lie in valleys leading from the
Lough, including the capital, Belfast, which
stands at the mouth of the river Lagan. The
Mourne Mountains, rising sharply in the
south-east, include Slieve Donard, Northern
Ireland’s highest peak (852 m, 2,796 ft).
History
During the tenth century Ireland was
dominated by the Vikings. In 1169 Henry II
of England launched an invasion of Ireland.
He had been granted its overlordship by the
English Pope Adrian IV, who was anxious to
bring the Irish church into full obedience to
Rome. Although a large part of the country
came under the control of Anglo-Norman
magnates, little direct authority was exercised
from England during the Middle Ages.
The Tudor monarchs showed a much
greater tendency to intervene in Ireland.
During the reign of Elizabeth I, a series of
campaigns was waged against Irish
insurgents. The main focus of resistance was
the northern province of Ulster. With the
collapse of this resistance and the flight of its
leaders in 1607, Ulster was settled by
immigrants from Scotland and England.
The English civil wars (1642-51) led to
further risings in Ireland and these were
crushed by Cromwell. There was more
fighting after the overthrow of James II, a
Roman Catholic, in 1688. During this, the
Protestant forces besieged in Derry were
rescued by those of William of Orange, who
became the British king.
Throughout most of the 18th century
there was an uneasy peace. In 1782 the Irish
11
1 ■
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Parliament (dating from medieval times) was
given legislative independence; the only
constitutional tie with Great Britain was the
Crown. The Parliament only represented the
privileged Anglo-Irish minority and Catholics
were excluded from it. An abortive rebellion
led by Wolfe Tone’s United Irishmen
movement took place in 1798, and in 1801
Ireland was unified with Great Britain. As a
result of this Union, Ireland was represented
in the British Parliament in London.
The Irish question was one of the major
issues of British politics during the 19th
century and after. In 1886 the Liberal
Government introduced a Home Rule Bill
designed to give an Irish Parliament
authority over most internal matters while
reserving control over external affairs to
Britain. This led to a split in the Liberal
Party and the failure of the Bill. In 1893 a
second Home Rule Bill was approved by the
House of Commons but was rejected by the
House of Lords.
The question returned to the political
agenda in 1910 because Asquith’s Liberal
Government was dependent on support from
the Irish Parliamentary Party, which favoured
Home Rule. The controversy intensified as
Unionists and Nationalists formed private
armies in Ireland. In 1914 Home Rule was
enacted by the Government of Ireland Act.
However, implementation was prevented by
the threat of armed resistance on the part of
the Protestant Unionist majority in Ulster
and by the outbreak of the First World War.
A nationalist rising in Dublin in 1916 was
suppressed and its leaders executed. Two
years later the nationalist Sinn Fein party
won a large majority of the Irish seats in
elections to the Westminster Parliament. Its
members refused to attend the House of
Commons and, instead, formed the Dail
Eireann in Dublin. A nationalist guerrilla
force known as the Irish Republican Army
(IRA) began operations against the British
administration in 1919.
The Government of Ireland Act 1920
provided for the establishment of two Home
Rule parliaments, one in Dublin and the
other in Belfast. The Act was implemented in
1921 in Northern Ireland, when six of the
nine counties of the province of Ulster
received their own Parliament and remained
represented in, and subject to the supreme
authority of, the British Parliament.
In the South the IRA continued to fight
for independence from the British
administration. After the signature of a truce
in June 1921, the Anglo-Irish Treaty of
December 1921 established the Irish Free
State, which became a republic in 1949.
For 50 years from 1921 Northern Ireland
had its own devolved Parliament, in which
the mainly Protestant Unionists consistently
formed the majority and therefore constituted
the Government after successive elections.
Nationalists resented this domination and
their effective exclusion from political office.
An active and articulate civil rights
movement emerged during the late 1960s.
Although reforms were made in response (see
p. 14), sectarian disturbances developed and
this required the introduction of British
Army troops in 1969 to support the police in
keeping order. Subsequently, sectarian
divisions were exploited by the actions of
terrorists from both sides, but most notably
by the Provisional Irish Republican Army,
who claimed to be protecting the Roman
Catholic minority.
Despite the reform programme, the inter-
communal violence continued, leading to a
decision by the British Government to take
over responsibility for law and order in 1972.
The Northern Ireland Government resigned
in protest against this decision and direct rule
from London began.
Government
Under the system of direct rule, the United
Kingdom Parliament approves all laws and
Northern Ireland’s government departments
are directed and controlled by the Secretary of
State, who is a Cabinet minister (see p. 66).
Northern Ireland elects 17 members to
the House of Commons. In the most
recent general election in April 1992 the
Ulster Unionists won 9 seats, the Democratic
Unionists 3, the Ulster Popular Unionists 1
and the nationalist Social Democratic and
Labour Party (SDLP) 4. The Alliance Party,
set up to offer an alternative to unionist and
nationalist parties, did not obtain a seat.
12
NORTHERN IRELAND
Sinn Fein also fought the election but lost
its only seat to the SDLP.
Three members of the European Parliament
are elected in Northern Ireland (see p. 112).
Efforts to Achieve Devolved Government
Legislation passed in 1973 provided for a
measure of devolved government in Northern
Ireland. This was implemented in January
1974 following agreement between political
parties there to form a power-sharing
Executive. The Executive, however, collapsed
in May 1974 as a result of a protest strike by
unionist ‘loyalists’.
Attempts have been made by successive
British governments to find a means of
restoring a widely acceptable form of
devolved administration. A 78-member
Assembly was elected by proportional
representation in 1982 in order to make
proposals for the resumption of devolved
government and to monitor the work of the
government departments. The Assembly was
dissolved four years later following its failure
to discharge these responsibilities.
The British Government remains
committed to the principle of a locally
accountable administration acceptable to, and
enjoying the support of, Unionists and
Nationalists. In 1991 and 1992 the four main
constitutional parties—the Ulster Unionists,
Democratic Unionists, Alliance Party and
Social Democratic and Labour Party—held
a series of talks to see whether they could
reach an agreement taking into account three
sets of relationships relevant to the Northern
Ireland problem—those within Northern
Ireland, within the island of Ireland, and
between the British and Irish governments.
The talks ended in November 1992 without
full agreement.
Since September 1993 the British
Government has been engaged in a series of
bilateral discussions with three of the four
Northern Ireland parties (the Democratic
Unionist Party have declined to take part) to
explore the basis upon which they might
come together for further dialogue. Over the
same period the Government has also been
engaged in intensive discussions with the
Irish Government on a framework document.
The aim is to produce a shared assessment of
the elements of a settlement which is likely to
have the best prospects of attracting
widespread agreement right across the
community in Northern Ireland. It is hoped
that this will facilitate the resumption of
multilateral talks with the aim of achieving
agreement in an overall political settlement.
Relations with the Irish Republic
The British and Irish governments have for
many years recognised the importance of
working to bring peace to Northern Ireland.
The 1985 Anglo-Irish Agreement created an
Inter-governmental Conference in which both
governments can discuss issues such as cross
border co-operation and security. The
Agreement provides for the Irish
Government to put forward views and
proposals on matters related to Northern
Ireland provided that these are not the
responsibility of a devolved administration in
Northern Ireland. Each government retains
full sovereign responsibility for decisions and
administration within its own jurisdiction.
Security co-operation with the Irish
Republic has improved significantly since
1985. Progress has been made in a number of
areas, including improved communications,
technical co-operation and joint assessments
of threats from terrorists.
The Downing Street Declaration
The Downing Street Declaration, signed on
15 December 1993 by the British Prime
Minister, John Major, and his Irish
counterpart, Albert Reynolds, is a statement
of fundamental principles which complements
other political talks (see above) in the search
for a settlement in Northern Ireland. It does
not envisage, nor advocate, any particular
outcome. It does, however, make clear that
the consent of a majority of the people in
Northern Ireland is required before any
constitutional change can come about.
The text reaffirms that the British
Government will uphold the democratic wish
of the majority of the people in Northern
Ireland on the issue of whether they prefer to
support the Union or a sovereign united
13
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Ireland. On this basis the British
Government reiterates that it has no selfish
strategic or economic interest in Northern
Ireland, and that, were a majority in
Northern Ireland to wish it, the Government
would introduce legislation to bring about a
united Ireland. For its part the Irish
Government accepts that it would be wrong
to attempt to impose a united Ireland without
the freely given consent of a majority of the
people of Northern Ireland.
The Irish Government also confirms that,
in the event of an overall settlement, it will
put forward and support proposals for
change in the Irish Constitution which
would fully reflect the principle of consent in
Northern Ireland.
The British and Irish Governments agreed
in the Declaration that only democratically
mandated parties with an established
commitment to exclusively peaceful methods
would be free to participate in future
dialogue. In the event of a permanent
cessation of violence by the Provisional IRA,
Sinn Fein could join that process.
In August 1994 the Provisional IRA
announced a complete cessation of its military
operations. Welcoming this news, the British
Government stressed the need for the IRA to
make clear that this cessation was permanent
before any discussions with Sinn Fein could
take place.
In September 1994 the Prime Minister said
that the outcome of any talks between the
Northern Ireland political parties would be
put to the people there in a referendum. In
addition, he lifted the broadcasting restrictions
on Sinn Fein and other organisations.
Another step towards lasting peace was
taken in mid-October 1994 as ‘loyalist’
paramilitaries responded to calls by the
Government and by leading figures in
Northern Ireland to give up violence with the
announcement of a ceasefire. The
Government said that it would look to the
‘loyalists’ to match deeds to words.
On 21 October the Prime Minister
announced that he was prepared to make a
working assumption that the IRA ceasefire was
intended to be permanent. He added that the
Government could move carefully towards
the beginning of dialogue with Sinn Fein.
Human Rights
Economic and social deprivation exist on
both sides of the Northern Ireland
community, but, on all major social and
economic indicators, Catholics experience
significantly greater levels of disadvantage
than Protestants, which sustains feelings of
discrimination and alienation; these in turn
influence attitudes to political and security
issues. The Government is fully committed
to tackling discrimination and ensuring that
all the people of Northern Ireland have
equal opportunities in employment and
housing, in education and in the expression
of their political and cultural identity.
Reforms introduced over the period of
direct rule include legislation against
discrimination, the creation of
independent and impartial authorities to
manage public services and investigate
complaints, and a series of measures to
safeguard civil liberties.
The aim is to encourage a more
pluralistic and tolerant society with parity
of esteem for both traditions. The goal of
the Royal Ulster Constabulary, for example,
is to provide a high-quality effective police
service to all the people, in partnership
with the community and in co-operation
with other agencies. There is an
Independent Commission for Police
Complaints (see p. 85). The Standing
Advisory Commission on Human Rights
advises the Secretary of State on the
effectiveness of anti-discrimination laws.
An independent Chief Electoral Officer
maintains the accuracy of the electoral
register. Electoral boundaries for
parliamentary constituencies are determined
by impartial statutory procedures conducted
by the Boundary Commission for Northern
Ireland. The Northern Ireland Ombudsman
and Commissioner for Complaints deal with
complaints against government departments
and local authorities.
Direct or indirect discrimination in
employment on grounds of religious belief
or political opinion is unlawful. Legislation
requires registration by employers with the
Fair Employment Commission, compulsory
monitoring of the religious composition of
14
NORTHERN IRELAND
workforces, review of recruitment, training
and promotion procedures, and affirmative
action if fair employment is not provided.
There are criminal penalties and economic
sanctions for defaulting employers and the
Fair Employment Tribunal deals with
individual complaints of discrimination.
Security Policy
Terrorism is rejected by the overwhelming
majority of the people in Northern Ireland.
Although the overall level of violence is now
far lower than in the early 1970s, over 3,120
people have been killed and over 36,000
injured since 1969.
Certain temporary emergency powers are
in force which require annual renewal by
Parliament; they are also reviewed each year
by an independent observer appointed by the
Government. They include special powers of
arrest of those suspected of certain serious
crimes, non-jury courts to try terrorist
offences (see pp. 90-1), and the banning of
terrorist organisations (see p. 82). Suspected
terrorists are tried for criminal offences, not
for their political beliefs.
If members of the security forces
break the law, they can and will be
prosecuted like any other citizen. An
independent commission supervises police
investigations into the more serious
complaints against police officers and, at its
discretion, the investigation of others.
Northern Ireland’s legal system is broadly
similar to that in England and Wales
(see Chapter 8).
An independent Commissioner
observes and reports on the conditions
under which terrorist suspects are detained
by the security forces in holding centres.
The Commissioner submits an annual
report to the Secretary of State, which is
made public.
Draft codes of practice have been
published, for public consultation, on the
detention, treatment, questioning and
identification of suspects. Breach of any of
the codes’ provisions by a police officer will
be a disciplinary offence.
Although an accused is not obliged to say
anything, courts are able to draw inferences
from his or her refusal to explain, for
example, marks on clothing or presence at a
certain place.
The Economy
Northern Ireland had a gross domestic
product of some £11,475 million in 1992 and
a workforce of some 736,000 in June 1993.
Trends in output and employment tend to
reflect overall trends in Britain. Almost half
of manufacturing output is sold to the rest of
Britain and a quarter is sold locally.
Unemployment is higher than in the
rest of Britain and reached 13 per cent
in August 1994, compared with 9.2 per cent
in the United Kingdom as a whole.
Industrial development policy is carried
out by five agencies associated with the
Department of Economic Development:
• the Industrial Development Board deals
with companies with more than 50
employees and with inward investment;
• the Local Enterprise Development Unit
promotes enterprise and the development
of small businesses employing up to 50
employees;
• the Training and Employment Agency is
responsible for training the workforce;
• the Northern Ireland Tourist Board
promotes tourism; and
• the Industrial Research and Technology
Unit provides advice and assistance to
encourage research and development and
technology transfer.
Nearly 180 of the IDE’s 490 client
companies come from outside Northern
Ireland, mainly from Europe, North America
and Asia.
One of the most recent investments is
a £36.6 million plant in County
Londonderry by a Hong Kong
company making plastic containers
for compact discs; it will create
314 jobs.
In 1993-94 two Korean companies, one
making car stereos and the other
manufacturing printed circuit boards,
15
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
announced their intention to invest in
Northern Ireland, as has an Indonesian fabric
manufacturing company. These three
investments will mean a total of about 1,250
new jobs. Various incentives are available
from the Industrial Development Board.
Considerable public expenditure is devoted
to urban renewal in Belfast and Londonderry,
and to a rural development programme. The
Making Belfast Work programme encourages
growth in jobs and small businesses, improves
training, and makes improvements to the
environment and living conditions. In
addition, a government and private sector
scheme is redeveloping the banks of the river
Lagan in the heart of the city. In
Londonderry there is a town centre
development programme as well as
community action to create more jobs.
Northern Ireland has parity with England,
Scotland and Wales on taxation and services.
The British Government makes a
contribution of over £3,000 million a year to
maintain social services at the level of those
in Great Britain, to meet the cost of security
measures and to compensate for the natural
disadvantages of geography and lack of
resources. Resources are focused on those
suffering the highest level of social and
economic disadvantage.
In 1986 the British and Irish governments
established the International Fund for
Ireland. Some three-quarters is spent in
Northern Ireland, the rest going to border
areas in the Republic. Programmes cover
business enterprise, tourism, community
relations, urban development, agriculture and
rural development. Donors include the
United States, the European Union, Canada
and New Zealand.
Cultural and Social Affairs
Northern Ireland’s heritage is preserved and
portrayed by the Ulster Museum in Belfast,
the Ulster Folk and Transport Museum in
County Down, and a number of smaller
museums and interpretative centres. The
Ulster-American Folk Park in Omagh
specialises in the history of Irish emigration
to America; it has an extensive computer
database on emigrants which is available for
use by the public.
Local arts festivals are an important
feature of the arts calendar, the highlight
being the Belfast Festival, based at Queens
University. The Ulster Orchestra has a
notable reputation. Government support for
the arts is channelled through the Arts Council
for Northern Ireland, which gives financial
help and advice to opera and drama companies,
orchestras and festivals, arts centres, galleries,
theatres, writers and artistic groups.
Local district councils provide leisure
facilities, including leisure centres and
swimming pools. The Government finances
the Sports Council for Northern Ireland,
which promotes sport and physical recreation.
Health and personal social services
correspond fairly closely to those in the rest
of Britain.
Although publicly maintained schools
must be open to children from all religions,
in practice Roman Catholic and Protestant
children are mainly educated in separate
schools. There are 21 integrated schools
providing education for some 4,000
Protestant and Roman Catholic children and
this process is being encouraged by the
Government (see p. 412).
Owner occupation of housing has
increased from 54 per cent in 1981 to 68 per
cent in 1993. The Housing Executive is the
sole public housing authority and allocates
homes to those in greatest need.
Local television and radio programmes are
broadcast and there is a local press (see
p. 478). National television and radio
broadcasts are also received and the national
press is sold widely.
Further Reading
Bardon, Jonathon. A History of Ulster. Blackstaff Press, 1992.
Northern Ireland. Aspects of Britain series, HMSO, 1992.
Northern Ireland Expenditure Plans and Priorities: The Government’s Expenditure Plans 1994-45 to
1996-97. HMSO, 1994.
16
4
Scotland
Early History 18
Government 18
The Economy 19
Agriculture, Forestry and
Fishing 20
Energy and Water Resources 20
Transport 20
Environment 20
Housing and Urban
Regeneration 20
Health 20
Education 21
Cultural and Social Affairs 21
Three-quarters of the population of Scotland and most of the industrial towns
are in the central lowlands. The chief cities are Edinburgh (the capital),
Glasgow, Aberdeen and Dundee. Just over half of Scotland consists of the
sparsely populated highlands and islands in the north.
Scotland contains large areas of unspoilt and wild landscape, and the
majority of Britain’s highest mountains—nearly 300 peaks over 913 m
(3,000 ft). The Grampians in the central highlands contain Ben Nevis
(1,343 m, 4,406 ft), the highest peak in Britain.
Table 4.1: Population, June 1993
Population density
Population (people per sq km)
Regions:
Borders 105,300 23
Central 272,900 104
Dumfries and Galloway 147,900 23
Fife 351,200 269
Grampian 528,100 61
Highland 206,900 8
Lothian 753,900 429
Strathclyde 2,286,800 169
Tayside 395,200 53
Islands:
Orkney Islands 19,760 20
Shetland Islands 22,830 16
Western Isles 29,410 10
Scotland 5,120,200 66
Source: General Register Office for Scotland.
17
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Early History
At the time of the Roman invasion of Britain,
what is now Scotland was mainly inhabited
by the Piets. Despite a long campaign, Roman
rule was never permanently extended to most
of Scotland. In the sixth century, the Scots
from Ireland settled in what is now Argyll,
giving their name to the present-day
Scotland. Lothian was populated by the
Angles, while Britons moved north to
Strathclyde. In the ninth century parts of
Scotland were subject to raids by the Vikings;
a united Scottish kingdom was established at
this time.
The powerful English monarchy
threatened Scottish independence in the
Middle Ages, particularly under Edward I,
and war between the two kingdoms was
frequent. There were also, however, strong
links with England; several Scottish kings
held land and titles in England and there was
intermarriage between the Scottish and
English royal families. Cultural influences on
Scotland were also strong. Despite reverses
such as the defeat of William Wallace’s uprising
in 1298, Robert the Bruce’s victory over
Edward II of England at Bannockburn ensured
the survival of a separate kingdom of Scotland.
The two crowns were eventually united
when Elizabeth I of England was succeeded
in 1603 by James VI of Scotland (James I of
England), who was her nearest heir. Even so,
England and Scotland remained separate
political entities during the 17th century,
apart from an enforced period of unification
under Oliver Cromwell in the 1650s. The
religions of the two kingdoms had also
developed in different directions, with
England retaining an Episcopalian church
(governed by bishops) and Scotland
embracing a Presbyterian system (see p. 435).
In 1707 both countries, realising the benefits
of closer political and economic union, agreed
on a single parliament for Great Britain.
Scotland retained its own system of law and
church settlement.
Government
There are special arrangements for the
conduct of Scottish affairs within the British
system of government and separate Acts of
Parliament are passed for Scotland where
appropriate. There are 72 Scottish seats in
the House of Commons. The General
Election in April 1992 resulted in the election
of 49 Labour Members of Parliament,
11 Conservative, 9 Liberal Democrat and
3 Scottish Nationalist.
Scottish administration is the responsibility
of the Secretary of State for Scotland, a
member of the Cabinet, working through The
Scottish Office, which has its headquarters in
Edinburgh and an office in London.
Review of Scottish Government
In 1993 the Government issued a White
Paper, Scotland in the Union: A Partnership
for Good, following a wide-ranging
examination of Scotland’s place in Britain and
the role of Parliament in Scottish affairs. A
series of initiatives is being taken to improve
the parliamentary arrangements for handling
Scottish business. This involves the widening
of the range of business handled by the
Scottish Grand Committee (which consists of
all 72 Scottish MPs); meeting in Scotland as
well as at Westminster; improved scrutiny of
Scottish legislation through special standing
committees; and greater accountability of
Scottish Office ministers through
parliamentary question time (see p. 59).
Certain functions are being transferred
from Whitehall departments to The Scottish
Office. For example, responsibility for the
Scottish Arts Council was transferred from
the Department of National Heritage in April
1994. To make The Scottish Office more
accessible, a central enquiry unit and
information points are being established in
many towns.
Local Government Reform
Local government currently operates on a
two-tier basis broadly similar to that in
England and Wales. The three islands
councils (for the Orkney, the Shetland and
the Western Isles) are single-tier authorities.
Major changes are planned for local
government. Provisions are contained in the
Local Government etc. (Scotland) Bill now
18
SCOTLAND
being considered by Parliament. This would
create a single-tier structure of 32 councils.
Existing regional and district councils would
be replaced by 29 new councils, while the
three islands councils would be unchanged.
Edinburgh, Glasgow, Dundee and Aberdeen
would each have its own single-tier council.
The new councils would be required to
devise plans to increase the involvement of
local people in council activities. It is
envisaged that the new authorities would
assume full control in April 1996.
Legal System
The principles and procedures of the Scottish
legal system differ in many respects from
those of England and Wales. These
differences stem, in part, from the adoption
of elements from other European legal
systems, based on Roman law, during the
16th century. One difference is in the verdicts
which a jury may give—in Scotland a jury can
give a verdict of ‘not proven’ when, as with a
‘not guilty’ verdict, the accused is acquitted.
The Economy
Scotland has experienced the same pressure
on its traditional industries as Wales and the
north of England. However, since 1987
economic growth in Scotland has on average
been greater than in Britain as a whole and it
was less affected by the recession in the early
1990s than were other areas.
The most significant development has
been the discovery in the early 1970s of oil
and gas under the North Sea. Up to about
100,000 jobs are estimated to have arisen
directly or indirectly as a result of North
Sea activities.
Industry
As traditional industries such as coal, steel
and shipbuilding have declined, there has
been growth in high technology industries
such as chemicals, electronic engineering and
lighter forms of mechanical and instrument
engineering. The electronics industry, which
includes many of the world’s leading
companies in this field (such as IBM and
Motorola), provides nearly 13 per cent of jobs
in manufacturing and about 19 per cent of
manufacturing output and 17 per cent of
manufacturing investment. By 1993 over 190
plants were employing about 41,500 workers,
one of the biggest concentrations of the
electronics industry in Western Europe.
Some traditional industries, such as high-
quality tweeds and other textiles, and food
and drink products, remain important. There
are over 100 whisky distilleries, mostly in the
north-east. Whisky exports, valued at £1,958
million in 1992, represent about one-fifth of
Scotland’s manufacturing exports.
Industrial Development
Government measures have helped to attract
firms to Scotland, and investment by overseas
companies has helped to make a significant
contribution to the growth of modern
technologically based industries. In 1992
about 82,200 people were employed in
overseas-owned manufacturing units,
representing a quarter of manufacturing
employment in Scotland.
Government support for enterprise and
training is channelled through Scottish
Enterprise and Highlands and Islands
Enterprise, which both have general functions
in economic development, training and
environmental improvement in the Scottish
lowlands and the Highlands and Islands
respectively. They contract with 22 Local
Enterprise Companies (led by the private
sector), which arrange the provision of
training and business support.
Services
A marked expansion has occurred in services,
which now employ over 70 per cent of the
workforce. Financial and business services are
of growing importance, and over 200,000
people are employed in the sector. There are
four Scottish-based clearing banks and they
have limited rights to issue their own
banknotes. About one-third of investment
funds in Britain are managed from Scotland,
which is also a base for a large number of
insurance companies.
Tourism and leisure also make a
19
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
significant contribution to the economy,
directly providing over 180,000 jobs. In 1993,
10.9 million visitors spent about £2,000
million in Scotland.
Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing
About 75 per cent of the land area of
Scotland is devoted to agriculture. Much of
this is rough grazing (including common
grazing) for cattle and sheep. Scotland’s cattle
industry has a worldwide reputation, both for
the quality of meat and for pedigree breeds.
Arable farms are highly productive, and the
principal crop is barley, which is used in the
making of whisky and beer.
Scotland accounts for nearly half of
Britain’s forest area and for over one-third of
timber production. The bulk of new planting
in Britain takes place in Scotland, mostly in
the upland and mountain areas.
Fishing remains an important activity,
particularly in the north-east and the islands.
Scotland accounts for over 70 per cent by
weight and over 60 per cent by value of the
fish landed in Britain by British vessels.
Energy and Water Resources
Nuclear and hydro-electric generation supply
a higher proportion of energy than in any
other part of Britain. Over 40 per cent of
Scotland’s electricity comes from nuclear
power, with hydro-power and other
renewables contributing more than 10 per cent.
With abundant rainfall, there is an
extensive supply of water from upland
sources. Water supply is currently the
responsibility of the regional and islands
councils, although under the plans for local
government reform these responsibilities
would pass to three public water authorities,
which would own and operate the water and
sewerage services. They would be able to
attract private capital to help to fund major
investment projects.
Transport
Communications, both domestic and
international, have improved in many parts of
Scotland. The electrification scheme of the
Edinburgh to London railway was completed
in 1991. The A74 road linking Glasgow and
Carlisle is being upgraded to provide a
northward extension of the M6 motorway,
while the Central Scotland motorway network
is to be completed. Proposals to improve
public and private transport services around
the Firth of Forth are being considered,
including investment of about £380 million
in a second Forth Road Bridge and associated
road links.
Environment
Scotland’s countryside contains a rich variety
of wildlife, with some species not found
elsewhere in Britain. There are 71 national
nature reserves and over 1,370 Sites of
Special Scientific Interest; 33 Special
Protection Areas have been designated under
the European Community directive on wild
birds. Four regional parks and 40 national
scenic areas have been designated, covering
13 per cent of the land surface. Four of the
11 forest parks in Great Britain are in
Scotland, and a fifth spans the border
between Scotland and England.
Housing and Urban Regeneration
The tenure pattern is somewhat different
from that in the rest of Britain. Home
ownership is increasing but, at 55 per cent, is
still lower than in other areas of Britain.
About 35 per cent of housing is rented from
the public sector, compared with 20 per cent
for Britain as a whole. Projects to tackle the
problems in inner city areas and some
peripheral housing estates include a series of
partnerships between The Scottish Office and
other groups, such as local communities and
the private sector.
Health
In certain diseases—for example, lung cancer
and heart disease—the health record in
Scotland is not as good as elsewhere in
Britain. In 1992 the Government issued a
policy statement with a range of initiatives to
improve health in Scotland. Targets were set
for the year 2000 and progress is already
20
SCOTLAND
being made in reducing mortality rates from
cancer and coronary heart disease, and in
lowering the levels of cigarette smoking.
Education
The concept of universal education was
accepted in Scotland as early as the 16th
century. The Scottish education system has a
number of distinctive features, for example,
in examinations (see p. 419). There are 12
universities, of which four—St Andrews,
Glasgow, Aberdeen and Edinburgh—were
established in the 15th century and four in
the 1960s, with four being accorded
university status in 1992-93.
Cultural and Social Affairs
Gaelic, a language of ancient Celtic origin, is
spoken by some 80,000 people; the greatest
concentration of Gaelic speakers is in the
islands of the Hebrides. The Government is
encouraging people to learn more about the
Gaelic language and culture. Government
support for Gaelic—which amounted to
£\2 million in 1993-94—covers three main
areas: education, Gaelic organisations and
television broadcasting.
Further Reading
Scotland. Aspects of Britain series, HMSO, 1993.
The annual Edinburgh International
Festival is one of the world’s leading cultural
events. Held in August and September, it is
the largest of its kind in the world. Since
1982 Glasgow has also held its own
international arts festival, the Mayfest, which
is now the second largest festival in Britain.
Scotland possesses a number of major
collections of the fine and applied arts such
as the Burrell Collection in Glasgow. A new
Museum of Scotland is to be built in
Edinburgh to house the National Museums’
Scottish collection. Many Scots have achieved
eminence in arts and sciences.
The predominant Church of Scotland is a
Protestant church which is Presbyterian in
form; it is governed by a hierarchy of church
courts, each of which includes lay people.
The sport of golf originated in Scotland,
and there are over 400 golf courses,
including St Andrews, Gleneagles,
Turnberry, Muirfield, Troon and Prestwick,
which are internationally renowned. A wide
range of outdoor activities, such as
mountaineering, hill walking and fishing,
are also pursued. Winter sports are becoming
increasingly popular in the Cairngorm
Mountains, Glencoe and a number of
other areas.
Scotland in the Union: A Partnership for Good. Cm 2225. HMSO, 1993.
Serving Scotland’s Needs: The Government’s Expenditure Plans 1994-95 to 1996-97. Departments
of the Secretary of State for Scotland and the Forestry Commission. Cm 2514. HMSO, 1994.
5 Wales
Early History 22
Language 22
Government 23
The Economy 23
Agriculture and Forestry 24
Transport 24
Environment 24
Cultural and Social Affairs 25
Two-thirds of the population of Wales live in the southern valleys and the
lower-lying coastal areas. The chief urban centres are Cardiff (with a
population of nearly 300,000), Swansea, Newport and Wrexham. However,
much of Wales is hilly or mountainous. The highest mountains are in
Snowdonia and the tallest peak is Snowdon (1,085 m, 3,560 ft).
Wales is a principality; Prince Charles, the heir to the throne, was invested
by the Queen with the title of Prince of Wales at Caernarfon Castle in 1969,
when he was 20. The Welsh name of the country is Cymru.
Early History
After the collapse of Roman rule in Britain
(see p. 3), Wales remained a Celtic
stronghold, although often within the English
sphere of influence. For much of the period,
it was divided into a number of separate
principalities, and unity was achieved only
sporadically. In 1267 Llywelyn ap Gruffudd,
who had achieved control over a large portion
of Wales, was recognised as Prince of Wales
by the English. However, on his death in
1282, Edward I launched a successful
campaign to bring Wales under English rule.
The series of great castles that he had built
in north Wales remain among Britain’s finest
historic monuments (see p. 354). Edward I’s
eldest son—later Edward II—was born at
Caernarfon in 1284 and was given the title
Prince of Wales, which continues to be borne
by the eldest son of the reigning monarch to
this day.
Continued strong Welsh national feeling
was indicated by the rising led by Owain
Glyndwr at the beginning of the 15th
century. The Tudor dynasty, which ruled
England from 1485 to 1603, was of W elsh
ancestry. The Acts of Union of 1536 and
1542 united England and Wales
administratively, politically and legally.
Language
At the 1991 census Welsh speakers made up
19 per cent of the population. In the rural
north and west, Welsh remains the first
language of most of the population; in recent
decades the language has experienced a
revival in the largely anglicised areas of
south-east and north-east Wales.
The Government has reaffirmed its
commitment to enhancing Welsh culture and
developing greater use of the Welsh
language. Bilingual education in schools is
encouraged (see p. 418), and there has been
an extended use of Welsh for official
purposes and in broadcasting. There are now
many more bilingual publications and most
road signs are bilingual. Expenditure of
£6.8 million in support of the language is
22
WALES
planned in 1994-95. The Welsh Language
Act 1993 establishes the principle that, in
the context of business of public sector
bodies and the administration of justice in
Wales, Welsh and English should be treated
on an equal basis. The Act also set up the
Welsh Language Board (formerly an advisory
body) on a statutory basis. Its aim is to
promote and facilitate the use of the Welsh
language. One of its first tasks is to prepare
guidelines on the form and content of Welsh
language schemes.
Government
The country returns 38 Members of
Parliament to the House of Commons. For
the last 60 years the industrial communities
have tended to support the Labour Party in
elections, ensuring a Labour majority of seats.
Following the 1992 General Election, Wales
has 27 Labour Members of Parliament, 6
Conservative, 4 Plaid Cymru (Welsh
Nationalist) and 1 Liberal Democrat. Special
arrangements exist for the discussion of
Welsh affairs in the Welsh Grand Committee,
whose function is to consider matters relating
exclusively to Wales; Bills are referred to it
for consideration as to whether they should
be given a second reading (see p. 58).
The Secretary of State for Wales, who is a
member of the Cabinet, has wide-ranging
responsibilities relating to the economy,
education, welfare services and the provision
of amenities. The headquarters of the
administration is the Welsh Office, in Cardiff;
it also has an office in London. The legal
system is identical to the English one.
A major change in the structure of local
government is planned. Under the Local
Government (Wales) Act 1994, the existing
eight county councils and 37 district councils
will be replaced by 22 unitary authorities
from April 1996.
The Economy
Recent decades have seen fundamental
changes in the basis of the Welsh economy.
The most notable features have been
expansion in service industries and the
development of a more diverse range of
manufacturing industries, including many at
the forefront of technology. For example,
Wales is now an important centre for
electronics, information technology,
automotive components, chemicals and
materials. The traditional industry of
steelmaking remains important, and Wales
accounts for about a third of steel production
in Britain. Coalmining, though, as elsewhere
in Britain, has declined substantially. Only
one deep mine of significance is now in
operation, although there are also a number
of smaller mines and opencast sites.
In services the most marked growth has
been in financial and business services, and
leisure services. Annual earnings from
tourism, for example, are estimated at about
£1,300 million and the industry employs
about 95,000 people. The Wales Tourist
Board seeks to develop tourism in ways
Table 5.1: Population Mid-1993
Population
Population density
(people per sq km)
Clwyd
Dyfed
Gwent
Gwynedd
Mid Glamorgan
Powys
South Glamorgan
West Glamorgan
415.900
351,500
450.300
240.200
544.300
119.900
413.200
371.200
171
61
327
62
535
24
993
453
Wales
2,906,500
140
Source: Regional Trends
23
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
which will yield the optimum economic
benefit for the people of Wales.
Although south Wales remains the
principal industrial area, new industries and
firms have been introduced in north-east
Wales and light industry attracted to
the towns in the rural areas of mid- and
north Wales.
Inward Investment
Wales has been particularly successful in
attracting investment from overseas
companies. In recent years it has obtained
about 20 per cent of overseas inward
investment into Britain. In total, 169 new
projects were secured from abroad and the
rest of Britain in 1993-94; these are expected
to lead to around 14,000 new jobs and
£765 million of capital investment.
Economic Development
The economic programmes of the Welsh
Office are complemented by the work of the
Welsh Development Agency and the
Development Board for Rural Wales, which
have wide powers to promote industrial,
environmental and social change. Planned
expenditure by these bodies in 1994-95 totals
£165 million and £27 million respectively.
One of the main areas of activity is providing
accommodation for business, increasingly in
partnership with the private sector. The
Agency has also undertaken the largest land
reclamation programme in Europe, and all the
significant remaining industrial dereliction in
Wales is expected to have been removed by
the end of the 1990s.
The south Wales valleys is one of the main
areas to have been affected by the decline in
traditional industries. The Programme for the
Valleys was the most extensive programme of
economic and urban regeneration undertaken
in Wales. Its achievements included
additional private sector investment of nearly
£700 million, involving 24,000 jobs;
240,000 sq m (2.6 million sq ft) of new
industrial floorspace; and the improvement of
over 7,000 homes.
In 1993 this was succeeded by a new five-
year Programme for the Valleys. The
emphasis of the new programme is moving
away from centralised initiatives towards local
partnerships, and greater emphasis is being
placed on links with Europe.
A development corporation has been set
up to stimulate the regeneration of the
Cardiff Bay area and its proposals include
a new barrage across the harbour mouth.
The regeneration is expected to attract
£1,200 million of private investment and to
support about 23,000 new jobs.
Agriculture and Forestry
Agriculture occupies over 80 per cent of the
land area. The main activities are sheep and
cattle rearing in the hill regions and dairy
farming in the lowlands. About 12 per cent
of Wales is covered by woodland.
Transport
Improvements to road and rail links, such as
the upgrading of the north Wales coast road,
have helped the Welsh economy in recent
years. In the south there are motorway links
across the Severn Bridge to southern England
and the Midlands, and high-speed rail
services to a number of destinations in
England. A second major motorway crossing
of the Severn is under construction, with
completion planned in 1996. Work on
motorway links to the new bridge started
in 1993.
Environment
About one-quarter of Wales is designated as a
National Park or Area of Outstanding Natural
Beauty (see p. 350). As well as the three
National Parks—Snowdonia, the Brecon
Beacons and the Pembrokeshire Coast—and
the five Areas of Outstanding Natural
Beauty, there are two national trails, 31
country parks and large stretches of heritage
coast. There are about 50 National Nature
Reserves and about 870 Sites of Special
Scientific Interest. Nearly all of the rivers
and canals are classified as having water of
good or fair quality, and a significant
improvement has been achieved in the quality
of bathing waters.
24
WALES
Cultural and Social Affairs
Welsh literature is one of the oldest and
richest in Europe, and there is a national
library. The Welsh people also have strong
musical traditions; the country is well known
for its choral singing and the Welsh National
Opera has an international reputation.
Special festivals, known as eisteddfodau,
encourage Welsh literature and music. The
largest is the annual Royal National
Eisteddfod, consisting of competitions in
music, singing, prose and poetry entirely in
Welsh. Artists from all over the world come
to the town of Llangollen for the annual
International Musical Eisteddfod.
A £21 million expansion scheme at
the National Museum of Wales, in
Cardiff, has been completed. New
galleries and a permanent Evolution
of Wales exhibition were opened in
1993. Visitor numbers to the Museum
have increased, and totalled some
923,000 in 1993-94. Work on a third
building at the National Library of
Wales, costing some £11 million,
started in summer 1994.
There is no established church, the
Anglican church in Wales having been
disestablished in 1920 following decades of
pressure from adherents of the Methodist and
Baptist churches. Methodism in particular
spread rapidly in Wales in the 18th century,
assuming the nature of a popular movement
among Welsh speakers and finding strong
support later in industrial communities.
An active local press includes a number of
Welsh language publications. The fourth
television channel, Sianel Pedwar Cymru
(S4C), broadcasts most of its programmes in
Welsh during peak viewing hours and is
required to see that a significant proportion
of programmes are in Welsh.
The education system is similar to that in
England. Welsh and English are both used as
media of instruction in a number of schools.
Most Welsh-medium schools are situated in
the traditionally Welsh-speaking, largely
rural, areas. There are also designated
bilingual schools in the anglicised, mainly
industrial areas to cater for children whose
parents want them to be educated through
the medium of both languages. Welsh is a
core subject in Welsh-speaking schools and a
foundation subject elsewhere under the
National Curriculum (see p. 418). The
collegiate University of Wales, founded in
1893, comprises six member institutions.
Among many sporting activities, there is
particular interest in rugby union football,
which has come to be regarded as the Welsh
national game. The provision of sports facilities,
such as indoor sports halls and swimming
pools, has increased in recent years.
Further Reading
The Government’s Expenditure Plans 1994-95 to 1996-97. A Report by the Welsh Office and the
Office of Her Majesty’s Chief Inspector of Schools in Wales. Cm 2515. HMSO, 1994.
Wales. Aspects of Britain series, HMSO, 1993.
25
6
The Social Framework
Population The Economic and Social
Language 30 Pattern
Ethnic and National
Minorities 30
Among the main social changes during the second half of the 20th century are
longer life expectancy and a lower birth rate, reflected in a growing
proportion of elderly people; a higher divorce rate; wider educational
opportunities; technological progress and a higher standard of living.
POPULATION
According to mid-1993 estimates, Britain’s
population is 58 million, the 17th largest in
the world. Statistics are derived from the
census (taken every ten years), with allowance
made for subsequent births and deaths
(obtained from compulsory registration), and
migration.
The population has been growing slowly
since the early 1980s. On mid-1992-based
projections, the population in Britain is
forecast to rise to 59.8 million in 2001 and
61.3 million in 2011.
Birth Rates
In 1993 there were 762,000 live births,
slightly fewer than in 1992, compared with
634,200 deaths in 1992. The total period
fertility rate (an indication of average family
size) remains below 2.1, the level leading to
the long-term replacement of the population,
although it is estimated that it will increase
from 1.8 in 1992 to 1.9 for women born in or
after 1980.
Contributory factors to the relatively low
birth rate in recent years (13.5 live births per
1,000 population in 1992) include:
• the trends towards later marriage and
towards postponing births, which have
led to an increase in the average age of
women having children—27.9 years in
England and Wales in 1992 compared
with 26.8 in 1981;
• the current preference for smaller families
than in the past, which has led to a
significant decline in the proportion of
families with four or more children;1 and
• more widespread and effective
contraception, making it easier to plan
families, and the greater prevalence of
voluntary sterilisation for both men and
women.
Mortality
At birth the expectation of life for a man is
about 73 years and for a woman 78 years,
compared with 49 years for men and 52 years
for women in 1901. There has, however, been
only a small increase in life expectancy in the
older age groups.
1 In 1991, 66 per cent of families consisted of a married couple
with one or two dependent children, compared with 15 per cent
of families consisting of a married couple with three or more
dependent children.
26
THE SOCIAL FRAMEWORK
The general death rate was 11 per 1,000
population in 1992. There has been a decline
in mortality at most ages, particularly among
children. The infant mortality rate (deaths of
infants under one year old per 1,000 live
births) was 6.6 in 1993; neonatal mortality
(deaths of infants under four weeks old per
1,000 live births) was 4.3; and maternal
mortality is about 0.07 per 1,000 total births.
The decline in mortality reflects better
nutrition, rising standards of living, the
advance of medical science, the growth of
medical facilities, improved health measures,
better working conditions, education in
personal hygiene and the smaller size
of families.
Deaths caused by circulatory diseases
(including heart attacks and strokes) now
account for nearly half of all deaths, and
mortality from heart disease in England and
Wales remains high compared with that of
other developed countries. The next largest
cause of death is cancer, which is responsible
for nearly one-quarter of deaths.
Cigarette smoking is the greatest
preventable cause of illness and death in
Britain. However, there has been a significant
decline in the prevalence of smoking, with 29
per cent of adult males and 28 per cent of
adult females smoking cigarettes in 1992, as
against 52 and 41 per cent respectively in
1972. In 1992 the Government set out
strategies in England and Scotland for
continuing the overall improvement in
health, emphasising disease prevention and
health promotion.
The Government is pursuing a
comprehensive strategy against drug misuse
in Britain. Initiatives are aimed at reducing
both the supply of, and demand for, drugs. A
number of government priorities, aimed at
supporting the overall goals of improving the
country’s health and providing high-quality
care for those who need it, have been listed
(see p. 372).
Marriage and Divorce
Britain has one of the highest marriage and
divorce rates in the European Union. In 1992
there were 311,500 marriages in Great
Britain, of which 38.5 per cent were
remarriages of one or both parties. Some 36.3
per cent of marriages were remarriages where
one or both parties had been divorced. Of the
population aged 16 or over in England and
Wales in 1992, 57 per cent were married, 27
per cent single, 9 per cent widowed and 7
per cent divorced. The average age for first
marriages in England and Wales is now about
27.9 for men and 25.9 for women.
In 1992 there were about 13.6 divorces for
every 1,000 married couples in England and
Wales. The rates are lower in Scotland and
Northern Ireland. In 1992, 160,400 divorces
were granted in England and Wales. The
average age of people at the time of divorce
in England and Wales is now about 38.9 for
men and 36.3 for women.
Another feature, common to many other
Western European countries, has been an
increase in cohabitation, and 18 per cent of
non-married men and women aged 16-59 in
Great Britain were cohabiting in 1992.
Between 1979 and 1992 the proportion of
non-married women aged 18-49 who were
cohabiting rose from 11 to 21 per cent.
Cohabitation is particularly high (28 per
cent) among divorced women, but recently
the largest increase has been for single
women.
There is some evidence of a growing
number of stable non-married relationships.
Roughly half of all births outside marriage
(which accounted for 31 per cent of live
births in Britain in 1992) are registered by
both parents giving a single address as their
place of residence.
Age and Sex Structure
The most significant changes in the age
structure of the population have been the
growing numbers of elderly people and the
decline in the proportion of young people.
The proportion of young people aged under
16 fell from 25.5 per cent in 1971 to 20.6 per
cent in 1993. During the same period the
proportion of elderly people (those aged 65
and over) increased from 13.2 to 15.8 per
cent, while 18.3 per cent of the population
were over the normal retirement ages (65 for
men and 60 for women), compared with
16.3 per cent in 1971.
27
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
There is a ratio of about 104 females to
every 100 males. There are about 3 per cent
more male than female births every year.
Because of the higher mortality of men at all
ages, there is a turning point, at about 50
years of age, beyond which the number of
women exceeds the number of men. This
imbalance increases with age so that there are
many more women among the elderly.
Distribution of Population
The population density is about 241
inhabitants per sq km, which is well above
the EU average of about 153 per sq km. Of
the four lands, England is the most densely
populated, with 372 people per sq km.
Scotland is the least densely populated,
with 66 people per sq km. Wales and
Northern Ireland have 140 and 121 people
per sq km respectively.
Since the 19th century there has been a
trend, especially in London, for people to
move away from congested urban centres into
the suburbs. Between 1981 and 1991 all
metropolitan counties (with the exception of
West Yorkshire) experienced small decreases
in population, the largest being in Merseyside
(5 per cent). There has also been a
geographical redistribution of the population,
away from Scotland and the northern regions
of England. The regions with the highest
rates of increase in population between 1981
and 1991 were East Anglia (10 per cent) and
the South West (8 per cent). Retirement
migration is also a feature of population
movement, the main recipient areas (where in
some towns the retired constitute over one-
quarter of the population) being the south
coast of England and East Anglia.
Migration
From 1988 to 1992 some 1.1 million people
left Britain (excluding the Channel Islands
and the Isle of Man) to live abroad and about
1.2 million came from overseas to live in
Britain, so that net immigration increased
the population by about 75,500. (These
figures exclude migration to and from the
Irish Republic.)
In 1992 the total inflow of people
intending to stay in Britain was 215,900,
some 19 per cent less than in 1991. The
outflow of people leaving to live abroad, at
227,000, was 5 per cent lower than in 1991.
Of the 227,000 departing residents in 1993:
• 25 per cent left for other EU countries;
• 19 per cent for Australia, Canada or
New Zealand;
• 16 per cent for the United States;
• 13 per cent for other Commonwealth
countries;
• 6 per cent for the Middle East; and
• 2 per cent for South Africa.
Of the 215,900 new residents in 1993:
• 32 per cent from other EU countries;
• 16 per cent came from Australia, Canada
or New Zealand;
• 22 per cent from other Commonwealth
countries;
• 8 per cent from the United States;
• 3 per cent from the Middle East; and
• 3 per cent from South Africa.
Nationality
Under the British Nationality Act 1981 there
are three main forms of citizenship:
• British citizenship for people closely
connected with Britain;
• British Dependent Territories citizenship
for people connected with the dependent
territories (see p. 114); and
• British Overseas citizenship for those
citizens of the United Kingdom and
Colonies who did not acquire either of
the other citizenships when the 1981 Act
came into force.
British citizenship is acquired
automatically at birth by a child born in
Britain if his or her mother or father is a
British citizen or is settled in Britain. A child
adopted in Britain by a British citizen is a
British citizen. A child born abroad to a
British citizen born, adopted, naturalised or
registered in Britain is generally a British
citizen by descent. The Act safeguards the
citizenship of a child born abroad to a British
28
THE SOCIAL FRAMEWORK
citizen in Crown service, certain related
services, or in service under a European
Union institution.
British citizenship may also be acquired:
• by registration for certain children,
including those born in Britain who do
not automatically acquire such
citizenship at birth or who have been
born abroad to a parent who is a citizen
by descent;
• by registration for British Dependent
Territories citizens, British Overseas
citizens, British subjects under the Act,
British Nationals (Overseas) and British
protected persons after five years’
residence in Britain, except for people
from Gibraltar, who may be registered
without residence;
• by registration for stateless people and
those who have previously renounced
British nationality; and
• by naturalisation for all other adults
aged 18 or over.
Naturalisation is at the Home Secretary’s
discretion. Requirements include five years’
residence, or three years if the applicant’s
spouse is a British citizen. Those who are
not married to a British citizen are also
required to have a sufficient knowledge of
English, Welsh or Scottish Gaelic; they must
also intend to have their main home in
Britain or be employed by the Crown, by an
international organisation of which Britain is
a member, or by a company or association
established in Britain.
Legislation passed in 1983 conferred
British citizenship on Falkland Islanders who
did not acquire it under the 1981 Act.
Special arrangements covering the status of
British Dependent Territories citizens
connected with Hong Kong when the
territory returns to the People’s Republic of
China in 1997 are made by the Hong Kong
(British Nationality) Order 1986. Under this,
such citizens are entitled, before 1997, to
acquire a status known as British National
(Overseas) and to hold a passport in that
status. In addition, the British Nationality
(Hong Kong) Act 1990 made provision for
the registration as British citizens before
30 June 1997 of up to 50,000 people who are
able to meet certain criteria and who are
recommended by the Governor, together
with their spouses and children who are
still minors.
In 1993 about 45,000 people acquired
British citizenship by naturalisation or
registration in Britain.
Immigration
Immigration into Britain is controlled under
the Immigration Rules, and the Asylum and
Immigration Appeals Act 1993. These set out
the requirements to be met by those,
excluding British citizens, who seek entry to
or leave to remain in Britain. British citizens
and those Commonwealth citizens who had
the right of abode before 1 January 1983
maintain the right of abode and are not
subject to immigration control.
Under the Immigration Rules nationals of
certain specified countries or territorial
entities must obtain a visa before they can
enter Britain. Other nationals subject to
immigration control require entry clearance
when coming to work or settle in Britain.
Visas and other entry clearances are normally
obtained from the nearest or other specified
British diplomatic post in the applicant’s
home country.
Nationals of European Economic Area
(EEA) countries—EU member states plus
Austria, Finland, Iceland, Norway and
Sweden (see p. 118)—are not subject to
substantive immigration control. They may
work in Britain without restriction. Provided
that they are working or able to support
themselves financially, EEA nationals have a
right to reside in Britain. Britain respects its
obligations under the United Nations
Convention and Protocol relating to the
Status of Refugees. These provide that
refugees lawfully resident in a contracting
state should enjoy treatment at least as
favourable as that accorded to other foreign
nationals in similar circumstances.
In 1993, nearly 10 million foreign and
Commonwealth nationals (excluding EU
nationals) were admitted to Britain.
About 55,600 people were accepted for
settlement.
29
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
LANGUAGE
English is the main language spoken in
Britain, and is also one of the most widely
used in the world/ Recent estimates suggest
that 310 million people speak it as their first
language, with a similar number speaking it as
a second language. It is an official language in
a large number of overseas countries, and is
widely used as the main language for
purposes such as air traffic control and
academic gatherings.
Modern English derives primarily from
one of the dialects of Anglo-Saxon. However,
it has been very greatly influenced by other
languages, particularly, following the Norman
conquest, by French. French was the
language of the nobility and the law courts
for many years after 1066. The re-emergence
of English as the universal language of
England was signified by such events as the
Statute of Pleadings in 1362, which laid down
that English was to be used in court. The
14th century also saw the first major English
literature since Anglo-Saxon days, with the
writing of works such as Piers Plowman by
William Langland and The Canterbury
Tales by Geoffrey Chaucer. However, there
remained great regional variations in
the language, and spellings were not
always standardised.
2 For Welsh language see p. 22; for Gaelic see p. 21.
The 16th and early 17th centuries saw a
considerable flowering of English literature,
with writers such as William Shakespeare,
Edmund Spenser and Christopher Marlowe.
Cranmer’s prayerbook and the Authorised
(‘King James’) Version of the Bible, which
have had a profound effect on literature down
to modern times, also date from this period.
The work of lexicographers, of whom the
most famous was Samuel Johnson (1709-84),
also led to greater standardisation in matters
such as spelling.
ETHNIC AND NATIONAL MINORITIES
For centuries people from overseas have
settled in Britain, either to escape political or
religious persecution or in search of better
economic opportunities.
The Irish have long formed a large section
of the population. Jewish refugees who came
to Britain towards the end of the 19th
century and in the 1930s were followed by
other European refugees after 1945.
Substantial immigration from the Caribbean
and the South Asian sub-continent dates
principally from the 1950s and 1960s. In
recent years, the number of people coming
from the South Asian sub-continent has
remained roughly stable, but there has been a
rise in immigration from some African
countries, such as Ghana and Nigeria
(see Table 6.1).
The 1991 census included for the first
India
United States
Nigeria
Bangladesh
Sri Lanka
Japan
Australia
Hong Kong
Ghana
Jamaica
Philippines
Iran
5,380
3,940
360
4,870
920
1,010
2,680
1,050
560
310
680
1,980
4,890
4,060
2,750
2,550
1,940
1,810
1,680
1,510
1,350
1,270
1,200
1,070
-9.1
3.0
663.9
-47.6
110.9
79.2
-37.3
43.8
141.1
309.7
76.5
-46.0
Source: Home Office.
30
THE SOCIAL FRAMEWORK
time a question on ethnic grouping. This
found that 94.5 per cent of the population
belonged to the ‘white’ group, while just over
3 million people (5.5 per cent) described
themselves as belonging to another ethnic
group (see Table 6.2). Members of other
ethnic groups were heavily concentrated in
industrial and urban areas, and over half
lived in the South East. The highest
proportion was in the London borough of
Brent: nearly 45 per cent of the population.
Ethnic minority groups also accounted for
over a third of the population in the
London boroughs of Newham, Tower
Hamlets and Hackney.
Outside London the main concentrations
were in Leicester, Slough, Luton, Bradford,
the West Midlands and the Pennine
conurbation. Regional concentrations varied
among the ethnic groups. About three-fifths
of people from black ethnic groups lived in
London, compared with about two-fifths of
Indians and 18 per cent of Pakistanis, who
were concentrated in other metropolitan areas
such as West Yorkshire.
Overall, 47 per cent of the ethnic minority
population were born in Britain. A higher
proportion is under 16 than for the white
group (33 per cent and 19 per cent
respectively), but a much lower proportion is
over pensionable age (3 per cent and about
17 per cent respectively).
According to the Labour Force Survey,
economic activity rates for men of working
age in Great Britain tend to be similar to
those for the white groups. In autumn 1993
Table 6.2: Population by Ethnic
Group, 1991, Great Britain
Number of
People (000s) Per cent
White 51,874 9L5
Other groups 3,015 5.5
of whom:
Black 891 1.6
Indian 840 1.5
Pakistani 477 0.9
Bangladeshi 163 0.3
Chinese 157 0.3
Other 488 0.9
Source: Office of Population Censuses and Surveys
they were 77 per cent for the black group, 76
per cent for the Indian group, and 73 per
cent for both the white and Pakistani/
Bangladeshi populations. The variations are
much greater for women: 61 per cent of those
from the black ethnic group were
economically active, compared with 59 per
cent in the Indian group, 53 per cent in the
white group and only 26 per cent in the
Pakistani/Bangladeshi group.
Alleviating Racial Disadvantage
Although many members of the black and
Asian communities are concentrated in the
inner cities, where there are problems of
deprivation and social stress, progress has
been made over the last 20 years in tackling
racial disadvantage in Britain.
Many individuals have achieved distinction
in their careers and in public life, and the
proportion of ethnic minority members
occupying professional and managerial
positions is increasing. There are at present
six ethnic minority Members of Parliament,
and the number of ethnic minority
councillors in local government is growing.
There has also been an expansion of
commercial enterprise, and numerous self-
help projects in ethnic minority communities
have been established. Black competitors
have represented Britain in a range of
sporting activities (such as athletics and
football), and ethnic minority talents in the
arts and in entertainment have increasingly
been recognised.
The principal means of combating
disadvantage is through the economic,
environmental, educational and health
programmes of central government and
local authorities. There are also special
allocations, mainly through Home Office
and Department of the Environment
grants, which channel extra resources into
projects of specific benefit to ethnic
minorities. These include, for example, the
provision of specialist teachers for
children needing English language tuition.
Cultural and recreational schemes and
the health and personal social services also
take account of the particular needs of
ethnic minorities.
31
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Government is promoting equal
opportunities for ethnic minorities through
training programmes, including greater
provision for unemployed people who need
training in English as a second language.
In recognition of the tensions that can
arise between the police and ethnic
minorities, there is statutory consultation
between the police and the community.
Liaison work is also undertaken with children
in schools.
Race Relations Legislation
The Race Relations Act 1976 strengthened
previous legislation passed in the 1960s. It
makes discrimination unlawful on grounds of
colour, race, nationality or ethnic or national
origin in the provision of goods, facilities and
services, in employment, in housing, in
education and in advertising. The 1976 Act
also gave complainants direct access to civil
courts and, for employment complaints, to
industrial tribunals. It is a criminal offence to
incite racial hatred under the provisions of
the Public Order Act 1986.
Commission for Racial Equality
The Commission for Racial Equality was
established by the 1976 Act. It has power to
investigate unlawful discriminatory practices
and to issue non-discrimination notices,
requiring such practices to cease. It has an
important educational role and has issued
codes of practice in employment, education,
health care and housing. It also provides
advice to the general public about the Race
Relations Act and has discretion to assist
individuals with their complaints about
racial discrimination. In 1993 the Commission
registered 1,630 applications for assistance
and handled successfully 210 litigation cases.
It can also undertake or fund research.
The Commission supports the work of
over 90 racial equality councils. These are
autonomous voluntary bodies set up in most
areas with a significant ethnic minority
population to promote equality of
opportunity and good relations at the local
level. The Commission helps pay the
salaries of the racial equality officers
employed by the councils, most of whom
also receive funds from their local
authorities. It also gives grants to ethnic
minority self-help groups and to other
projects run by or for the benefit of the
minority communities.
THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL
PATTERN
Marked improvements in the standard of
living have taken place during the 20th
century. According to a United Nations
report on human development published in
1994, Britain ranked tenth out of 173
countries on a human development index that
combines life expectancy, education levels
and basic purchasing power.
Britain has also performed well
economically. Growth between 1980 and 1990
was higher than in all other major EU
countries except Spain. Subsequently,
following the recession of the early 1990s,
Britain has been one of the first countries to
experience recovery. Gross domestic product
in Britain grew by 1.9 per cent in 1993, with
an increase in manufacturing output and
growth in retail sales. Inflation has recently
been around 2 per cent a year, with the
underlying level of inflation in 1993 and 1994
the lowest since 1967.
Income and Wealth
Earnings from employment remain the main
source of household income for most people,
although the proportion of household income
(57 per cent in 1992, compared with 68 per
cent in 1971) has been declining. Sources
which have become more important include
private pensions and annuities (11 per cent,
up from 5 per cent in 1971) as the number of
people who have made such provision has
grown. By 1992, disposable income—the
amount of money people have available to
spend after the deduction of income tax,
National Insurance contributions and
contributions to pension schemes—is now at
its highest ever level. Disposable income in
1992 was nearly 80 per cent higher than in
1971 after allowing for inflation.
The proportion of household income paid
32
THE SOCIAL FRAMEWORK
in income tax has remained steady in recent
years and stood at 13 per cent in 1992. The
top 20 per cent of households by income
received 41 per cent of income in 1990-91.
Wealth is less evenly distributed, with the
richest 10 per cent of the population having
50 per cent of marketable wealth in 1991.
The inclusion of ‘non-marketable’ rights in
occupational and state pension schemes
reduces this share substantially, to 36 per
cent. Since the mid-1970s there has been
little change in the distribution of
marketable wealth.
A large proportion of personal wealth—33
per cent in 1992—is in dwellings, down quite
sharply from the level of immediately
preceding years as house prices have fallen.
The proportion of net wealth held in shares
declined up to 1984, but has since increased.
The Government’s privatisation programme
has contributed to the growth in share
ownership. In 1993 about 10 million people—
22 per cent of the adult population in Great
Britain—owned shares, compared with 7 per
cent in 1979.
Eating and Drinking Habits
The general level of nutrition remains high.
There has been a significant shift in eating
patterns over the last decade, reflecting
greater emphasis on health, frozen and
convenience foods. Changes in household
consumption of selected foods between 1983
and 1993 are shown in the diagram below.
Consumption of several items, such as packet
sugar, eggs, fresh potatoes and fresh green
vegetables, has declined substantially. Other
changes include:
• a decline in consumption of beef, lamb
and pork—this has been partly offset by
a continuing increase in poultry
consumption, which is now at a record
level;
Changes in Average Household Food Consumption 1983-1993
%
Note: Average household food consumption may be affected
by the decline in household size as well as changes in eating habits.
Sou rce: National Food Survey, M AFF.
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
• an increase in purchases of semi-skimmed
milk, with skimmed milk now
constituting more than half of the total
household consumption of liquid milk;
• a decline in the total consumption of
cooking and spreading fats, with large
falls in butter and lard usage being partly
offset by rapid rises in the consumption
of vegetable and salad oils and reduced
fat spreads;
• a trend away from consumption of some
fresh green vegetables such as cabbages
and beans towards leafy salads and
cauliflowers;
• a large increase in purchases of fruit
juice; and
• a switch in fish consumption away from
fresh white fish towards canned fish and
shellfish.
Average mineral and nutrient intakes are
generally above the daily amounts
recommended by the Department of Health.
There has been a steady fall in fat intakes,
and a small increase in the intake of fibre.
There is some evidence that health
considerations influence food consumption, as
in the move away from whole milk and the
growth in low fat spread consumption. The
Government encourages the widest
availability of wholesome food, while giving
high priority to consumer safety.
There has been an increase in the number
of meals eaten away from home, for example,
in restaurants or at work, and a growth in the
consumption of food from ‘take-away’ and
‘fast-food’ shops.
There has been little change in alcohol
consumption in recent years. Beer is the most
popular drink among male drinkers, whose
overall consumption is significantly higher
than that of women. Lager is now estimated
to account for over half of all beer sales. The
largest consumers of alcohol are those aged 18
to 24, with consumption generally declining
with age. Consumption of table wine has
grown, although there has been little change
in the consumption of higher strength wines
such as sherry and port.
A high proportion of beer is drunk in
public houses (‘pubs’), traditional social
centres for many people, and in clubs. The
Licensing Act 1988 relaxed restrictions on the
opening hours of public houses, but this has
not resulted in a significant increase in
consumption. There are signs that they are
becoming more popular with families: more
meals are being served and the consumption
of non-alcoholic drinks is increasing. Under
proposals in the Deregulation and
Contracting Out Bill (see p. 197), pubs
would be able to apply for a children’s
certificate. This would allow children under
14 into designated areas if accompanied by
an adult.
Households
The average size of households in Great
Britain has fallen from over four people in
1911 to three in 1961 and 2.4 in 1992. The
fall reflects a greater number of people living
on their own (14 per cent of adults in 1992),
or in one-parent families, the increasing
number of old people (more of whom
are living alone) and the preference for
smaller families.
A large proportion of households, 67 per
cent, own or are buying their own homes.
Owner-occupation is higher among married
couples than for single, divorced or widowed
household heads. The number of owner-
occupied dwellings rose from over 4 million
in 1951 to nearly 15.5 million in 1992. Four-
fifths of British households live in houses
rather than flats.
Transport and the Environment
An important influence on the planning of
housing and services has been the growth of
car ownership; in 1992, 69 per cent of
households had the use of at least one car or
van, including 24 per cent with the use of
two or more. Greater access to motorised
transport and the construction of a network
of modern trunk roads and motorways have
resulted in a considerable increase in
personal mobility and changed leisure
patterns. Most detached or semi-detached
houses in new suburban estates have garages.
Many out-of-town shopping centres, often
including large supermarkets and do-it-
34
THE SOCIAL FRAMEWORK
yourself stores, have been built with the
motorist in mind.
Although the growth in car ownership has
brought benefits, there have been a number
of problems, notably increased congestion,
noise and air pollution arising from motor
vehicle emissions. Cars, taxis and motor
cycles accounted for 87 per cent of all
passenger transport in Great Britain in 1992,
compared with 55 per cent in 1961. To
relieve road congestion, the Government
regards carefully targeted improvements to
the road system as essential. The
Government is also seeking to use the
planning system (see p. 343) to reduce
people’s need to travel without inhibiting
their freedom to do so. To help meet the
British target for reducing carbon dioxide
emissions (see p.362), it is increasing fuel
duty by 5 per cent a year in real terms.
Women
The economic and domestic lives of women
have been transformed in the 20th century.
These changes are due partly to the
removal of much of sex discrimination in
political and legal rights. A major feature has
been the rise in the number of women,
especially married women, at work. With the
decline in family size, more women are now
combining raising a family with paid
employment. Women now make up more
than two-fifths of the workforce. The growth
of part-time and flexible working patterns,
and training and retraining schemes, allows
more women to take advantage of
employment opportunities. More than
740,000 women now run their own
businesses—nearly double the number who
did so in 1980.
Availability of Certain Durable Goods
full or partial
refrigerator or
fridge freezer
,^7, 1 \»—^
Per cent of households with goods
35
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In 1992 the Department of Employment
assumed responsibility for co-ordinating
policy and strategy on women’s issues. The
Secretary of State set up a working group to
advise on practical measures to extend equal
opportunities for women in the workplace
and elsewhere. The Women’s National
Commission, an official advisory committee,
represents the views of women to the
Government and other public bodies. About
50 of the main national women’s organisations
are represented on the Commission.
The Government supports the
‘Opportunity 2000’ campaign, an employer-
led initiative to increase the quantity and
quality of women’s participation in the
workforce. Membership stands at some 200
employers, with organisations employing
nearly a quarter of the workforce being
committed to the campaign.
In April 1994 the Department of
Employment and the Equal
Opportunities Commission announced
a new regional initiative in England—
‘Fair Play for Women’, modelled on a
programme launched in Wales in
1991. Its aim is to encourage women
to realise their full potential in the
community. The Government is
supplying start-up funding of £750,000
to help establish regional consortia
involving groups such as trade unions
and Training and Enterprise Councils.
The Government has also launched a
number of initiatives. It is spending
£45 million to help set up over 50,000 out-
of-school childcare places in Great Britain.
In 1991 the Government launched an
initiative to increase the proportion of public
appointments held by women, which has
subsequently gone up from 23 per cent to
28 per cent.
Equal Opportunities
The Sex Discrimination Acts 1975 and 1986
make discrimination between men and women
unlawful, with certain limited exceptions, in
employment, education, training and the
provision of housing, goods, facilities and
services. Discriminatory job recruitment
advertisements are also unlawful. Complaints
of discrimination concerning employment are
dealt with by industrial tribunals; other
complaints are taken before county courts in
England and Wales or the Sheriff Court in
Scotland. Under the Equal Pay Act 1970, as
amended in 1984, women in Great Britain are
entitled to equal pay with men when doing
work that is the same or broadly similar, or
work which is rated as equivalent or work
which is of equal value. Parallel legislation on
sex discrimination and equal pay is in
operation in Northern Ireland.
The Equal Opportunities Commission, set
up in 1975 (1976 in Northern Ireland under
separate laws), has powers to enforce some
parts of the Sex Discrimination and Equal
Pay Acts. Its statutory duties are to work
towards the elimination of sex discrimination,
to promote equality of opportunity, and to
keep legislation on sex discrimination and
equal pay under review, submitting
proposals for amending it to the
Government The Commission may advise
people of their rights under the Acts and may
give financial or other assistance to help
individuals conduct a case before a court or
tribunal. It is empowered to carry out formal
investigations and issue notices requiring
discriminatory practices to stop. The
Commission carries out research on the
causes, content and effects of discrimination.
It runs an ‘Equality Exchange’, which enables
employers to exchange information on good
practice.
The Voluntary Sector
There is a long tradition in Britain of
voluntary service to the community. There
are hundreds of thousands of voluntary
organisations, ranging from national bodies to
small local groups. Their activities range
from helping protect the global environment
to running a village hall.
One area of rapid expansion in about the
last 20 years has been ‘self-help’ groups.
Examples include bodies which provide
playgroups for pre-school children, or help
their members cope with a particular disability.
36
THE SOCIAL FRAMEWORK
Voluntary organisations may be staffed by
professional workers, but all rely on the
efforts of volunteers at some level. It has
been estimated that up to half of all adults
take part in some form of organised voluntary
activity in the course of the year. Many
volunteers are involved in work which
improves the quality of life in their local
communities or, more widely, give their time
to help organise events and groups in areas as
diverse as social welfare, education, sport and
the arts. A very large number are also
involved in activities to protect or improve
the environment, for example, the National
Trust (see p. 348), which has over 2 million
members.
The Government greatly values the
voluntary sector’s contribution to society and,
as a result, is keen to encourage productive
partnerships between the statutory and
voluntary sectors. For example, voluntary
organisations are important providers of
government-supported employment and
training services for unemployed people.
The Home Office Voluntary Services Unit
is responsible for co-ordinating government
policy towards the voluntary sector
throughout Britain. It also aims to support a
healthy and cost-effective voluntary sector
and to promote volunteering. In connection
with this, the ‘Make a Difference’ initiative
was launched in March 1994, bringing the
business, voluntary and public sectors
together to develop effective local voluntary
action. As one aspect of the initiative, the
Government is giving grants to partnerships
of people from business, the public and
voluntary sectors who come forward with the
most innovative ideas for encouraging
volunteering.
Funding
Voluntary organisations receive income from
several sources, including contributions from
individuals, businesses and trusts; central and
local government grants; and earnings from
commercial activities and investments. They
also receive fees (from central and local
government) for those services which are
provided on a contractual basis. In 1992-93
direct grants to voluntary organisations from
government amounted to £563 million.
Tax changes in recent budgets have
helped the voluntary sector secure more
funds from industry and individuals. The
Gift Aid scheme provides tax relief on single
cash donations to charity of more than £250.
By June 1994 charities had received donations
of more than £730 million under the scheme
and had claimed tax repayments of
£244 million on them. Employees can also
make tax-free donations to charity from
their earnings. The Payroll Giving scheme
provides tax relief on donations of up to
£900 a year.
Table 6.3: Income of the Top Fund-raising Charities 1992-3
Charity £ million
total income
Voluntary
income^
National Trust
Save the Children Fund
Barnardo’s
Oxfam
Salvation Army
Royal National Lifeboat Institution
British Red Cross Society
Spastics Society
Imperial Cancer Research Fund
Royal National Institute for the Blind
Cancer Research Campaign
Christian Aid
132.4
99.6
75.5
73.3
64.5
62.3
60.7
56.6
53.0
47.0
44.7
42.1
70.4
65.2
34.5
53.3
31.4
55.8
28.0
21.5
47.5
24.9
40.9
26.4
Source: Charities Aid Foundation.
' Mostly donations but also includes other funds such as legacies and proceeds of charity shops.
37
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Charities
In England and Wales there are over 171,000
charities registered with the Charity
Commission. The Commission also gives
advice to trustees of charities on their
administration. Organisations are charities if
they are established for exclusively charitable
purposes such as the relief of poverty, the
advancement of education or religion, or the
promotion of certain other purposes of public
benefit. These may include good community
relations, the prevention of racial
discrimination, the protection of health and
the promotion of equal opportunity. The
Charity Commission also has a statutory
responsibility to ensure that charities make
effective use of their resources. The Charities
Act 1992 strengthened the Commissioners’
power to investigate and supervise charities,
thereby increasing their accountability.
The Charities Aid Foundation, an
independent body, is one of the main
organisations that aid the flow of funds to
charity from individuals, companies and
grant-making trusts.
Umbrella Organisations
The National Council for Voluntary
Organisations is one of the main
co-ordinating bodies in England, providing
close links between voluntary organisations,
government departments, local authorities,
the European Commission and the private
sector; around 625 national voluntary
organisations are members. It also protects
the interests and independence of voluntary
agencies, and provides them with advice,
information and other services. Councils in
Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland
perform similar functions. The National
Association of Councils for Voluntary Service
is another umbrella organisation providing
resources and advice, with over 230 local
councils for voluntary service throughout
England. Their role is to encourage the
development of local voluntary action, mainly
in urban areas. The rural equivalent is Action
with Communities in Rural England, an
organisation which represents 38 rural
community councils.
Leisure Trends
About 14 per cent of total household
expenditure went on leisure goods and
services in 1993. The most common leisure
activities are home-based, or social, such as
visiting relatives or friends. Television
viewing is by far the most popular leisure
pastime, and nearly all households have a
television set, with 96 per cent in 1992
having a colour set. Average viewing time
is nearly 27 hours a week. Around 73 per
cent of households now have at least one
video recorder, compared with 30 per cent
in 1985.
Listening to radio has been increasing, and
averages over 10 hours a week. Purchases of
compact discs have risen very rapidly, and in
1992 for the first time exceeded the sales of
audio cassettes. The proportion of households
with a compact disc player has grown
considerably, from 15 per cent in 1989 to 39
per cent in 1993.
Other popular pursuits include: reading,
do-it-yourself home improvements, gardening
and going out for a meal, for a drink or to
the cinema. About half of households have a
pet, the most common being dogs and cats,
with roughly 7 million of each in Britain.
Holidays
In 1993, 61 per cent of the adult population
took at least one long holiday of four or more
nights away from home. The number of long
holidays taken by British residents was nearly
56 million, of which 33 million were taken in
Britain. The most frequented free attraction
was Blackpool Pleasure Beach (Lancashire),
with 6.7 million visitors. The most popular
destinations for summer holidays are the
West Country, Scotland and Wales.
In 1993 the most popular destinations for
overseas holidays by British residents were:
• Spain (25 per cent);
• France (11 per cent);
• the United States (9 per cent); and
• Greece (8 per cent).
In all, British residents took over
23 million holidays overseas in 1993, of
which 58 per cent involved ‘package’
38
THE SOCIAL FRAMEWORK
arrangements. About 74 per cent of all
holidays abroad are taken in Europe, although
more people are taking holidays further afield,
Further Reading
Immigration and Nationality. Aspects of Britain
Annual Reports
Family Spending. HMSO.
General Household Survey. HMSO.
Social Trends. HMSO.
Women and Men in Britain. Equal Opportunities Commission.
such as to the United States. The proportion
of adults taking two or more holidays a year
was 16 per cent in 1993.
series, HMSO, 1992.
39
Government and
Administration
7
Government
Development 43
The Monarchy 44
Parliament 48
Her Majesty’s Government 61
The Privy Council 63
Government Departments 64
Citizen’s Charter 66
The Civil Service 68
Local Government 71
Pressure Groups 76
The system of parliamentary government in Britain is not based on a written
constitution, but is the result of gradual evolution over many centuries. The
monarchy is the oldest institution of government, dating back to at least the
ninth century. Parliament is one of the oldest representative assemblies in the
world. In government among the most significant recent developments have
been the steps taken to improve management. New management structures—
such as the creation of executive agencies—have been developed; competition
has been introduced or extended; and arrangements for pay are changing.
The aim of all these changes is to safeguard and improve the standards of the
public services.
Development of the British
System of Government
The growth of political institutions in
England can be traced back to the period of
Saxon rule, which lasted from the fifth
century ad until the Norman Conquest in
1066 (see p. 7). This period saw the origins
of the institution of kingship, and of the idea
that the king should seek the advice of a
council of prominent men.
The period of Norman rule after 1066 saw
a considerable strengthening of royal power.
However, the monarchy eventually
experienced difficulties in controlling the
growing machinery of government. The
actions of King John (1199-1216) led to
opposition from the nobility and leading
figures in the Church. In 1215 the barons
forced the King to agree to a series of
concessions embodied in a charter which
became known as Magna Carta. The charter,
which provided for the protection of the
rights of freemen against the abuse of royal
power, came to be regarded as the key
expression of the rights of the community
against the Crown.
The first known occurrence of the term
‘Parliament’ to describe the meetings of
nobles to advise the king is in 1236; by the
late 13th century representatives of counties
and towns were also occasionally being
summoned at the same time, usually to
express political support, but increasingly to
give consent to taxation. By the end of the
15th century Parliament existed in a form
virtually recognisable today: as a body whose
43
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
function was to agree to taxes and to legislate,
and which consisted of two separate
chambers—the House of Commons and the
House of Lords.
Although the influence of government in
Parliament was considerable, the body was
always an area for political conflict; one such
clash led to the outbreak of the Civil War in
1642 between Crown and Parliament.
Following the defeat of the royalist armies
and the execution of Charles I in 1649, the
monarchy and the House of Lords were
abolished and the country was proclaimed a
republic. However, the republican experiment
came to an end in 1660, two years after the
death of the ‘Lord Protector’, Oliver
Cromwell. Charles Ps son was restored to the
throne as Charles II.
Charles IPs successor, James VII and II
(1685-88), sought both to bypass Parliament
and to make it more amenable. As a result, in
1688 a group of leading men invited William
of Orange (a grandson of Charles I and the
husband of Mary, James VII and IPs eldest
daughter) to ‘secure the infringed liberties’ of
the country. James VII and II fled into exile.
Following the success of the revolution of
1688, Parliament in 1689 passed the Bill of
Rights, which defined the rights and
privileges of Parliament.
Increasingly thereafter parliamentary
control of national finance made it
impracticable for the Sovereign to ignore the
wishes of Parliament. Ministers were
appointed by the Sovereign, but they had to
have sufficient support in the House of
Commons to enable them to persuade
Parliament to pass legislation and vote for
taxation. The development of ‘party’ during
the 18th and 19th centuries provided them
with the machinery for securing that support,
while the personal involvement of the
monarch in policy and the day-to-day
business of administration declined, leaving
government in the hands of the cabinet,
presided over by a ‘Prime’ Minister.
Since the mid-19th century the Prime
Minister has normally been the leader of the
party with a majority in the House of Commons.
The Reform Act of 1832 altered the
medieval system of parliamentary
representation and standardised the
qualifications for the right to vote.
Subsequent reforms gave the vote to virtually
all adults—women were finally enfranchised
in 1918, but not on the same terms as men
until 1928.
The British Constitution
The British constitution is to a large extent a
product of the historical events described
above. Unlike the constitutions of most
other countries, it is not set out in any single
document. Instead it is made up of statute
law, common law and conventions.
(Conventions are rules and practices which
are not legally enforceable but which are
regarded as indispensable to the working
of government.)
The constitution can be altered by Act
of Parliament, or by general agreement,
and is thus adaptable to changing political
conditions.
The organs of government overlap but can
be clearly distinguished. Parliament is the
legislature and the supreme authority. The
executive consists of:
• the Government—the Cabinet and other
ministers responsible for national policies;
• government departments, responsible for
national administration;
• local authorities, responsible for many
local services; and
• public corporations, responsible for
operating particular nationalised
industries or other bodies, subject to
ministerial control.
The judiciary (see Chapter 8) determines
common law and interprets statutes.
The Monarchy
The monarchy is the oldest institution of
government, going back to at least the 9th
century. Queen Elizabeth II is herself directly
descended from King Egbert, who united
England under his rule in 829. The only
interruption in the history of the monarchy
was the republic, which lasted from 1649 to
1660 (see above).
44
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Today the Queen is not only head of
State, but also an important symbol of
national unity. The royal title in Britain is:
‘Elizabeth the Second, by the Grace of God
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and of Her other Realms
and Territories Queen, Head of the
Commonwealth, Defender of the Faith’.
In the Channel Islands and the Isle of
Man the Queen is represented by a
Lieutenant-Governor.
The Commonwealth
Although the seat of the monarchy is in
Britain, the Queen is also head of state of a
number of Commonwealth states.1 In each
such state the Queen is represented by a
Governor-General, appointed by her on the
advice of the ministers of the country
concerned and completely independent of
the British Government. In each case the
form of the royal title varies. Other
Commonwealth states are republics or have
their own monarchies.
In British dependent territories (see p. 114)
the Queen is usually represented by
governors, who are responsible to the British
Government for the administration of the
countries concerned.
Succession
The title to the Crown is derived partly
from statute and partly from common law
rules of descent. Despite interruptions in the
direct line of succession, the hereditary
principle upon which it was founded has
always been preserved.
Sons of the Sovereign have precedence
over daughters in succeeding to the throne.
When a daughter succeeds, she becomes
Queen Regnant, and has the same powers as
a king. The consort of a king takes her
husband’s rank and style, becoming Queen.
The constitution does not give any special
rank or privileges to the husband of a Queen
1 The other Commonwealth countries of which the Queen is
head of state are: Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, Bahamas,
Barbados, Belize, Canada, Grenada, Jamaica, New Zealand,
Papua New Guinea, Saint Christopher and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Solomon Islands and Tuvalu.
Regnant, although in practice he fills an
important role in the life of the nation, as
does the Duke of Edinburgh.
Under the Act of Settlement of 1700,
which formed part of the Revolution
Settlement following the events of 1688
(see p. 44), only Protestant descendants of a
granddaughter of James I of England and VI
of Scotland (Princess Sophia, the Electress
of Hanover) are eligible to succeed. The
order of succession can be altered only by
common consent of the countries of
the Commonwealth.
Accession
The Sovereign succeeds to the throne as soon
as his or her predecessor dies: there is no
interregnum. He or she is at once proclaimed
at an Accession Council, to which all
members of the Privy Council (see p. 63) are
summoned. The Lords Spiritual and
Temporal (see p. 50), the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen and other leading citizens of the
City of London are also invited.
Coronation
The Sovereign’s coronation follows the
accession after a convenient interval. The
ceremony takes place at Westminster Abbey
in London, in the presence of representatives
of the Houses of Parliament and of all the
great public organisations in Britain. The
Prime Ministers and leading members of the
other Commonwealth nations and
representatives of other countries also attend.
The Monarch’s Role in Government
The Queen personifies the State. In law, she
is head of the executive, an integral part of
the legislature, head of the judiciary, the
commander-in-chief of all the armed forces of
the Crown and the ‘supreme governor’ of the
established Church of England. As a result of
a long process of evolution, during which the
monarchy’s absolute power has been
progressively reduced, the Queen acts on the
advice of her ministers. Britain is governed
by Her Majesty’s Government in the name
of the Queen.
46
GOVERNMENT
Within this framework, and in spite of a
trend during the past hundred years towards
giving powers directly to ministers, the
Queen still takes part in some important acts
of government. These include summoning,
proroguing (discontinuing until the next
session without dissolution) and dissolving
Parliament; and giving Royal Assent to Bills
passed by Parliament. The Queen also
formally appoints many important office
holders, including government ministers,
judges, officers in the armed forces,
governors, diplomats, bishops and some
other senior clergy of the Church of
England. She is also involved in pardoning
people convicted of crimes; and in
conferring peerages, knighthoods and other
honours/ An important function is
appointing the Prime Minister (see p. 61). In
international affairs the Queen, as head of
State, has the power to declare war and make
peace, to recognise foreign states and
governments, to conclude treaties and to
annex or cede territory.
With rare exceptions (such as appointing
the Prime Minister), acts involving the use
of ‘royal prerogative’ powers are now
performed by government ministers, who are
responsible to Parliament and can be
questioned about particular policies.
Parliamentary authority is not required for
the exercise of these prerogative powers,
although Parliament may restrict or abolish
such rights.
The Queen continues to play a role in the
working of government. She holds Privy
Council meetings, gives audiences to her
ministers and officials in Britain and overseas,
receives accounts of Cabinet decisions, reads
dispatches and signs state papers. She must
be consulted on every aspect of national life,
and must show complete impartiality.
Provision has been made to appoint a
regent to perform these royal functions
should the Queen be totally incapacitated.
The regent would be the Queen’s eldest
son, the Prince of Wales, then those, in order
of succession to the throne, aged 18 or over.
2 Although most honours are conferred by the Queen on the
advice of the Prime Minister, a few are granted by her
personally—the Order of the Garter, the Order of the Thistle, the
Order of Merit and the Royal Victorian Order.
In the event of her partial incapacity or
absence abroad, the Queen may delegate
certain royal functions to the Counsellors of
State (the Duke of Edinburgh, the four
adults next in line of succession, and the
Queen Mother). However, Counsellors of
State may not, for instance, dissolve
Parliament (except on the Queen’s
instructions), nor create peers.
Ceremonial and Royal Visits
Ceremonial has always been associated with
the British monarchy, and, in spite of
changes in the outlook of both the Sovereign
and the people, many traditional ceremonies
continue to take place. Royal marriages and
royal funerals are marked by public
ceremony, and the Sovereign’s birthday is
officially celebrated in June by Trooping the
Colour on Horse Guards Parade. State
banquets take place when a foreign monarch
or head of State visits Britain; investitures are
held at Buckingham Palace and the Palace of
Holyroodhouse in Scotland to bestow
honours; and royal processions add
significance to such occasions as the state
opening of Parliament.
Each year the Queen and other members
of the royal family visit many parts of
Britain. They are also closely involved in the
work of many charities. For example, the
Prince of Wales is actively involved in the
Youth Business Trust set up to encourage
small firms and self employment in inner
cities, while the Princess Royal is President of
the Save the Children Fund and takes an
active interest in third world development
issues. The Queen pays state visits to foreign
governments, accompanied by the Duke of
Edinburgh. She also tours the other countries
of the Commonwealth. Other members of the
royal family pay official visits overseas,
occasionally representing the Queen.
Royal Income and Expenditure
Until 1760 the Sovereign had to provide for
payment of all government expenses,
including the salaries of officials and the
expenses of the royal palaces and households.
These were met from hereditary revenues,
47
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
mainly income from Crown lands, and
income from some other sources granted to
the monarch by Parliament. The income from
these sources eventually proved inadequate
and in 1760 George III turned over to the
Government most of the hereditary revenue.
In return he received an annual grant (Civil
List) from which he continued to pay royal
expenditure of a personal character, the
salaries of government officials, the costs of
royal palaces, and certain pensions. The
latter charges were removed from the Civil
List in 1830.
Present Arrangements
Today the expenditure incurred by the
Queen in carrying out her public duties is
financed from the Civil List and from
government departments (which meet the
cost of, for example, the Royal Yacht and the
aircraft of the Queen’s Flight). All such
expenditure is approved by Parliament. In
1991 Civil List payments were fixed at
.£7.9 million a year for ten years. About
three-quarters of the Queen’s Civil List
provision is required to meet the cost of
staff They deal with, among other things,
state papers and correspondence and the
organisation of state occasions, visits and
other public engagements undertaken by
the Queen in Britain and overseas. The
Queen’s private expenditure as Sovereign is met
from the Privy Purse, which is financed mainly
from the revenue of the Duchy of Lancaster;
her expenditure as a private individual is met
from her own personal resources.
Since April 1993 the Queen has
voluntarily paid income tax on all her
personal income and on that part of the Privy
Purse income which is used for private
purposes. The Queen also pays tax on any
realised capital gains on her private
investments and on the private proportion of
assets in the Privy Purse. Inheritance tax will
not, however, apply to transfers from one
sovereign to his or her successor, although
any personal bequests other than to the
3 The Duchy of Lancaster is an inheritance which, since 1399,
has always been enjoyed by the reigning Sovereign. It is kept
quite apart from his or her other possessions and is separately
administered by the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster.
successor will be subject to inheritance tax.
In line with these changes the Prince of
Wales pays income tax on the income from
the Duchy of Cornwall to the extent that it is
used for private purposes.
Under the Civil List Acts, other members
of the royal family also receive annual
parliamentary allowances to enable them to
carry out their public duties. The Prince of
Wales, however, receives no such allowance,
since as Duke of Cornwall he is entitled to
the income of the estate of the Duchy of
Cornwall. Each year the Queen refunds the
Government for all annuities paid to
members of the royal family except the
Queen Mother and the Duke of Edinburgh.
Parliament
Origins of Parliament
The medieval kings were expected to meet all
royal expenses, private and public, out of
their own revenue. If extra resources were
needed for an emergency, such as a war, the
Sovereign would seek to persuade his barons,
in the Great Council—a gathering of leading
men which met several times a year—to grant
aid. During the 13th century several kings
found the private revenues and baronial aids
insufficient to meet the expenses of
government. They therefore summoned not
only the great feudal magnates but also
representatives of counties, cities and towns,
primarily to get their assent to extraordinary
taxation. In this way the Great Council came
to include those who were summoned by
name (those who, broadly speaking, were to
form the Elouse of Lords) and those who
were representatives of communities—the
commons. The two parts, together with the
Sovereign, became known as ‘Parliament’
(the term originally meant a meeting for
parley or discussion).
Over the course of time the commons
began to realise the strength of their position.
By the middle of the 14th century the
formula had appeared which in substance was
the same as that used nowadays in voting
supplies to the Crown—that is, money to the
Government—namely, ‘by the Commons
48
GOVERNMENT
with the advice of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal’. In 1407 Henry IV pledged that
henceforth all money grants should be
approved by the House of Commons before
being considered by the Lords.
A similar advance was made in the
legislative field. Originally the King’s
legislation needed only the assent of his
councillors. Starting with the right of
individual commoners to present petitions,
the Commons as a body gained the right to
submit collective petitions. Later, during the
15th century, they gained the right to
participate in giving their requests—their
‘Bills’—the form of law.
The subsequent development of the power
of the House of Commons was built upon
these foundations. The constitutional
developments of the 17th century (see p. 44)
led to Parliament securing its position as the
supreme legislative authority.
The Powers of Parliament
The three elements which make up
Parliament—the Queen, the House of Lords
and the elected House of Commons—are
constituted on different principles. They meet
together only on occasions of symbolic
significance such as the state opening of
Parliament, when the Commons are
summoned by the Queen to the House of
Lords. The agreement of all three elements is
normally required for legislation, but that of
the Queen is given as a matter of course.
Parliament can legislate for Britain as a
whole, or for any part of the country. It can
also legislate for the Channel Islands and the
Isle of Man, which are Crown dependencies
and not part of Britain. They have local
legislatures which make laws on island affairs
(see p. 5).
As there are no legal restraints imposed by
a written constitution, Parliament may
legislate as it pleases, subject to Britain’s
obligations as a member of the European
Union. It can make or change any law, and
overturn established conventions or turn them
into law. It can even prolong its own life
beyond the normal period without consulting
the electorate.
In practice, however, Parliament does not
assert its supremacy in this way. Its members
bear in mind the common law and normally
act in accordance with precedent. The House
of Commons is directly responsible to the
electorate, and in this century the House of
Lords has recognised the supremacy of the
elected chamber. The system of party
government helps to ensure that Parliament
legislates with its responsibility to the
electorate in mind.
The European Union
As a member of the European Union, Britain
recognises the various types of Community
legislation and wider policies. It sends 81
elected members to the European Parliament
(see p. 112).
The Functions of Parliament
The main functions of Parliament are:
• to pass laws;
• to provide, by voting for taxation, the
means of carrying on the work of
government;
• to scrutinise government policy and
administration, including proposals for
expenditure; and
• to debate the major issues of the day.
In carrying out these functions Parliament
helps to bring the relevant facts and issues
before the electorate. By custom, Parliament
is also informed before all important
international treaties and agreements are
ratified. The making of treaties is, however, a
royal prerogative exercised on the advice of
the Government and is not subject to
parliamentary approval.
The Meeting of Parliament
A Parliament has a maximum duration of
five years, but in practice general
elections are usually held before the end of
this term. The maximum life has been
prolonged by legislation in rare circumstances
such as the two world wars. Parliament is
dissolved and writs for a general election are
ordered by the Queen on the advice of the
Prime Minister.
49
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The life of a Parliament is divided into
sessions. Each usually lasts for one year—
normally beginning and ending in October or
November. There are ‘adjournments’ at
night, at weekends, at Christmas, Easter and
the late Spring Bank Holiday, and during a
long summer break usually starting in late
July. The average number of ‘sitting’ days in
a session is about 160 in the House of
Commons and about 145 in the House of
Lords. At the start of each session the
Queen’s speech to Parliament outlines the
Government’s policies and proposed
legislative programme. Each session is ended
by prorogation. Parliament then ‘stands
prorogued’ for about a week until the new
session opens. Prorogation brings to an end
nearly all parliamentary business: in
particular, public Bills which have not been
passed by the end of the session are lost.
The House of Lords
The House of Lords consists of the Lords
Spiritual and the Lords Temporal. The
Lords Spiritual are the Archbishops of
Canterbury and York, the Bishops of
London, Durham and Winchester, and the 21
next most senior diocesan bishops of the
Church of England. The Lords Temporal
consist of:
• all hereditary peers and peeresses of
England, Scotland, Great Britain and the
United Kingdom (but not peers of
Ireland);
• life peers created to assist the House in
its judicial duties (Lords of Appeal or
‘law lords’);4 and
• all other life peers.
Hereditary peerages carry a right to sit in
the House provided holders establish their
claim and are aged 21 years or over.
However, anyone succeeding to a peerage
may, within 12 months of succession,
disclaim that peerage for his or her lifetime.
Disclaimants lose their right to sit in the
House but gain the right to vote and stand as
candidates at parliamentary elections. When a
4 The House of Lords is the final court of appeal for civil cases
in Britain and for criminal cases in England, Wales, and
Northern Ireland.
disclaimant dies, the peerage passes on down
the family in the usual way.
Peerages, both hereditary and life, are
created by the Sovereign on the advice of the
Prime Minister. They are usually granted in
recognition of service in politics or other
walks of life or because one of the political
parties wishes to have the recipient in the
House of Lords. The House also provides a
place in Parliament for people who offer
useful advice, but do not wish to be involved
in party politics.
Peers who attend the House (the average
daily attendance is some 380) receive no
The potential membership of the
House of Lords is about 1,200, but
this number is reduced by about 80
by a scheme which allows peers who
do not wish to attend to apply for
leave of absence for the duration of a
Parliament. In addition some
hereditary peers do not establish their
claim to succeed and so do not
receive a writ of summons entitling
them to sit in the House; there were
around 90 such peers in early 1994.
salary for their parliamentary work, but can
claim for expenses incurred in attending the
House (for which there are maximum daily
rates) and certain travelling expenses.
Officers of the House of Lords
The House is presided over by the Lord
Chancellor, who takes his place on the
woolsack5 as ex-officio Speaker of the House.
In his absence his place is taken by a deputy.
The first of the deputy speakers is the
Chairman of Committees, who is appointed
at the beginning of each session and normally
chairs Committees of the Whole House and
some domestic committees. The Chairman
and the Principal Deputy Chairman of
Committees are the only Lords who receive
salaries as officers of the House.
5 The woolsack is a seat in the form of a large cushion stuffed
with wool from several Commonwealth countries; it is a tradition
dating from the medieval period, w'hen wool was the chief source
of the country’s wealth.
50
GOVERNMENT
In mid-1994 there were 1,198 members of
the House of Lords, including the two
archbishops and 24 bishops. The Lords
Temporal consisted of 758 hereditary peers who
had succeeded to their titles, 15 hereditary
peers who had had their titles conferred on
them (including the Prince of Wales), and
399 life peers, of whom 21 were ‘law lords’.
The Clerk of the Parliaments is
responsible for the records of proceedings of
the House of Lords and for the text of Acts
of Parliament. He is the accounting officer
for the cost of the House, and is in
charge of the administrative staff of the
House, known as the Parliament Office.
The Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod,
usually known as ‘Black Rod’, is responsible
for security, accommodation and services
in the House of Lords’ part of the Palace
of Westminster.
The House of Commons
The House of Commons is elected by
universal adult suffrage (see below) and
consists of 651 Members of Parliament
(MPs). In mid-1994 there 60 women, three
Asian and three black MPs. Of the 651 seats,
524 are for England, 38 for Wales, 72 for
Scotland, and 17 for Northern Ireland.
General elections are held after a
Parliament has been dissolved and a new one
summoned by the Queen. When an MP dies
or resigns,6 or is given a peerage, a by-
election takes place. Members are paid an
annual salary of £31,687 and an office costs
allowance of up to £41,308. There are also a
number of other allowances, including travel
allowances, a supplement for London members
and, for provincial members, subsistence
allowances and allowances for second homes.
(For ministers’ salaries see p. 62.)
Officers of the House of Commons
The chief officer of the House of Commons
is the Speaker, elected by MPs to preside
over the House. Other officers include the
6 An MP who wishes to resign from the House can only do so by
applying for an office under the Crown as Crown Steward or
Bailiff of the Chiltern Hundreds, or Steward of the Manor of
Northstead.
Chairman of Ways and Means and two
deputy chairmen, who act as Deputy
Speakers. They are elected by the House on
the nomination of the Government but are
drawn from the Opposition as well as the
government party. They, like the Speaker,
neither speak nor vote other than in their
official capacity. Responsibility for the
administration of the House rests with the
House of Commons Commission, a statutory
body chaired by the Speaker.
Permanent officers (who are not MPs)
include the Clerk of the House of
Commons, who is the principal adviser to
the Speaker on its privileges and procedures.
The Clerk’s departmental responsibilities
relate to the conduct of the business of the
House and its committees. The Clerk is also
accounting officer for the House. The
Serjeant-at-Arms, who waits upon the
Speaker, carries out certain orders of the
House. He is also the official housekeeper of
the Commons’ part of the building, and is
responsible for security. Other officers serve
the House in the Library, the Department of
the Official Report (Hansard), the Finance and
Administration Department and the
Refreshment Department.
Parliamentary Electoral System
For electoral purposes Britain is divided into
constituencies, each of which returns one
member to the House of Commons. To
ensure that constituency electorates are kept
roughly equal, four permanent Parliamentary
Boundary Commissions, one each for
England, Wales, Scotland and Northern
Ireland, keep constituencies under review.
They recommend any adjustment of seats
that may seem necessary in the light of
population movements or other changes.
Reviews are conducted every 8 to 12 years.
Elections are by secret ballot.
Voters
British citizens, together with citizens of
other Commonwealth countries and citizens
of the Irish Republic resident in Britain, may
vote provided they are:
• aged 18 or over;
51
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
• included in the annual register of
electors for the constituency; and
• not subject to any disqualification.
People not entitled to vote include
members of the House of Lords, patients
detained under mental health legislation,
sentenced prisoners and people convicted
within the previous five years of corrupt or
illegal election practices. Members of the
armed forces, Crown servants and staff of
the British Council employed overseas
(together with their wives or husbands if
accompanying them) may be registered for an
address in the constituency where they would
live but for their service. British citizens
living abroad may apply to register as
electors for a period of 20 years after they
have left Britain.
Voting Procedures
Each elector may cast one vote, normally in
person at a polling station. Electors whose
circumstances on polling day are such that
they cannot reasonably be expected to vote in
person at their local polling station—for
example, electors away on holiday—may
apply for an absent vote at a particular
election. Electors who are physically
incapacitated or unable to vote in person
because of the nature of their work or
because they have moved to a new area may
apply for an indefinite absent vote. People
entitled to an absent vote may vote by post
or by proxy, although postal ballot papers
cannot be sent to addresses outside Britain.
Voting is not compulsory; 76.9 per cent of
a total electorate of 43.3 million people voted
in the general election in April 1992. The
simple majority system of voting is used.
Candidates are elected if they have more
votes than any of the other candidates
(although not necessarily an absolute majority
over all other candidates).
Candidates
British citizens and citizens of other
Commonwealth countries, together with
citizens of the Irish Republic, may stand for
election as MPs provided they are aged 21 or
over and are not disqualified. Those
disqualified include undischarged bankrupts;
people sentenced to more than one year’s
imprisonment; clergy of the Church of
England, Church of Scotland, Church of
Ireland and Roman Catholic Church; peers;
and holders of certain offices listed in the
House of Commons Disqualification Act
1975. A candidate’s nomination for election
must be proposed and seconded by two
electors registered as voters in the constituency
and signed by eight other electors.
Candidates do not have to be backed by a
political party. A candidate must also deposit
£500, which is returned if he or she receives
5 per cent or more of the votes cast.
The maximum sum a candidate may
spend on a general election campaign is
£4,642 plus 3.9 pence for each elector in a
borough constituency, or 5.2 pence for each
elector in a county constituency. Higher
limits have been set for by-elections in order
to reflect the fact that they are often regarded
as tests of national opinion in the period
between general elections. The maximum
sum is £18,572 plus 15.8 pence for each
elector in borough seats, and 20.8 pence for
each elector in county seats. A candidate may
post an election communication to each
elector in the constituency, free of charge.
All election expenses, apart from the
candidate’s personal expenses, are subject to
the statutory limit.
The Political Party System
The party system, which has existed in one
form or another since the 18th century, is an
essential element in the working of the
constitution. The present system depends
upon the existence of organised political
parties, each of which presents its policies to
the electorate for approval. The parties are
not registered nor formally recognised in law,
but in practice most candidates in elections,
and almost all winning candidates, belong to
one of the main parties.
For the last 150 years a predominantly
two-party system has existed. Since 1945
either the Conservative Party, the origins of
which go back to the 18th century, or the
Labour Party, which emerged in the last
decade of the 19th century, has held power.
52
GOVERNMENT
A new party—the Liberal Democrats—was
formed in 1988 when the Liberal Party,
which traced its origins to the 18th century,
merged with the Social Democratic Party,
formed in 1981. Other parties include two
nationalist parties, Plaid Cymru (founded in
Wales in 1925) and the Scottish National
Party (founded in 1934). In Northern Ireland
there are a number of parties. They include
the Ulster Unionist Party, formed in the early
part of this century; the Democratic Unionist
Party, founded in 1971 by a group which
broke away from the Ulster Unionists; and
the Social Democratic and Labour Party,
founded in 1970.
Since 1945 eight general elections have
been won by the Conservative Party and six
by the Labour Party; the great majority of
members of the House of Commons have
belonged to one of these two parties. The
results of the general election of April 1992
are shown in Table 7.1.
The party which wins most seats
(although not necessarily the most votes) at
a general election, or which has the support
of a majority of members in the House of
Commons, usually forms the Government.
By tradition, the leader of the majority party
is asked by the Sovereign to form a
government. About 100 of its members in
the House of Commons and the House of
Lords receive ministerial appointments
(including appointment to the Cabinet—see
p. 62) on the advice of the Prime Minister.
The largest minority party becomes the
official Opposition, with its own leader and
‘shadow cabinet’.
The Party System in Parliament
Leaders of the Government and Opposition
sit on the front benches of the Commons
with their supporters (the backbenchers)
sitting behind them.
Similar arrangements for the parties also
apply to the House of Lords; however, Lords
who do not wish to be associated with any
political party may sit on the ‘cross-benches’.
The effectiveness of the party system in
Parliament rests largely on the relationship
between the Government and the opposition
parties. Depending on the relative strengths
of the parties in the House of Commons, the
Opposition may seek to overthrow the
Government by defeating it in a vote on a
‘matter of confidence’. In general, however,
its aims are to contribute to the formulation
of policy and legislation by constructive
criticism; to oppose government proposals it
considers objectionable; to seek amendments
to government Bills; and to put forward its
own policies in order to improve its chances
of winning the next general election.
The detailed arrangements of government
business are settled, under the direction of
the Prime Minister and the Leaders of the
two Houses, by the Government Chief Whip
in consultation with the Opposition Chief
Whip. The Chief Whips together constitute
the ‘usual channels’ often referred to when
Table 7.1: Results of the April 1992 General Election
Members Number of % of
Party elected votes cast votes cast
Conservative 336
Labour 271
Liberal Democrats 20
Plaid Cymru (Welsh Nationalist) 4
Scottish National 3
Ulster Unionist (Northern Ireland) 9
Ulster Democratic Unionist (Northern Ireland) 3
Ulster Popular Unionist (Northern Ireland) 1
Social Democratic and Labour (Northern Ireland) 4
Total 651
14,094,116
11,557,134
5,998,446
1,960,703
33,610,399
41.9
34.4
17.8
5.9
100.0
“These figures include votes for other parties whose candidates were unsuccessful.
53
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the question of finding time for a particular
item of business is discussed. The Leaders of
the two Houses are responsible for enabling
the Houses to debate matters about which
they are concerned.
Outside Parliament, party control is
exercised by the national and local
organisations. Inside, it is exercised by the
Chief Whips and their assistants, who are
chosen within the party. Their duties include
keeping members informed of forthcoming
parliamentary business, maintaining the
party’s voting strength by ensuring members
attend important debates, and passing on to
the party leadership the opinions of backbench
members. Party discipline tends to be less
strong in the Lords than in the Commons,
since Lords have less hope of high office and
no need of party support in elections.
The formal title of the Government Chief
Whip in the Commons is Parliamentary
Secretary to the Treasury. Of the other
Government Whips, three are officers of the
Royal Household (one of these is Deputy
Chief Whip), five hold titular posts as Lords
Commissioners of the Treasury and five are
Assistant Whips. The Opposition Chief
Whips in both Houses and two of the
Opposition Assistant Whips in the
Commons receive salaries. The Government
Whips in the Lords hold offices in the
Royal Household; they also act as
government spokesmen.
Financial Assistance to Parties
Annual assistance from public funds helps
opposition parties carry out parliamentary
work at Westminster. It is limited to parties
which had at least two members elected at
the previous general election or one member
elected and a minimum of 150,000 votes cast.
The amount is £3,442.50 for every seat won
at the previous general election, plus £6.89
for every 200 votes.
Parliamentary Procedure
Parliamentary procedure is based on custom
and precedent, partly codified by each House
in its Standing Orders. The system of debate
is similar in both Houses. Every subject starts
off as a proposal or ‘motion’ by a member.
After debate, in which each member may
speak only once, the motion may be
withdrawn: if it is not, the Speaker or
Chairman ‘puts the question’ whether to
agree with the motion or not. The question
may be decided without voting, or by a
simple majority vote. The main difference of
procedure between the two Houses is that the
Speaker or Chairman in the Lords has no
powers of order; instead such matters are
decided by the general feeling of the House.
In the Commons the Speaker has full
authority to enforce the rules of the House
and must guard against the abuse of
procedure and protect minority rights. The
Speaker has discretion on whether to allow a
motion to end discussion so that a matter
may be put to the vote and has powers to put
a stop to irrelevance and repetition in debate,
and to save time in other ways. In cases of
grave disorder the Speaker can adjourn or
suspend the sitting. The Speaker may order
members who have broken the rules of
behaviour of the House to leave the
Chamber or can initiate their suspension for
a period of days.
The Speaker supervises voting in the
Commons and announces the final result. In
a tied vote the Speaker gives a casting vote,
without expressing an opinion on the merits
of the question. The voting procedure in
the House of Lords is broadly similar,
although the Lord Chancellor does not have
a casting vote.
Financial Interests
The Commons has a public register of MPs’
financial interests. Members with a financial
interest in a debate in the House must
declare it when speaking. If the interest is
direct, immediate and personal, the member
cannot vote on the issue. In other
proceedings of the House or in dealings
with other members, ministers or civil
servants, MPs must also disclose any relevant
financial interest.
There is no register of financial interests
in the Lords, but Lords speaking in a debate
in which they have a direct interest are
expected to declare it.
54
GOVERNMENT
Public Access to Parliamentary Proceedings
Proceedings of both Houses are normally
public. The minutes and speeches
(transcribed verbatim in Hansard, the official
report) are published daily.
The records of the Lords from 1497 and
of the Commons from 1547, together with the
parliamentary and political papers of a
number of former members of both Houses,
are available to the public through the House
of Lords Record Office.
The proceedings of both Houses of
Parliament may be broadcast on television and
radio, either live or, more usually, in recorded
or edited form. Complete coverage is available
on cable television.
The Law-making Process
Statute law consists of Acts of Parliament and
delegated legislation made by Ministers under
powers given to them by Act (see p. 57).
While the law undergoes constant refinement
in the courts, changes to statute law are made
by Parliament.
Draft laws take the form of parliamentary
Bills. Proposals for legislation affecting the
powers of particular bodies (such as local
authorities) or the rights of individuals (such
as certain proposals relating to railways, roads
and harbours) are known as Private Bills, and
are subject to a special form of parliamentary
procedure. Bills which change the general law
and which constitute the significant part of the
parliamentary legislative process are Public Bills.
Public Bills can be introduced into either
House, by a government minister or by an
ordinary (‘private’ or ‘backbench’) member.
Most Public Bills that become Acts of
Parliament are introduced by a government
Minister and are known as ‘Government Bills’.
Bills introduced by other members of Parliament
are known as ‘Private Members’ Bills.’
The main Bills which constitute the
Government’s legislative programme are
announced in the Queen’s Speech at the State
opening of Parliament, which usually takes
place in November, and the Bills themselves
are introduced into one or other of the
Houses over the succeeding weeks.
Before a government Bill is drafted, there
may be consultation with professional bodies,
voluntary organisations and other agencies
interested in the subject, and interest and
pressure groups which seek to promote
specific causes. Proposals for legislative
changes are sometimes set out in government
‘White Papers’, which may be debated in
Parliament before a Bill is introduced. From
time to time consultation papers, sometimes
called ‘Green Papers’, set out government
proposals which are still taking shape and
seek comments from the public.
Private Members ’ Bills
Early in each session backbench Members of
the Commons hold a ballot (draw lots) for
the opportunity to introduce a Bill on one of
the Fridays during the session on which such
Bills have precedence over government
business. The first 20 Members whose names
are drawn win this privilege, but it does not
guarantee that their Bills will pass into law.
Members may also present a Bill on any day
without debate, and on most Tuesdays and
Wednesdays on which the Commons is
sitting there is also an opportunity to seek
leave to present a Bill under the ‘ten minute
rule’, which provides an opportunity for a
brief speech by the Member proposing the
Bill (and by one who opposes it). Few of
these Bills make further progress or receive
any debate, but in most sessions a few do
become law. Recent examples include the
Osteopaths Act 1993, the Noise and Statutory
Nuisance Act 1993 and the Race Relations
(Remedies) Act 1994. Private Members’ Bills
do not often call for the expenditure of
public money; but if they do they cannot
proceed to committee stage unless the
Government decides to provide the necessary
money resolution. Peers may introduce
Private Members’ Bills in the House of Lords
at any time. A Private Members’ Bill passed
by either House will not proceed in the other
House unless it is taken up by a Member of
that House.
Passage of Public Bills
Public Bills must normally be passed by both
Houses. Bills relating mainly to financial
55
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
matters are almost invariably introduced in
the Commons. Under the provisions of
the Parliament Acts, the powers of the Lords
in relation to ‘money Bills’ are very
restricted. The Parliament Acts also provide
for a Bill to be passed by the Commons
without the consent of the Lords in certain
(very rare) circumstances.
The process of passing a public Bill is
similar in each House. On presentation the
Bill is considered, without debate, to have
been read a first time and is printed
(although a substantial number of Private
Members’ Bills are never printed). After an
interval, which may be between one day and
several weeks, a Government Bill will receive
its second reading debate, during which the
general principles of the Bill are discussed. If
it obtains a second reading in the Commons,
a Bill will normally be committed to a
standing committee (see p. 57) for detailed
examination and amendment. In the Lords,
the committee stage usually takes place on
the floor of the House, and this procedure
may also be followed in the Commons if that
House so decides (usually in cases where
there is a need to pass the Bill quickly or
where it raises matters of constitutional
importance). The Commons may also decide
to divide the committee stage of a Bill between
a standing committee and a committee of the
whole House (which is commonly the case
with the annual Finance Bill).
The committee stage is followed by the
report stage (‘consideration’) on the floor of
the House, during which further amendments
may be made. In the Commons, this is
usually followed immediately by the third
reading debate, where the Bill is reviewed in
its final form. In the Lords, a Bill may be
further amended at third reading.
After passing its third reading in one
House a Bill is sent to the other House,
where it passes through all the stages once
more, and where it is, more often than not,
further amended. Amendments made by the
second House must be agreed by the first, or
a compromise agreement reached, before a
Bill can go for Royal Assent.
In the Commons, the House may vote to
limit the time available for consideration of a
Bill. This is done by passing a ‘timetable’
motion proposed by the Government,
commonly referred to as a ‘guillotine’.
There are special procedures for Public
Bills which consolidate existing legislation
or which enact private legislation relating
to Scotland.
Royal Assent
When a Bill has passed through all its
parliamentary stages, it is sent to the Queen
for Royal Assent, after which it is part of the
law of the land and known as an Act of
Parliament. Royal Assent takes the form of an
announcement rather than any signature or
mark on a copy of the Bill. The Royal Assent
has not been refused since 1707. A list of the
main public Bills receiving Royal Assent since
autumn 1993 is given on p. 515.
Limitations on the Power of the Lords
Most government Bills introduced and passed
in the Lords pass through the Commons
without difficulty, but a Lords Bill which was
unacceptable to the Commons would not
become law. The Lords, on the other hand,
do not generally prevent Bills insisted upon
by the Commons from becoming law, though
they will often amend them and return them
for further consideration by the Commons.
By convention the Lords pass Bills authorising
taxation or national expenditure without
amendment. Under the Parliament Acts 1911
and 1949, a Bill that deals only with taxation
or expenditure must become law within one
month of being sent to the Lords, whether or
not they agree to it, unless the Commons
directs otherwise. If no agreement is reached
between the two Houses on a non-financial
Commons Bill the Lords can delay the Bill
for a period which, in practice, amounts to at
least 13 months. Following this the Bill may
be submitted to the Queen for Royal Assent,
provided it has been passed a second time by
the Commons. The Parliament Acts make
one important exception: any Bill to lengthen
the life of a Parliament requires the full
assent of both Houses in the normal way.
The limits to the power of the Lords,
contained in the Parliament Acts, are based
on the belief that nowadays the main
56
GOVERNMENT
legislative function of the non-elected
House is to act as a chamber of revision,
complementing but not rivalling the
elected House.
Delegated Legislation
In order to reduce unnecessary pressure on
parliamentary time, primary legislation often
gives ministers or other authorities the power
to regulate administrative details by means of
‘delegated’ or secondary legislation. To
minimise any risk that delegating powers to
the executive might undermine the authority
of Parliament, such powers are normally only
delegated to authorities directly accountable
to Parliament. Moreover, the Acts of
Parliament concerned usually provide for
some measure of direct parliamentary control
over proposed delegated legislation, by giving
Parliament the opportunity to affirm or annul
it. Certain Acts also require that organisations
affected must be consulted before rules and
orders can be made.
A joint committee of both Houses reports
on the technical propriety of these ‘statutory
instruments’. In order to save time on the
floor of the House, the Commons uses
standing committees to debate the merits of
instruments; actual decisions are taken by the
House. The House of Lords has also
appointed a delegated powers scrutiny
committee which examines the
appropriateness of the powers to make
secondary legislation in Bills as they come
before that House.
Private Legislation
Private Bills are promoted by people or
organisations outside Parliament (often local
authorities) to give them special legal powers.
They go through a similar procedure to
public Bills, but most of the work is done in
committee, where procedures follow a semi¬
judicial pattern. The promoter must prove
the need for the powers sought and the
objections of opposing interests are heard.
Both sides may be legally represented. Hybrid
Bills are public Bills which may affect
private rights. As with private Bills, the
passage of hybrid Bills through Parliament
is governed by special procedures which
allow those affected to put their case.
Parliamentary Committees
Committees of the Whole House
Either House may pass a resolution setting
itself up as a committee of the whole House
to consider Bills in detail after their second
reading. This permits unrestricted discussion:
the general rule that an MP or Lord may
speak only once on each motion does not
apply in committee.
Standing Committees
House of Commons standing committees
debate and consider public Bills at the
committee stage. The committee considers
the Bill clause by clause, and may amend it
before reporting it back to the House. The
standing committees include two Scottish
standing committees, and the Scottish, Welsh
and Northern Ireland Grand Committees.
Ordinary standing committees do not have
names but are referred to simply as Standing
Committee A, B, C, and so on; a new set of
members is appointed to them to consider
each Bill. Each committee has between
16 and 50 members, with a party balance
reflecting as far as possible that in the House
as a whole.
The Scottish Grand Committee
comprises all 72 Scottish members (and
may be convened anywhere in Scotland as
well as Westminster). It may consider the
principles of Scottish Bills referred to it at
second reading stage. It also debates
Scottish public expenditure estimates and
other matters concerning Scotland only
which may be referred to it.
The Welsh Grand Committee, with all
38 Welsh members and up to five others,
considers Bills referred to it at second
reading stage, and matters concerning Wales
only. Similarly, the Northern Ireland Grand
Committee debates matters relating
specifically to Northern Ireland. It includes
all 17 Northern Ireland members and up to
25 others.
There are also standing committees to
57
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
debate proposed European legislation, and
to scrutinise statutory instruments made by
the Government.
The Lords’ equivalent to a standing
committee, a Public Bill Committee, is rarely
used; instead the committee stage of a Bill is
taken by the House as a whole.
Select Committees
Select committees are appointed for a
particular task, generally one of enquiry,
investigation and scrutiny. They report their
conclusions and recommendations to the
House as a whole; in many cases their
recommendations invite a response from the
Government, which is also reported to the
House. A select committee may be appointed
for a Parliament, or for a session, or for as
long as it takes to complete its task. To help
Parliament with the control of the executive
by examining aspects of public policy,
expenditure and administration, 17
committees have been established by the
House of Commons to examine the work of
the main government departments and their
associated public bodies. The Foreign Affairs
Select Committee, for example, ‘shadows’ the
work of the Foreign & Commonwealth
Office. The committees are constituted on a
basis which is in approximate proportion to
party strength in the House.
Other regular Commons select committees
include those on Public Accounts, European
Legislation, Members’ Interests, and the
Parliamentary Commissioner for
Administration (the ‘Parliamentary
Ombudsman’—see p. 60). ‘Domestic’ select
committees also cover the internal workings
of Parliament.
In their examination of government
policies, expenditure and administration,
committees may question ministers, civil
servants and interested bodies and
individuals. Through hearings and
published reports, they bring before
Parliament and the public an extensive body
of fact and informed opinion on many issues,
and build up considerable expertise in their
subjects of inquiry.
In the House of Lords, besides the
Appeal and Appellate Committees, in which
the bulk of the House’s judicial work is
transacted, there are two major select
committees (along with several sub¬
committees), on the European Community
and on Science and Technology.
Joint Committees
Joint committees, with a membership drawn
from both Houses, are appointed in each
session to deal with Consolidation Bills and
delegated legislation. The two Houses may
also agree to set up joint select committees on
other subjects.
Party Committees
In addition to the official committees of the
two Houses there are several unofficial party
organisations or committees. The
Conservative and Unionist Members’
Committee (the 1922 Committee) consists of
the backbench membership of the party in
the House of Commons. When the
Conservative Party is in office, ministers
attend its meetings by invitation and not by
right. When the party is in opposition, the
whole membership of the party may attend
meetings. The then leader appoints a
consultative committee, which acts as the
party’s ‘shadow cabinet’.
The Parliamentary Labour Party
comprises all members of the party in both
Houses. When the Labour Party is in office,
a parliamentary committee, half of whose
members are elected and half of whom are
government representatives, acts as a channel
of communication between the Government
and its backbenchers in both Houses. When
the party is in opposition, the Parliamentary
Labour Party is organised under the direction
of an elected parliamentary committee, which
acts as the ‘shadow cabinet’.
Other Forms of Parliamentary Control
House of Commons
In addition to the system of scrutiny by
select committees, the House of Commons
offers a number of opportunities for the
examination of government policy by both
58
GOVERNMENT
the Opposition and the Government’s own
backbenchers. These include:
1. Question time, when for 55 minutes on
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and
Thursday, ministers answer MPs’
questions. The Prime Minister’s question
time is every Tuesday and Thursday when
the House is sitting. Parliamentary
questions are one means of seeking
information about the Government’s
intentions. They are also a way of raising
grievances brought to MPs’ notice by
constituents. MPs may also put questions
to ministers for written answer; the
questions and answers are published in
Hansard. There are some 50,000 questions
every year.
2. Adjournment debates, when MPs use
motions for the adjournment of the House
to raise constituency cases or matters of
public concern. There is a half-hour
adjournment period at the end of the
business of the day, while immediately
before the adjournment for each recess
(Parliament’s Christmas, Easter, Whitsun
and summer breaks) a full day is spent
discussing issues raised by private
members. There are also adjournment
debates following the passagei three times
a year, of Consolidated Fund' or
Appropriation Bills.7 8
In addition, an MP wishing to discuss a
‘specific and important matter that should
have urgent consideration’ may, at the end
of question time, seek leave to move the
adjournment of the House. On the very
few occasions when leave is obtained, the
matter is debated for three hours in what
is known as an emergency debate, usually
on the following day.
3. Early day motions (EDMs) provide a
further opportunity for backbench MPs
to express their views on particular
issues. A number of EDMs are tabled
each sitting day; they are very rarely
debated but can be useful in gauging the
7At least two Consolidated Fund Acts are passed each session
authorising the Treasury to make certain sums of money
available for the public service.
“The annual Appropriation Act fixes the sums of public money
provided for particular items of expenditure.
degree of support for the issue by the
number of signatures of other MPs which
the motion attracts.
4. The 20 Opposition days each session,
when the Opposition can choose subjects
for debate. Of these days, 17 are at the
disposal of the Leader of the Opposition
and three at the disposal of the second
largest opposition party.
5. Debates on three days in each session on
details of proposed government
expenditure, chosen by the Liaison
Committee.
Procedural opportunities for criticism of
the Government also arise during the debate
on the Queen’s speech at the beginning of
each session; during debates on motions of
censure for which the Government provides
time; and during debates on the
Government’s legislative and other proposals.
House of Lords
Similar opportunities for criticism and
examination of government policy are
provided in the House of Lords at daily
question time and during debates.
Control of Finances
The main responsibilities of Parliament, and
more particularly of the House of Commons,
in overseeing the revenue of the State and
public expenditure, are to authorise the
raising of taxes and duties, and the various
objects of expenditure and the sum to be
spent on each. It also has to satisfy itself that
the sums granted are spent only for the
purposes which Parliament intended. No
payment out of the central government’s
public funds can be made and no taxation or
loans authorised, except by Act of Parliament.
However, limited interim payments can be
made from the Contingencies Fund.
The Finance Act is the most important
of the annual statutes, and authorises the
raising of revenue. The legislation is based
on the Chancellor of the Exchequer’s
Budget statement. It includes a review of the
public finances of the previous year, and
proposals for future expenditure (see p. 155).
59
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Scrutiny of public expenditure is carried
out by House of Commons select committees
(see p. 58).
European Union Affairs
To keep the two Houses informed of EU
developments, and to enable them to
scrutinise and debate Union policies and
proposals, there is a select committee in each
House (see p. 58) and two Commons
standing committees debate specific European
legislative proposals. Ministers also make
regular statements about Union business.
The Commons' Ability to Force the Government
to Resign
The final control is the ability of the House
of Commons to force the Government to
resign by passing a resolution of ‘no
confidence’. The Government must also
resign if the House rejects a proposal which
the Government considers so vital to its
policy that it has declared it a ‘matter of
confidence’ or if the House refuses to vote
the money required for the public service.
Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration
The post of Parliamentary Commissioner for
Administration (the ‘Parliamentary
Ombudsman’) was established under the
Parliamentary Commissioner Act 1967. The
Ombudsman is independent of government
and reports to a Select Committee of the
House of Commons. He investigates
complaints from members of the public
(referred through MPs) alleging that they
have suffered injustice arising from
maladministration. The Ombudsman’s
jurisdiction covers central government
departments and a large number of non-
departmental public bodies. He cannot
investigate complaints about government
policy, the content of legislation or relations
with other countries. In making his
investigations, the Commissioner has access
to all departmental papers, and has powers to
summon those from whom he wishes to take
evidence. When an investigation is
completed, he sends a report with his
findings to the MP who referred the
complaint. In reports of justified cases, the
Ombudsman normally recommends that the
department provides redress (which can
include a financial remedy for the
complainant in appropriate cases). His
recommendations are almost always put into
practice. He submits an annual report to
Parliament, and also publishes selected cases
three times a year.
A complaint to the Ombudsman:
A man complained that an
Employment Service Jobcentre had
wrongly advised him that he was not
eligible for a grant when starting a
business. The Ombudsman found the
complaint justified, and on his
recommendation the Employment
Service paid the complainant, ex
gratia, jC2*080—the amount of grant
he would have received.
In 1993 the Ombudsman completed 208
investigations; of these he found 61 per cent
wholly justified; 35 per cent partly justified;
and 4 per cent unjustified.
The Parliamentary Ombudsman also
monitors the 1994 Code of Practice on Open
Government. He investigates complaints,
referred through MPs, that government
departments or bodies have refused access to
official information. If he finds a complaint
justified, he can recommend that the
information is released.
Parliamentary Privilege
Each House of Parliament has certain rights
and immunities to protect it from obstruction
in carrying out its duties. The rights apply
collectively to each House and to its staff and
individually to each member.
For the Commons the Speaker formally
claims from the Queen ‘their ancient and
undoubted rights and privileges’ at the
beginning of each Parliament. These
include freedom of speech; first call on the
attendance of its members, who are
therefore free from arrest in civil actions and
exempt from serving on juries, or being
compelled to attend court as witnesses; and
60
GOVERNMENT
the right of access to the Crown, which is a
collective privilege of the House. Further
privileges include the rights of the House to
control its own proceedings (so that it is
able, for instance, to exclude ‘strangers’9 if
it wishes); to decide upon legal
disqualifications for membership and to
declare a seat vacant on such grounds; and
to punish for breach of its privileges and
for contempt. Parliament has the right to
punish anybody, inside or outside the House,
who commits a breach of privilege—that is,
offends against the rights of the House.
The privileges of the House of Lords
are broadly similar to those of the House
of Commons.
Her Majesty’s Government
Her Majesty’s Government is the body of
ministers responsible for the conduct of national
affairs. The Prime Minister is appointed by
the Queen, and all other ministers are
appointed by the Queen on the recommendation
of the Prime Minister. Most ministers are
members of the Commons, although the
Government is also fully represented by
ministers in the Lords. The Lord Chancellor
is always a member of the House of Lords.
The composition of governments can vary
both in the number of ministers and in the
titles of some offices. New ministerial offices
may be created, others may be abolished, and
functions may be transferred from one
minister to another.
Prime Minister
The Prime Minister is also, by tradition, First
Lord of the Treasury and Minister for the
Civil Service. The Prime Minister’s unique
position of authority derives from majority
support in the House of Commons and from
the power to appoint and dismiss ministers.
By modern convention, the Prime Minister
always sits in the House of Commons.
The Prime Minister presides over the
Cabinet, is responsible for the allocation of
0 All those who are not members or officials of either House.
functions among ministers and informs the
Queen at regular meetings of the general
business of the Government.
The Prime Minister’s other responsibilities
include recommending a number of
appointments to the Queen. These include:
• Church of England archbishops, bishops
and deans and some 200 other clergy in
Crown ‘livings’;
• senior judges, such as the Lord Chief
Justice;
• Privy Counsellors; and
• Lord-Lieutenants.
They also include certain civil
appointments, such as Lord High
Commissioner to the General Assembly of
the Church of Scotland, Poet Laureate,
Constable of the Tower, and some university
posts; and appointments to various public
boards and institutions, such as the BBC
(British Broadcasting Corporation), as well as
various royal and statutory commissions.
Recommendations are likewise made for the
award of many civil honours and distinctions
and of Civil List pensions (to people who
have achieved eminence in science or the arts
and are in financial need). The Prime
Minister also selects the trustees of certain
national museums and institutions.
The Prime Minister’s Office at 10
Downing Street (the official residence in
London) has a staff of civil servants who
assist the Prime Minister. The Prime
Minister may also appoint special advisers to
the Office to assist in the formation of policies.
Departmental Ministers
Ministers in charge of government
departments are usually in the Cabinet; they
are known as ‘Secretary of State’ or
‘Minister’, or may have a special title, as in
the case of the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
Non-departmental Ministers
The holders of various traditional offices,
namely the Lord President of the Council,
the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster,
the Lord Privy Seal, the Paymaster General
and, from time to time, Ministers without
61
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Portfolio, may have few or no departmental
duties. They are thus available to perform any
duties the Prime Minister may wish to give
them. In the present administration, for
example, the Lord President of the Council is
Leader of the House of Commons and the
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster is
Minister for Public Service and Science.
Lord Chancellor and Law Officers
The Lord Chancellor holds a special position,
as both a minister with departmental functions
and the head of the judiciary (see p. 104). The
four Law Officers of the Crown are: for
England and Wales, the Attorney General
and the Solicitor General; and for Scotland,
the Lord Advocate and the Solicitor General
for Scotland.
Ministers of State and Junior Ministers
Ministers of State usually work with ministers
in charge of departments. They normally have
specific responsibilities, and are sometimes
given titles which reflect these functions.
More than one may work in a department. A
Minister of State may be given a seat in the
Cabinet and be paid accordingly.
Junior ministers (generally Parliamentary
Under-Secretaries of State or, where the
senior minister is not a Secretary of State,
simply Parliamentary Secretaries) share in
parliamentary and departmental duties. They
may also be given responsibility, directly
under the departmental minister, for specific
aspects of the department’s work.
Ministerial Salaries
The salaries of ministers in the House of
Commons range from .£45,815 a year for
junior ministers to £64,749 for Cabinet
ministers. In the House of Lords salaries
range from £38,894 for junior ministers to
£52,260 for Cabinet ministers. The Prime
Minister receives £78,292 and the Lord
Chancellor £120,179. (The Leader of the
Opposition receives £61,349 a year; two
Opposition whips in the Commons and the
Opposition Leader and Chief Whip in the
Lords also receive salaries.)
The Cabinet
The Cabinet is composed of about 20
ministers (the number can vary) chosen by
the Prime Minister and may include
departmental and non-departmental ministers.
The functions of the Cabinet are to
initiate and decide on policy, the supreme
control of government and the co-ordination
of government departments. The exercise of
these functions is vitally affected by the fact
that the Cabinet is a group of party
representatives, depending upon majority
support in the House of Commons.
Cabinet Meetings
The Cabinet meets in private and its
proceedings are confidential. Its members are
bound by their oath as Privy Counsellors not
to disclose information about its proceedings,
although after 30 years Cabinet papers may
be made available for inspection in the Public
Record Office at Kew, Surrey.
Normally the Cabinet meets for a few
hours each week during parliamentary
sittings, and rather less often when
Parliament is not sitting. To keep its
workload within manageable limits, a great
deal of work is carried on through the
committee system. This involves referring
issues either to a standing Cabinet
committee or to an ad hoc committee
composed of the ministers directly concerned.
The committee then considers the matter in
detail and either disposes of it or reports
upon it to the Cabinet with
recommendations for action.
The membership and terms of reference of
all ministerial Cabinet committees are published
by the Cabinet Office. Where appropriate,
the Secretary of the Cabinet and other senior
officials of the Cabinet Office attend meetings
of the Cabinet and its committees.
Diaries published by several former
ministers have given the public insight into
Cabinet procedures in recent times.
The Cabinet Office
The Cabinet Office is headed by the
Secretary of the Cabinet (a civil servant who
62
GOVERNMENT
is also Head of the Home Civil Service)
under the direction of the Prime Minister. It
comprises the Cabinet Secretariat and the
Office of Public Service and Science (OPSS).
The Cabinet Secretariat serves ministers
collectively in the conduct of Cabinet
business, and in the co-ordination of policy at
the highest level.
The Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster
is in charge of the Office of Public Service
and Science and is a member of the Cabinet.
The OPSS is responsible for:
• raising the standard of public services
across the public sector through the
Citizen’s Charter (see p. 66);
• promoting openness in government;
• improving the effectiveness and efficiency
of central government, through, among
other things, the establishment of
executive agencies and the market testing
programme (see p. 69); and
• advice—through its Office of Science and
Technology—on science and technology
policy, expenditure and the allocation of
resources to the research councils.
The Historical and Records Section is
responsible for Official Histories and
managing Cabinet Office records.
Ministerial Responsibility
‘Ministerial responsibility’ refers both to the
collective responsibility for government policy
and actions, which ministers share, and to
ministers’ individual responsibility for their
departments’ work.
The doctrine of collective responsibility
means that the Cabinet acts unanimously even
when Cabinet ministers do not all agree on a
subject. The policy of departmental ministers
must be consistent with the policy of the
Government as a whole. Once the
Government’s policy on a matter has been
decided, each minister is expected to support
it or resign. On rare occasions, ministers have
been allowed free votes in Parliament on
government policies involving important
issues of principle. In February 1994, for
example, free votes were allowed on
lowering the age of consent to homosexual
sex from 21 to 18.
The individual responsibility of ministers
for the work of their departments means that
they are answerable to Parliament for all their
departments’ activities. They bear the
consequences of any failure in administration,
any injustice to an individual or any aspect of
policy which may be criticised in Parliament,
whether personally responsible or not. Since
most ministers are members of the House of
Commons, they must answer questions and
defend themselves against criticism in person.
Departmental ministers in the House of
Lords are represented in the Commons by
someone qualified to speak on their behalf,
usually a junior minister.
Departmental ministers normally decide all
matters within their responsibility. However,
on important political matters they usually
consult their colleagues collectively, either
through the Cabinet or through a Cabinet
committee. A decision by a departmental
minister binds the Government as a whole.
On assuming office ministers must resign
directorships in private and public
companies, and must ensure that there is no
conflict between their public duties and
private interests.
The Privy Council
The Privy Council was formerly the chief
source of executive power in the State; its
origins can be traced back to the King’s
Court, which assisted the Norman monarchs
in running the government. As the system of
Cabinet government developed in the
18th century, however, much of the role of
the Privy Council was assumed by the
Cabinet, although the Council retained certain
executive functions. Some government
departments originated as committees of the
Privy Council.
Nowadays the main function of the Privy
Council is to advise the Queen on the
approval of Orders in Council, including
those made under prerogative powers, such
as Orders approving the grant of royal
charters of incorporation and those made
under statutory powers. Responsibility for
each Order, however, rests with the minister
answerable for the policy concerned,
63
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
regardless of whether he or she is present at
the meeting where approval is given.
The Privy Council also advises the
Sovereign on the issue of royal
proclamations, such as those summoning or
dissolving Parliament. The Council’s own
statutory responsibilities, which are
independent of the powers of the Sovereign
in Council, include supervising the registration
authorities of the medical and allied professions.
Membership of the Council (retained for
life, except for very occasional removals) is
accorded by the Sovereign on the
recommendation of the Prime Minister (or
occasionally, Prime Ministers of
Commonwealth countries) to people eminent
in public life—mainly politicians and judges—
in Britain and the independent monarchies of
the Commonwealth. Cabinet Ministers must
be Privy Counsellors and, if not already
members, are admitted to membership before
taking their oath of office at a meeting of the
Council. There are about 400 Privy
Counsellors. A full Council is summoned
only on the accession of a new Sovereign or
when the Sovereign announces his or her
intention to marry.
Committees of the Privy Council
There are a number of Privy Council
committees. These include prerogative
committees, such as those dealing with
legislation from the Channel Islands and the
Isle of Man, and with applications for
charters of incorporation. Committees may
also be provided for by statute, such as
those for the universities of Oxford and
Cambridge and the Scottish universities.
Membership of such committees is confined
to members of the current administration.
The only exceptions are the members of the
Judicial Committee and the members of any
committee for which specific provision
authorises a wider membership.
Administrative work is carried out in the
Privy Council Office under the Lord
President of the Council, a Cabinet minister.
The Judicial Committee of the Privy
Council is the final court of appeal for certain
independent members of the Commonwealth,
the British dependent territories, the Channel
Islands and the Isle of Man. It also hears
appeals from the disciplinary committees of
the medical and allied professions and certain
ecclesiastical appeals.
Government Departments
Government departments and their agencies,
staffed by politically neutral civil servants, are
the main instruments for implementing
government policy when Parliament has
passed the necessary legislation, and for
advising ministers. They often work alongside
local authorities, statutory boards, and
government-sponsored organisations
operating under various degrees of
government control.
A change of government does not
necessarily affect the number or general
functions of government departments,
although major changes in policy may be
accompanied by organisational changes.
The work of some departments (for
instance, the Ministry of Defence) covers
Britain as a whole. Other departments, such
as the Department of Employment, cover
England, Wales and Scotland, but not
Northern Ireland. Others, such as the
Department of the Environment, are mainly
concerned with affairs in England. Some
departments, such as the Department of
Trade and Industry, maintain a regional
organisation, and some which have direct
contact with the public throughout the
country (for example, the Department of
Employment) also have local offices.
Departments are usually headed by
ministers. In some departments the head is a
permanent official, and ministers with other
duties are responsible for them to Parliament.
For instance, ministers in the Treasury are
responsible for HM Customs and Excise, the
Inland Revenue, the National Investment and
Loans Office and a number of other
departments as well as executive agencies
such as the Royal Mint. Departments
generally receive their funds directly out of
money provided by Parliament and are
staffed by members of the Civil Service.
The functions of the main government
departments are set out on pp. 507—14.
64
GOVERNMENT
Non-departmental Public Bodies
There are bodies which have a role in the
process of national government, but are not
government departments nor parts of a
department (in April 1993 there were 1,389).
There are three kinds of non-departmental
public bodies: executive bodies, advisory
bodies and tribunals. The last of these are a
specialised group of bodies whose functions
are essentially judicial (see p. 103).
Executive Bodies
Executive bodies normally employ their own
staff and have their own budget. They are
public organisations whose duties include
executive, administrative, regulatory or
commercial functions. They normally operate
within broad policy guidelines set by
departmental ministers but are in varying
degrees independent of government in
carrying out their day-to-day responsibilities.
Examples include the Legal Aid Board, the
Police Complaints Authority, the Countryside
Commission and the Human Fertilisation and
Embryology Authority.
Advisory Bodies
Many government departments are assisted
by advisory councils or committees which
undertake research and collect information,
mainly to give ministers access to informed
opinion before they come to a decision
involving a legislative or executive act. In
some cases a minister must consult a standing
committee, but advisory bodies are usually
appointed at the discretion of the minister.
Examples include the British Overseas Trade
Board and the Theatres Trust.
The membership of advisory councils
and committees varies according to the
nature of the work involved, but normally
includes representatives of the relevant
interests and professions.
In addition to standing advisory bodies,
there are committees set up by the
Government to examine specific matters and
make recommendations. For certain important
inquiries, Royal Commissions, whose members
are chosen for their wide experience, may be
appointed. Royal Commissions examine
evidence from government departments,
interested organisations and individuals, and
submit recommendations; some prepare
regular reports. Examples include the
standing Royal Commission on
Environmental Pollution, set up in 1970, and
the Royal Commission on Criminal Justice,
which issued its report in 1993 (see
Chapter 8). Inquiries may also be undertaken
by departmental committees.
Government Information Services
Each of the main government departments
has its own information division, public
relations branch or news department. These
are normally staffed by professional
information officers responsible for
communicating their department’s activities
to the news media and the public (sometimes
using publicity services provided by the
Central Office of Information—see p. 512).
They also advise their departments on the
public’s reaction.
The Lobby
As press adviser to the Prime Minister, the
Prime Minister’s Press Secretary and other
staff in the Prime Minister’s Press Office
have direct contact with the parliamentary
press through regular meetings with the
Lobby correspondents. The Lobby
correspondents are a group of political
correspondents who have the special privilege
of access to the Lobby of the House of
Commons, where they can talk privately to
government ministers and other members of
the House. The Prime Minister’s Press
Office is the accepted channel through which
information about parliamentary business is
passed to the media.
Administration of Scottish, Welsh and
Northern Ireland Affairs
Scotland
Scotland has its own system of law and wide
administrative autonomy. The Secretary of
State for Scotland, a Cabinet minister, has
65
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
responsibility in Scotland (with some
exceptions) for a wide range of policy matters
(see p. 513). Following an examination of
Scotland’s place in Britain which began after
the general election in April 1992, a number
of changes to the responsibilities of The
Scottish Office have been made. These make
it responsible for more areas of policy.
The distinctive conditions and needs of
Scotland and its people are also reflected in
separate Scottish legislation on many domestic
matters. Special provisions applying to
Scotland alone are also inserted in Acts which
otherwise apply to Britain generally.
British government departments with
significant Scottish responsibilities have
offices in Scotland and work closely with
The Scottish Office.
Wales
Since 1964 there has been a separate
Secretary of State for Wales, who is a
member of the Cabinet and is responsible for
many aspects of Welsh affairs. (For further
details see p. 514.)
Northern Ireland
Since the British Government’s assumption of
direct responsibility for Northern Ireland in
1972 (see p.12), the Secretary of State for
Northern Ireland has been the Cabinet
minister responsible for Northern Ireland
affairs. Through the Northern Ireland
Office the Secretary of State has direct
responsibility for constitutional developments,
law and order, security, and electoral matters.
The work of the Northern Ireland departments
is also subject to the direction and control of
the Secretary of State (see p. 513).
Citizen’s Charter
The Citizen’s Charter was launched by the
Prime Minister in 1991. The Charter’s aim is
to raise the standard of public services and make
them more responsive to their users. It is closely
linked to other reforms, including the Next
Steps programme, efficiency measures and the
Government’s contracting out and market
testing programmes (see p. 69). The Citizen’s
Charter is a ten-year programme which is
intended to be at the heart of the Government’s
policy-making throughout the 1990s.
The Charter applies to all public services,
at both national and local levels, and the
privatised utilities. Most major public services
have now published separate charters (by
mid-1994 39 had been issued). In many cases
separate charters have been published for
services in Northern Ireland, Scotland and
Wales. (Details of many of the charters can
be found in the relevant chapters; a full list,
together with information on how to obtain
them, appears on p. 518.)
The Principles of Public Service
The Charter sets out a number of key
principles which users of public services are
entitled to expect:
Standards
Setting, monitoring and publishing
explicit standards for the services that
individual users can reasonably expect.
Publication of actual performance against
these standards.
Information and Openness
Full and accurate information should be
readily available in plain language about how
public services are run, their cost and
performance, and who is in charge.
Choice and Consultation
There should be regular and systematic
consultation with those who use services. Users’
views about services, and their priorities for
improving them, should be taken into
account in final decisions about standards.
Courtesy and Helpfulness
Courteous and helpful service from public
servants who will normally wear name
badges Services available equally to all
who are entitled to them and run to suit
their convenience.
66
NATURAL HISTORY
The dormouse is now an endangered species in Britain.
In an attempt to increase its numbers, English Nature
launched a National Dormouse Week in 1994.
Mice bred in captivity were released into the wild,
and the public were asked to monitor local woods for
signs of dormouse presence, such as opened hazelnuts.
Seeds from all over the world are stored
at the Royal Botanic Gardens Seed Bank at
Wakehurst Place, Sussex. They are cleaned,
dried, and kept at sub-zero temperatures;
it is thought that in this way they may be
able to survive for hundreds of years, saving
many species from possible extinction.
MULTI-CULTURAL BRITAIN
The Chinese New Year—the
Year of the Dog - celebrated
at London’s Commonwealth
Institute. The festival of
music, martial arts, dance and
drama was attended by adults
and children from many
London schools.
Members of the Jatra Opera Group
rehearse at Spitalfields Market in East
London. They took part in a four-day
festival celebrating Bangladeshi
culture and lifestyle.
Highland Games take place
in various centres
throughout Scotland during
the summer, and attract
large numbers of spectators
from around the world.
Scottish dancing is one of
the competitions at the
annual games held in
Braemar.
London’s Notting Hill Carnival, held in August each year, is the largest event of its kind in Europe, with
hundreds of thousands of visitors coming to enjoy its mixture of arts, entertainment, music and spectacle.
INDUSTRIAL HERITAGE
Ironbridge Gorge, near Telford, Shropshire,
is often described as the birthplace of industry.
It is there that iron was first smelted from coke,
and the world’s first cast iron bridge was
erected (seen here), from which the town gets
its name. Some 250 years later Ironbridge is
one of Britain’s biggest museums, and its valley
is designated a World Heritage Site.
At the Big Pit Mining Museum, Blaenavon,
Wales, visitors can ride down the 90 m (300 ft)
shaft to the pit bottom, as well as seeing the
workshops, engines and forge, and an
exhibition of photographs and artefacts
describing the history of the pit, which
stopped coal production in 1980.
GOVERNMENT
Putting Things Right
If things go wrong, an apology, a full
explanation and a swift and effective remedy
should be given. Well publicised and easy to
use complaints procedures with independent
review wherever possible should be available.
Value for Money
Efficient and economical delivery of
public services within the resources the
nation can afford, and independent
validation of performance against standards.
Implementing the Charter
A Cabinet minister, the Chancellor of
the Duchy of Lancaster, is responsible for
the Charter programme. The Chancellor
of the Duchy is supported by the Citizen’s
Charter Unit within the OPSS (see p. 63).
The Prime Minister also receives advice on
the Charter from a Panel drawn from
business, consumer affairs and education. The
Panel works with the Citizen’s Charter Unit
and officials in all the departments to
implement and develop the Citizen’s Charter
programme. The Prime Minister holds regular
Citizen’s Charter seminars with Advisory
Panel members and Cabinet ministers to
report on progress and plan further action.
Executive agencies (see p. 69) are expected
to comply fully with the principles of the
Citizen’s Charter, and the pay of agency chief
executives is normally directly related to
their agency’s performance. Performance-
related pay is being introduced throughout
the public service.
The mechanisms for implementing the
Charter cover:
• more privatisation;
• wider competition;
• further contracting-out of service
provision to private sector organisations;
• setting standards of service delivery;
• comprehensive publication of information
on standards achieved;
• published performance targets, both local
and national;
• more effective complaints procedures;
• tougher and more independent
inspectorates; and
• better redress for the citizen if things
go wrong.
Progress on the Charter
Projects to ensure that the Charter becomes
an integral part of all public services and that
members of the public are aware of the
standards of service to which they are
entitled include:
Charter Mark Awards
The Charter Mark Scheme has been
introduced to reward excellence in delivering
public services: winners are judged by the
Prime Minister’s Citizen’s Charter Advisory
Panel. Applicants have to demonstrate that
they have achieved measurable improvements
in the quality of services over the previous
two years, and that their customers are
satisfied with their services.
In 1993 awards were made to 93 of
over 400 public service organisations
and privatised utilities which had
applied. Winners ranged from
schools, local authority services and
executive agencies, such as the Driver
and Vehicle Licensing Agency, to
British Gas. Award winners can use
the Charter Mark on their products
and equipment, and on stationery,
vehicles and promotional material for
up to three years.
Complaints Task Force
In June 1993 a task force was set up to
review and recommend improvements to
public service complaints procedures.
Charter Forums and Quality Networks
A programme of Charter Forums has been
held around the country, providing an
opportunity for local service providers to
exchange information about best practice in
67
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
implementing the Citizen’s Charter.
Following this, a series of Citizen’s Charter
Quality Networks was announced in July
1994. These would offer public service
managers the opportunity to discuss lessons
of good practice on a regular basis.
Open Government
In line with Citizen’s Charter principles, the
Government has a general policy of
increasing the openness and accountability of
public administration. In April 1994 it
introduced a code of practice on access to
government information. This commits the
Government to release certain information as
a matter of course and also to respond to
requests for other factual information which
it holds. The code will be policed by the
Parliamentary Ombudsman. Similar codes of
practice have been proposed to cover the
health service and local authorities.
As part of the same openness, the
Government is also to propose legislation to
provide rights of access to health and safety
information and personal records. These
rights would add to a number of existing
rights of access to information in specific
areas such as environmental information.
The Civil Service
The Civil Service is concerned with the
conduct of the whole range of government
activities as they affect the community. These
range from policy formulation to carrying out
the day-to-day duties of public administration.
Civil servants are servants of the Crown.
For all practical purposes the Crown in this
context means, and is represented by, the
Government of the day. In most
circumstances the executive powers of the
Crown are exercised by, and on the advice of.
Her Majesty’s Ministers, who are in turn
answerable to Parliament. The Civil Service
as such has no constitutional personality or
responsibility separate from that of the
Government of the day. The duty of the
individual civil servant is first and foremost
to the Minister of the Crown who is in
charge of the Department in which he or she
is serving. A change of minister, for whatever
reason, does not involve a change of staff.
Ministers sometimes appoint special advisers
from outside the Civil Service. The advisers
are normally paid from public funds, but
their appointments come to an end when the
Government’s term of office finishes, or when
the Minister concerned leaves the Government
or moves to another appointment.
The number of civil servants fell from
732,000 in April 1979 to 541,800 in January
1994, reflecting the Government’s policy of
controlling the cost of the Civil Service and
of improving its efficiency.
About half of all civil servants are engaged
in the provision of public services. These
include paying sickness benefits and pensions,
collecting taxes and contributions, running
employment services, staffing prisons, and
providing services to industry and
agriculture. A quarter are employed in the
Ministry of Defence. The rest are divided
between central administrative and policy
duties; support services; and largely financially
self-supporting services, for instance, those
provided by the Department for National
Savings and the Royal Mint. The total includes
about 48,000 ‘industrial’ civil servants, mainly
manual workers in government industrial
establishments. Four-fifths of civil servants
work outside London.
Equality of Opportunity
The Government is committed to achieving
equality of opportunity for all its staff. In
support of this commitment, the Civil
Service, which recruits and promotes on the
basis of merit, is actively pursuing policies to
develop career opportunities for women,
ethnic minorities and people with disabilities:
• women now represent 51.2 per cent of
all non-industrial civil servants, and
between 1992 and 1993 the proportion
of women in the management grades of
the service increased by 2 per cent to
31.9 per cent;
• representation of ethnic minority staff
among non-industrial civil servants has
increased from 4.2 per cent in 1989 to 5.2
per cent in 1993 and compares well with
4.9 per cent, which is the ethnic minority
representation in the working population.
68
GOVERNMENT
• 1.5 per cent of civil servants are
registered as disabled, which is just above
the proportion of registered disabled
people in the workforce as a whole and
twice the proportion employed in the
private sector.
Progress is monitored and reported on
regularly by the Cabinet Office (OPSS).
Management Reforms
Civil Service reforms are being implemented
to ensure improved management performance,
in particular through the increased
accountability of individual managers, based
on clear objectives and responsibilities. These
reforms include performance-related pay
schemes and other incentives.
Executive Agencies: Xext Steps
Programme
The Next Steps Programme, launched in
1988, aims to deliver government services
more efficiently and effectively within
available resources for the benefit of taxpayers,
customers and staff. This has involved setting
up, as far as is practicable, separate units or
agencies to perform the executive functions of
government. Agencies remain part of the
Civil Service but under the terms of
individual framework documents they enjoy
greater delegation of financial, pay and
personnel matters. Agencies are headed by
chief executives who are accountable to
ministers but who are personally responsible
for the day-to-day operations of the agency.
No agency can be established until the
‘prior options’ of abolition, privatisation and
contracting out have been considered and
ruled out. These ‘prior options’ are
reconsidered when agencies are reviewed after
three to three-and-a-half years of operation.
By April 1994 96 agencies had been set
up, together with 31 Executive Units of
Customs and Excise and 31 Executive Offices
of the Inland Revenue. Over 348,000 civil
servants—60 per cent of the total—work in
organisations run on Next Steps lines. In
April 1994 a further 57 agency candidates—
employing over 94,000 staff had been
identified as suitable for agency status.
In 1992-93 agencies met around 77 per
cent of their key performance targets—a
small improvement on the previous year
because, in general, targets will have been
made progressively tougher.
Competing for Quality
In 1991 the Government announced further
proposals to extend competition and choice in
the provision of public services. Value for
money improvements in public expenditure
are being sought through a range of
techniques including market testing the in-
house operation against external competition
and, where appropriate, contracting out. By
December 1993, ^1,100 million worth of
services had been market tested or otherwise
examined, and annual savings of at least
£135 million had been achieved.
Central Management and Structure
Responsibility for central co-ordination and
management of the Civil Service is divided
between the Treasury and the Cabinet Office
(OPSS). In addition to its other functions,
the Treasury is responsible for the structure
of the Civil Service, for recruitment policy
and for controlling staffing, pay, pensions and
allowances. The OPSS, which is under the
control of the Prime Minister, as Minister for
the Civil Service, oversees the organisation,
non-financial aspects of personnel
management and overall efficiency of the
Serv ice. The function of official Head of the
Home Civil Service is combined with that of
Secretary to the Cabinet.
At the senior levels, where management
forms a major part of most jobs, there are
common grades throughout the Civil Service.
These unified grades 1 to 7 are known as the
Open Structure and cover grades from
Permanent Secretary level to Principal level.
\\ ithin the unified grades each post is filled
by the person best qualified, regardless of the
occupational group to which he or she
previously belonged.
Below this the structure of the non¬
industrial Civil Service is based on a system
of occupational groups. These groups assist
the recruitment and matching of skills to
69
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
posts and offer career paths in which specialist
skills can be developed. Departments and
agencies are being encouraged to develop their
own pay and grading arrangements. They are
expected to produce value-for-money benefits
which are greater than those available
through centrally controlled negotiation.
The Diplomatic Service
Staff in the 4,500 strong Diplomatic Service are
those working in the Foreign & Commonwealth
Office (see p. 109) and at British diplomatic
missions abroad who are not in Home Civil
Service grades and are not locally engaged.
The Service has its own grade structure,
linked to that of the Home Civil Service.
Terms and conditions of service are
comparable, but take into account the
special demands of the Service,
particularly the requirement to serve abroad.
Home civil servants, members of the armed
forces and individuals from the private sector
may also serve in the Foreign &
Commonwealth Office and at overseas posts
on loan or attachment.
Civil Service Recruitment
Recruitment is based on the principle of
selection on merit by fair and open
competition. Independent Civil Service
Commissioners are responsible for
approving the selection of people for
appointment to the higher levels and to the
fast-stream entry to the Home Civil Service
and the Diplomatic Service. Recruitment of
middle-ranking and junior staff is the
responsibility of departments and executive
agencies; it is monitored by the
Commissioners. Departments and agencies
can choose whether to undertake this
recruitment work themselves, to employ a
private sector recruitment agency or to use
the Recruitment and Assessment Services
Agency to recruit on their behalf.
People from outside the Civil Service may
be recruited directly to all levels, particularly
to posts requiring skills and experience more
readily found in the private sector. The
exchange of staff between the Civil Service
and industry is also encouraged.
Training
Individual government departments and
agencies are responsible for the performance
of their own staff. They provide training and
development to meet their business needs, to
improve performance, and to help staff
respond effectively to changing demands.
Most training and development takes place
within departments and agencies. In addition,
the Civil Service College provides high-
quality management and professional training,
mainly for those who occupy, or hope to
occupy, relatively senior positions.
Considerable use is made of other providers
in the private and public sectors.
Civil servants aged under 18 may continue
their general education by attending courses,
usually for one day a week (‘day release’
schemes). All staff may be entitled to
financial support to continue their education,
mainly in their own time. There are also
opportunities for civil servants to undertake
research and study in areas of interest to
them and to their department or agency.
Promotion
Departments are responsible for promotion
up to and including Grade 4. Promotion or
appointment to Grades 1 and 2 and all
transfers between departments at these
levels are approved by the Prime Minister,
who is advised by the Head of the Home
Civil Service. Promotions and
appointments to Grade 3 are approved
by the Cabinet Office.
Political and Private Activities
Civil servants are required to perform
loyally the duties assigned to them by
the Government of the day, whatever its
political persuasion. It is essential that
ministers and the public should have
confidence that the personal views of civil
servants do not influence the performance of
their official duties, given the role of the
Civil Service in serving successive
governments formed by different parties.
The aim of the rules which govern
political activities by civil servants is to allow
70
GOVERNMENT
them, subject to these fundamental
principles, the greatest possible freedom to
participate in public affairs consistent with
their rights and duties as citizens. The rules
are therefore concerned with activities
liable to give public expression to political
views rather than with privately held beliefs
and opinions.
The Civil Service is divided into three
groups for the purposes of deciding the
extent to which individuals may take part in
political activities:
• those in the ‘politically free’ group,
consisting of industrial staff and
non-office grades, are free to engage in
any political activity outside official time,
including adoption as a prospective
candidate for the British or the European
Parliament (although they would have to
resign from the Service before giving
their consent to nomination).
• those in the ‘politically restricted’ group,
which comprises staff in Grade 7 and
above as well as Administration Trainees
and Higher Executive Officers (D), may
not take part in national political
activities but may apply for permission to
take part in local political activities; and
• the ‘intermediate’ group, which comprises
all other civil servants, may apply for
permission to take part in national or
local political activity, apart from
candidature for the British or the
European Parliament.
Where required, permission is granted to
the maximum extent consistent with the
Civil Service’s reputation for political
impartiality and the avoidance of any conflict
with official duties. A code of discretion
requires moderation and the avoidance of
embarrassment to ministers.
Generally, there are no restrictions on
the private activities of civil servants,
provided that these do not bring discredit on
the Civil Service, and that there is no
possibility of conflict with official duties.
For instance, a civil servant must comply
with any departmental instruction on the
need to seek authority before taking part
in any outside activity which involves
official experience.
71
Security
Each department is responsible for its own
internal security. As a general rule the
privately-held political views of civil servants
are not a matter of official
concern. However, no one may be employed
on work which is vital to the security of the
State who is, or has been involved in, or
associated with, activities threatening national
security. Certain posts are not open to people
who fall into this category, or to anyone
whose reliability may be in doubt for any
other reason.
The Security Commission may
investigate breaches of security in the public
service and advise on changes in security
procedure if requested to do so by the Prime
Minister after consultation with the Leader of
the Opposition.
Local Government
Although the origins of local government in
England can be traced back to Saxon times,
the first comprehensive system of local councils
was established in the late 19th century.
Local Government Reform
A major reform of local government took
place in 1974 in England and Wales and in
1975 in Scotland. This created two main tiers
of local authority throughout England and
Wales: counties and the smaller districts.
Local government in London had been
reorganised along the same lines in 1965. In
Scotland functions were allocated to regions
and districts on the mainland; single-tier
authorities were introduced for the three
Islands areas. In Northern Ireland changes
were made in 1973 which left local
authorities with fewer functions than in the
rest of Britain.
The Local Government Act 1985
abolished the Greater London Council and
the six metropolitan county councils in
England. Most of their functions were
transferred to the London boroughs and
metropolitan district councils respectively in
1986 (see below).
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Local Government Commission
The Local Government Act 1992 made
provision for the establishment of a Local
Government Commission to review the
structure, boundaries and electoral
arrangements of local government in England.
The Commission, set up in 1992, is
reviewing the structure of local government
in all the shire counties of England, and is
due to complete this work by the end of
1994. The first changes, on the Isle of Wight,
will be implemented in April 1995. The
reviews are considering whether the two-tier
structure should be replaced by unitary or
single-tier authorities in each area. The
Government intends to direct the
Commission to look at the boundaries of
metropolitan areas once the review of the
English shires is complete. The Government
is also looking at ways of improving the
internal management of local authorities.
The Local Government Commission’s
first progress report was published in
December 1993. As well as conducting
detailed opinion surveys in every
review area, the Commission had
received 155,000 letters and other
communications directly from
residents. The general pattern of
response showed that people tended to
identify most strongly with quite
small, local communities; there was
widespread support for a change to a
unitary structure, with most support
for change among those most
knowledgeable about the review; and
there was only limited support for
unitary authorities to be based on
existing district boundaries.
Scotland and Wales
The Local Government etc. (Scotland) Bill,
which is under consideration in Parliament,
would create 32 single-tier councils to replace
the present system of regional and district
councils. The three islands councils would
remain. In Wales, the Government proposes
to set up 22 unitary authorities to replace the
existing eight county councils and 37 district
councils. Legislation for this was enacted
during 1994. The reform takes effect from
1 April 1996.
Local Authorities’ Powers
Local authorities derive their power from
legislation. Although local authorities are
responsible for administering certain services,
ministers have powers in some areas to
secure a degree of uniformity in standards to
safeguard public health or to protect the
rights of individual citizens.
Relations with Central Government
The main link between local authorities and
central government in England is the
Department of the Environment. However,
other departments such as the Department
for Education and the Home Office are also
concerned with various local government
functions. In the rest of Britain the local
authorities deal with the Scottish or Welsh
Offices or the Department of the Environment
for Northern Ireland, as appropriate.
Principal Types of Local Authority
At present England and Wales (outside
Greater London) are divided into 53
counties, sub-divided into 369 districts. All
the districts and 47 of the counties—the
‘non-metropolitan’ counties—have locally
elected councils with separate functions.
County councils provide large-scale services,
while district councils are responsible for the
more local ones (see p. 74).
Greater London is divided into 32 boroughs
and the City of London, each of which has a
council responsible for local government in
its area. In the six metropolitan counties
there are 36 district councils; there are no
county councils. A number of services,
however, require a statutory authority over
areas wider than the individual boroughs and
districts. These are:
• waste regulation and disposal (in certain
areas);
• the fire services, including civil defence;
and
72
GOVERNMENT
• (outside London) public transport.
These are run by joint authorities composed
of elected councillors nominated by the
borough or district councils. Local councils
also provide many of the members of the
police authorities (see p. 83).
In addition to the two-tier local authority
system in England, over 8,000 parish councils
or meetings provide and manage local
facilities such as allotments and village halls
and act as agents for other district council
functions. They also provide a forum for
discussion of local issues. In Wales over 700
community councils have similar functions.
On the mainland of Scotland local
government is at present on a two-tier basis:
nine regions are divided into 53 districts,
each of which has an elected council. There
are three virtually all-purpose authorities for
the Orkneys, the Shetlands and the Western
Isles. Provision is also made for local
community councils.
The boundaries and electoral arrangements
of local authorities in Wales and Scotland
are kept under review by the Local
Government Boundary Commissions for
Wales and Scotland respectively. In 1992 the
responsibilities of the former Local
Government Boundary Commission for
England passed to the Local Government
Commission (see p. 72).
In Northern Ireland 26 district councils
are responsible for local environmental and
certain other services. Statutory bodies, such
as the Northern Ireland Housing Executive
and area boards, are responsible to central
government departments for administering
other major services (see p. 513).
Election of Councils
Local councils consist of elected councillors.
Councillors are paid a basic allowance but
may also be entitled to additional allowances
and expenses for attending meetings or taking
on special responsibilities. Parish and
community councillors cannot claim allowances
for duties undertaken within their own council
areas. In Scotland community councillors are
not eligible for any form of allowance.
In England and Wales each council elects
its presiding officer annually. Some districts
have the ceremonial title of borough, or city,
both granted by royal authority. In boroughs
and cities the presiding officer is normally
known as the Mayor. In the City of London
and certain other large cities, he or she is
known as the Lord Mayor. In Scotland the
presiding officer of the district council of
each of the four cities is called the Lord
Provost. In other councils he or she is known
as a convenor or provost. District councils in
Northern Ireland are presided over by mayors.
Councillors are elected for four years. All
county councils in England and Wales,
London borough councils, and about two-
thirds of non-metropolitan district councils
are elected in their entirety every four years.
In the remaining districts (including all
metropolitan districts) one-third of the
councillors are elected in each of the three
years between county council elections. In
Scotland local elections are held every two
years, alternately for districts and for regions
and islands authorities. Each election covers
the whole council.
Voters
Anyone may vote at a local government
election in Britain provided he or she is:
• aged 18 years or over;
• a citizen of Britain or another
Commonwealth country, or a citizen of
the Irish Republic;
• not legally disqualified; and
• on the electoral register.
To qualify for registration a person must be
resident in the council area on the qualifying
date. In Northern Ireland there are slightly
different requirements.
Citizens of the European Union will be able
to register to vote and stand for election at
local government elections by the end of 1995.
Candidates
Most candidates at local government elections
stand as representatives of a national political
party, although some stand as independents.
Candidates must be British citizens, other
Commonwealth citizens or citizens of the
73
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Irish Republic, and aged 21 or over. In
addition, they must either:
• be registered as local electors in the area
of the relevant local authority; or
• have occupied (as owner or tenant) land
or premises in that area during the whole
of the preceding 12 months; or
• have had their main place of work in
the area throughout this 12-month
period.
No one may be elected to a council of
which he or she is an employee, and there are
some other disqualifications. All candidates
for district council elections in Northern
Ireland are required to make a declaration
against terrorism.
Electoral Divisions and Procedure
Counties in England and Wales are divided
into electoral divisions, each returning one
councillor. Districts in England, Wales and
Northern Ireland are divided into wards,
returning one councillor or more. In Scotland
the electoral areas in the regions and islands
areas are called electoral divisions, each
returning a single member; the districts are
divided into wards, similarly returning a
single member. Parishes (in England) and
communities (in Wales) may be divided into
wards. Wards return at least one councillor.
The minimum parish/community council
size is five councillors.
The procedure for local government
voting in Great Britain is broadly similar to
that for parliamentary elections. In Northern
Ireland local government elections are held by
proportional representation, and electoral wards
are grouped into district electoral areas.
Council Functions and Services
At present in England county councils are
responsible for strategic planning, transport
planning, highways, traffic regulation,
education,10 consumer protection, refuse
disposal, police,11 the fire service, libraries
10 Schools may, however, ‘opt out’ of local education authority
control by obtaining grant-maintained status—see p. 411.
" In many areas, police forces cover more than one county, and
in these cases a joint board is set up to act as police authority.
and the personal social services. District
councils are responsible for services such as
environmental health, housing, decisions on
most local planning applications, and refuse
collection. Both tiers of local authority have
powers to provide facilities such as museums,
art galleries and parks; arrangements depend
on local agreement.
In the metropolitan counties the district
councils are responsible for all services apart
from the police, the fire service and public
transport and, in some areas, waste regulation
and disposal (see p. 358). In Greater London
the boroughs and the Corporation of the City
of London have similar functions, but
London’s metropolitan police force is
responsible to the Home Secretary.
Responsibility for public transport lies with
London Transport (see p. 290).
In Wales the division of functions between
county and district councils is much the same
as that between county and district councils
in non-metropolitan areas of England, except
that Welsh district councils are responsible
for refuse disposal and a few are also
responsible for libraries.
In Scotland the functions of regional and
district authorities are, at present, divided
up in a similar way to the counties and
districts in England and Wales. Because of
their isolation from the mainland, the
Orkneys, the Shetlands and the Western Isles
have single, virtually all-purpose authorities;
they take part in wider-scale administration
for their police and fire services, however,
and rely on the mainland for assistance in the
more specialised aspects of education and
social work.
In Northern Ireland local environmental
and certain other services, such as leisure and
the arts, are administered by the district
councils. Responsibility for planning, roads,
water supply and sewerage services is
exercised in each district through a divisional
office of the Department of the Environment
for Northern Ireland. Area boards,
responsible to central departments, administer
education, public libraries and the health and
personal social services locally. The Northern
Ireland Housing Executive, responsible to the
Department of the Environment for Northern
Ireland, administers housing.
74
GOVERNMENT
Changes in Local Government
There have been numerous changes in recent
years in the way that local authorities approach
their responsibilities. Many of these can be
encapsulated under the term ‘the enabling
authority’. It is used to describe the general
shift away from local authorities providing
services directly and towards them arranging
for services to be provided, or carrying out
functions in partnership with other bodies.
For example, councils often have nomination
rights to housing association properties
(see p. 330), so that they are acting not as
provider but as ‘gatekeeper’. Likewise, under
the community care reforms, councils with
social services responsibilities have to draw up
care plans for those who need them (see
p. 392), but the care will often be provided
by the private or voluntary sectors funded by
the council, rather than directly by the local
authority itself.
Internal Organisation of Local
Authorities
Local authorities have considerable freedom
to make arrangements for carrying out their
duties; these are set out in standing orders.
Some decisions are made by the full council;
many other matters are delegated to
committees composed of members of the
council. A council may delegate most
functions to a committee or officer, although
certain powers are legally reserved to the
council as a whole. The powers and duties of
local authority committees are usually laid
down in the terms of reference. Parish and
community councils in England and Wales
are often able to do their work in full session,
although they appoint committees from time
to time as necessary.
In England and Wales committees
generally have to reflect the political
composition of the council (although the
legislation governing this specifically excludes
parish or community councils). In practice,
this is often also the case in Scotland,
although it is not enforced by legislation.
People who are not members of the council
may be co-opted onto decision-making
committees and can speak and take part in
debates; they cannot normally vote.
Legislation also prevents senior officers and
others in politically sensitive posts from being
members of another local authority or
undertaking public political activity. Some of
these provisions have not been introduced in
Northern Ireland.
Public Access
The public (including the press) are admitted
to council, committee and sub-committee
meetings, and have access to agendas, reports
and minutes of meetings and certain background
papers. Local authorities may exclude the
public from meetings and withhold these
papers only in limited circumstances.
Employees
Over 2 million people12 are employed by
local authorities in Great Britain. These
include administrative, professional and
technical staff, teachers, firefighters, those
engaged in law and order services, and
manual workers. Education is the largest
service, employing some 40 per cent of all
local government workers. Councils are
individually responsible, within certain
national legislative requirements, for deciding
the structure of their workforces.
Senior staff appointments are usually made
by the elected councillors. More junior
appointments are made by heads of
departments. Pay and conditions of service
are usually a matter for each council,
although there are scales recommended by
national negotiating machinery between
authorities and trade unions, and most
authorities follow these.
Authorities differ in the degree to which
they employ their own permanent staff to
carry out certain functions or use private
firms under contract. The Government’s
policy of promoting value for money is
encouraging the use of private firms where
savings can be made. Many local government
functions, such as refuse collection and
leisure management, must be put out to
tender (‘compulsory competitive tendering’—
Full-time equivalents.
75
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
CCT), although the local authority’s own
workforce can put up an in-house bid.
Between 1989 and 1992, CCT achieved
average cost savings of 6 to 7 per cent. In
November 1992 the Government announced
proposals to extend CCT to local authorities’
provision of a range of professional services.
Local Authority Finance
Local government expenditure accounts for
about 25 per cent of public spending. The
Government has sought to influence local
government spending as part of a general
policy of controlling the growth of public
expenditure. Since 1984 the Government has
had powers to limit or ‘cap’ local authority
budgets (local authority taxation in Scotland)
by setting a maximum amount for local
authorities which have, in its view, set
budgets which are excessive.
In 1993-94 expenditure by local authorities
in Britain was about £70,200 million.
Current expenditure amounted to £59,200
million, and capital expenditure, net of capital
receipts, was £6,700 million and debt interest
£4,400 million. Local government capital
expenditure is financed primarily by
borrowing and from capital receipts from the
disposal of land and buildings.
Local authorities in Great Britain raise
revenue through the council tax, which
replaced the community charge system in
April 1993 (see p. 162). They are also the
beneficiaries of revenue from the national
non-domestic rate, a property tax levied on
businesses and other non-domestic properties.
Financial Safeguards
Local councils’ annual accounts must be
audited by independent auditors appointed by
the Audit Commission in England and Wales,
or by the Commission for Local Authority
Accounts in Scotland. In Northern Ireland
this role is exercised by a local government
audit section appointed by the Department of
the Environment for Northern Ireland.
Local Government Complaints System
Local authorities are encouraged to resolve
complaints through internal mechanisms, and
members of the public will often ask their own
councillor for assistance in this. Local
authorities must also appoint a monitoring
officer whose duties include ensuring that the
local authority acts lawfully in the conduct of
its business.
Allegations of local government
maladministration may be investigated by
statutory independent Commissioners for
Local Administration, often known as ‘local
government ombudsmen’. There are three of
these in England, and one each in Wales and
Scotland. A report is issued on each
complaint investigated and, if injustice
caused by maladministration is found, the
local ombudsman normally suggests a
remedy. The council must consider the
report and reply to it.
In Northern Ireland a Commissioner for
Complaints deals with complaints alleging
injustices suffered as a result of
maladministration by district councils and
certain other public bodies.
Pressure Groups
Pressure groups are informal organisations
which aim to influence Parliament and
Government in the way decisions are made
and carried out, to the benefit of their
members and the causes they support.
There is a huge range, covering politics,
business, employment, consumer affairs,
ethnic minorities, aid to developing
countries, foreign relations, education,
culture defence, religion, sport, transport,
social welfare, animal welfare and the
environment. Some have over a million
members, others only a few dozen. Some
exert pressure on a number of different
issues; others are concerned with a single
issue. Some have come to play a
recognised role in the way Britain is
governed; others seek influence through
radical protest.
While political parties seek to win political
power, pressure groups aim to influence
those who are in power, rather than to
exercise the responsibility of government and
to legislate.
76
GOVERNMENT
Pressure Groups and Policy
Pressure groups operating at a national level
have a number of ways of influencing the way
Britain is governed. Action by them may
highlight a particular problem, which is then
acknowledged by the Government. Groups
whose scale of membership indicates that they
are broadly representative in their field may
then be consulted by a government department,
or take part in Whitehall working groups or
advisory councils. If the Government
considers that legislation is necessary, then
proposals are drafted, which are circulated to
interested groups for their comments.
Legislation is then put before Parliament, and
at various times during the passage of a Bill—
especially at the committee stage—pressure
groups have opportunities to influence its
content. If the Act includes delegated
legislation (see p. 57), pressure groups may be
consulted and have the opportunity to
provide information and express their views.
Pressure Groups and Government
The principle of consultation to gain the
consent and co-operation of as wide a range
of organisations as possible, and ensure the
smooth working of laws and regulations,
plays an important part in the relationship
between government departments and
interested groups.
In some instances a department is under
legal obligation to consult with interested
groups. The Government has a duty to
consult organised interests, providing the
pressure groups involved have a broad
enough membership for them to represent a
majority view, and that they observe
confidentiality about their discussions with
the department. Members of pressure groups
have direct expertise, and an awareness of
what is practicable, and can give advice and
information to civil servants engaged in
preparing policy or legislation. In return, the
pressure groups have the opportunity to
express their opinions directly to the
Government. The contacts between civil
servants and pressure group representatives
may be relatively informal—by letter or
telephone—or more formal, through
involvement in working parties or by giving
evidence to committees of inquiry.
Administration by Pressure Groups
As well as providing information and opinions,
pressure groups can also be involved in
administering government policy. The Law
Society—the representative body for solicitors
—administered the Government’s Legal Aid
scheme until that function was taken over in
1989 by the Legal Aid Board (see p. 105).
The Government also makes grants to
pressure groups which, as well as speaking on
behalf of their members or for an issue, also
provide a service. Relate: National Marriage
Guidance has received grants for the advice
centres it runs, and government departments
make grants to a number of pressure groups
for research relating to public policy.
Pressure Groups and Parliament
Lobbying—the practice of approaching MPs
or Lords, persuading them to act on behalf of
a cause, and enabling them to do so by
providing advice and information—is a form
of pressure group activity which has
substantially increased in recent years.
A common pressure group tactic is to ask
members of the public to write to their MP
about an issue—for example, the Sunday
trading laws, or the plight of political
prisoners in particular countries—in order to
raise awareness and persuade the MP to
support the cause.
Raising Issues in Parliament
Other ways through which pressure groups
may exert influence include:
• suggesting to MPs or Lords subjects for
private members’ Bills (see p. 55); many
pressure groups have ready-drafted
legislation waiting to be sponsored;
• approaching MPs or Lords to ask
parliamentary questions as a means of
gaining information from the
Government and of drawing public
attention to an issue;
• suggesting to MPs subjects for Early Day
Motions (see p. 59); and
77
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
• orchestrating public petitions as a form of
protest against government policy, or to
call for action. If the petition is to be
presented in Parliament, it must be
worded according to Commons or Lords
rules, and be presented by an MP or
Lord in his or her own House.
Sponsoring and Employing MPs
The trade unions sponsor a large number of
Labour Party parliamentary candidates, by
providing financial help with general election
expenses, as well as making annual payments
to the constituency parties of sponsored Labour
MPs. Of the 269 Labour MPs elected at the
1992 general election, 165 were sponsored.
MPs may be employed as parliamentary
advisers or consultants to pressure groups or
companies. As a consultant, an MP might be
expected to give information and advice
about relevant parliamentary business, and
speak on behalf of the interests concerned in
a debate. Any such employment must be
registered in the published Register of
Members’ Interests (see p. 54), and must be
declared in the course of any relevant speech
in the House.
Parliamentary Lobbyists
Many pressure groups employ full-time
parliamentary workers or liaison officers,
whose job is to develop contacts with MPs
and Lords sympathetic to their cause, and to
brief them when issues affecting the group
are raised in Parliament.
There are also public relations and
political consultancy firms specialising in
lobbying Parliament and Government. Such
firms are employed by pressure groups—as
well as by British and overseas companies
and organisations—to monitor parliamentary
business, and to promote their clients’
interests where they are affected by
legislation and debate.
Further Reading
The British System of Government. Aspects of Britain series, HMSO, 1994.
The Civil Service: Continuity and Change. Cm 2627, HMSO, 1994.
History and Function of Government Departments. Aspects of Britain series, HMSO, 1993.
Open Government. Cm 2290. HMSO, 1993.
Organisation of Political Parties. Aspects of Britain series, HMSO, 1994.
Parliament. Aspects of Britain series, HMSO, 1994.
Pressure Groups. Aspects of Britain series, HMSO, 1994.
Renewing Local Government in the English Shires. Local Government Commission. HMSO, £7.90
78
8
Justice and the Law
Criminal Justice 80
The Police Service 83
Criminal Courts 88
Treatment of Offenders 94
Civil Justice 101
Civil Courts 101
Administration of the Law 104
Government Responsibilities 104
Judges and Lawyers 105
Legal Aid ' 105
In response to increasing public concern about crime, the Government has
toughened its law and order policy. This has been reflected in two major
pieces of legislation—the Police and Magistrates’ Courts Act and the Criminal
Justice and Public Order Bill. The former is intended to improve police
flexibility to tackle crime and to increase the efficiency of court
administration. The latter includes new measures to combat crime and
allows for the prompt enactment of some of the recommendations of the
Royal Commission on Criminal Justice in England and Wales, which reported
to the Government in July 1993.
England and Wales, Scotland, and Northern
Ireland all have their own legal systems, with
considerable differences in law, organisation
and practice. All three have separate
prosecution, prison and police services. Crime
prevention policy and non-custodial treatment
for offenders is very similar throughout Britain.
There are different civil court and civil law
systems in England and Wales and in Scotland;
Northern Ireland’s system is in many ways
similar to the English and Welsh model.
Common Law and Statute Law
One of the main sources of law in England
and Wales and in Northern Ireland is
common law, which has evolved over
centuries from judges’ decisions. It forms the
basis of the law except when superseded by
legislation. In Scotland, too, the doctrine of
legal precedent has been more strictly applied
since the end of the 18th century.
Much of the law, particularly that relating
to criminal justice, is statute law passed by
Parliament. If a court reaches a decision
which is contrary to the intentions of
Parliament, then Parliament must either
accept the decision or pass amending
legislation. Some Acts create new law, while
others are passed to draw together existing
law on a given topic. Parliament can repeal a
statute and replace it with another.
European Community Law
European Community law, deriving from
Britain’s membership of the European Union,
is confined mainly to economic and social
matters; in certain circumstances it takes
precedence over domestic law. It is normally
applied by the domestic courts, but the most
authoritative rulings are given by the
European Court of Justice (see p. 112).
Certain changes to United Kingdom law
79
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
have been made to bring it into line with
rulings of Strasbourg’s European Court of
Human Rights.
Branches of the Law
There are two main branches of the law—
criminal and civil. Criminal law is concerned
with acts punishable by the State. Civil law
covers:
• disputes between individuals about their
rights, duties and obligations; and
• dealings between individuals and
companies, and between one company
and another.
Criminal Justice
Crime Statistics
Differences in the legal systems, police
recording practices and statistical classifications
make it impracticable to analyse in detail
trends in crime for the country as a whole.
Nevertheless, there has, as in Western Europe
generally, been a substantial increase in crime
since the early 1950s. Annual official statistics
cover crime recorded by the police and can be
affected by changes in unreported crime.
Recorded crimes in England and Wales in
1993 are detailed in Table 8.1. In the same
year the Scottish police recorded 543,013
crimes, of which 186,212 were cleared up. In
Northern Ireland, of the 66,228 recorded
crimes about 24,088 were cleared up.
Most crime is committed by young males,
is opportunist and is not planned by
hardened professional criminals, although
these do exist.
Crime tends to be concentrated in large
cities and urban areas. About 94 per cent of
offences recorded by the police in England
and Wales are directed against property but
only 5 per cent involve violence. Rising
affluence has provided more opportunities for
casual property crime. In 1957, for example,
car crime was only one-tenth of total crime
but this has risen to about 28 per cent. The
demand for, and supply of, illegal drugs has
been an increasing factor in the incidence of
crime in recent years.
Regular crime surveys are undertaken in
England and Wales, Scotland and in
Northern Ireland. The 1992 survey in
England and Wales asked respondents for
information about how crime had affected
them in 1991. It estimated a total of 15
million crimes in 1991, the majority of which
were against property. Violent crime
accounted for only 5 per cent of the total,
while 36 per cent involved vehicles, 9 per
cent were burglaries and 30 per cent other
forms of theft. These surveys, the fifth of
which is in progress, indicate that many
crimes go unrecorded by the police, mainly
because not all victims report them.
Crime Prevention
National publicity campaigns are a regular
feature of the Government’s programmes.
The Home Office’s Crime Prevention Centre
Table 8.1: Notifiable Crimes Recorded by the Police in England and Wales 1993
Offence Group Recorded crimes Crimes cleared up Per cent
Violence against the person
Sexual offences
Burglary
Robbery
Theft and handling stolen goods
Fraud and forgery
Criminal damage*
Other
Total
205,416
31,380
1,369,998
58,274
2,753,927
163,132
697,841
40,997
5,320,965
156,636
23,371
266,420
12,532
634,491
82,956
113,494
38,988
1,328,888
76
74
19
22
23
51
16
95
25
Source: Home Office.
“Excludes criminal damage of £20 or under.
80
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
encourages local agencies to implement
anti-crime measures and to assess the results.
Assisted by the police, local crime
prevention panels (including mainly school-
based youth panels) try to prevent crime
through publicity, marking goods and
equipment, and fund-raising to buy security
devices. The police have also been closely
involved in setting up 130,000
neighbourhood watch schemes in England
and Wales. There are some 3,400 watch
schemes in Scotland. Crime Concern, a
national independent organisation, encourages
local initiatives and business participation in
crime prevention.
The Safer Cities programme tackles crime
and the fear of crime in inner city and urban
areas through joint action by local government,
private businesses, the police and voluntary
agencies. By March 1994, 20 projects had
supported 3,600 crime prevention schemes with
over £22 million of grant funds from central
government. Although 16 of the projects
under the first phase of the programme have
closed, the programme is being expanded to
up to 40 new projects in selected high-crime
areas. Each project is led by a committee,
drawn from local agencies and supported by a
co-ordinator funded by the Home Office.
There is a Safer Cities programme in
Scotland and similar projects are being funded
by the Government in Northern Ireland.
The National Board for Crime Prevention,
set up in 1993, advises the Government about
ways of involving all sections of the
community in the development and delivery
of crime prevention in England and Wales.
The Scottish Crime Prevention Panel
performs a similar function in Scotland.
Helping the Victim
There are some 370 victim support schemes
—with some 10,000 volunteer visitors and
covering 98 per cent of the population in
England and Wales—providing practical help
and emotional support to victims of crime.
They are co-ordinated by a national organisation,
Victim Support, which receives a government
grant (over £10 million in 1994-95). Most of
the grant goes to local schemes to meet either
the salaries of co-ordinators or running costs.
Similar schemes operate in Scotland and
Northern Ireland.
In England and Wales a witness service,
organised by Victim Support with Home
Office funding, provides support for victims
and other witnesses attending Crown Courts.
Some 40 witness schemes have been set up to
help victims through the stress of giving
evidence; these will be extended to all 76 main
Crown Court centres by the end of 1995.
The Government has accepted the 11
recommendations made by the Royal
Commission on Criminal Justice on
help for the victims of crime. Some
reflect the standards of the Victims’
Charter, published by the Government
in 1990, and are already established
practice. Others call for new
procedures to be set up within and
between the criminal justice agencies
responsible for their delivery.
Blameless victims of violent crime in
England, Wales and Scotland, including
foreign nationals, may be eligible for
compensation from public funds. In Northern
Ireland there is statutory provision in certain
circumstances for compensation to be paid
from public funds for criminal injuries, and
for malicious damage to property, including
any resulting loss of profits. Britain is a party
to a European Convention under which
mutual arrangements for compensation apply
to citizens of those countries in which the
Convention is in force.
Strengthening the Law
Important measures to strengthen the
criminal justice system have been taken in
recent years. The courts, for instance, have
powers to confiscate the proceeds of drug
trafficking. A court can require an offender to
pay an amount equal to the full value of the
proceeds arising from the trafficking.
Following a conviction, the onus is on the
offender to prove that property does not
represent the proceeds of trafficking.
Restraint and confiscation orders made by
courts can be enforced against assets held
81
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
overseas, and vice versa, if a mutual
enforcement agreement has been made
between Britain and another state. A court,
other than in Scotland, may also confiscate
the proceeds of offences such as robbery,
fraud, blackmail and insider dealing in shares.
New powers to clamp down on money
launderers1 came into force in February and
April 1994, with heavy penalties for those
who launder money gained from any sort of
serious crime.
In 1992 Britain became the first country
to ratify the 1990 Council of Europe
convention which provides for international
co-operation in the investigation, search,
seizure and confiscation of the proceeds of
all crimes.
There are strict legislative controls on
firearms. The police license the possession of
firearms and have powers to regulate their
safe keeping and movement. The private
ownership of certain highly dangerous types
of weapon, such as machine guns,
high-powered self-loading rifles and burst-fire
weapons, is banned. Similar legislation
applies in Northern Ireland.
It is unlawful to manufacture, sell or
import certain weapons such as
knuckledusters or to carry a knife in a public
place without good reason.
The Criminal Justice Act 1991 made a
number of reforms to the criminal law in
England and Wales, mainly concerning
sentencing and the system for early release of
prisoners (see p. 97). Similar reforms in
Scotland took effect from October 1993.
Legislation has been passed to improve the
organisation and management of the police,
so that they are better able to combat crime.
A Bill before Parliament is designed to tilt
the balance of the criminal justice system
further against criminals and in favour of
protecting law-abiding people.
Measures to Combat Terrorism
The Government has certain exceptional
powers for dealing with and preventing
■Money laundering is the process by which illegally obtained
property—from drugs or arms trafficking, terrorist activities or
other serious crimes—is given the appearance of having
originated from a legitimate source.
terrorist activities. These take account of
the need to achieve a proper balance
between the safety of the public and the
rights of the individual.
Northern Ireland
The security forces in Northern Ireland have
special powers to search, question and arrest.
The police can hold a suspected terrorist on
their own authority for up to 48 hours;
detention for up to a further five days must
be approved by the Northern Ireland
Secretary. A person who is detained under
emergency provisions is entitled to consult a
solicitor privately.
Nobody may be imprisoned for political
beliefs. All prisoners, except those awaiting
trial, have been found guilty in court of
criminal offences. The legislation is reviewed
annually by an independent person whose
reports are presented to Parliament, which
has to renew the legislation each year.
Other Legislation
Other legislation applies throughout Britain
and is renewable annually by Parliament. It
provides for the exclusion from Great Britain,
Northern Ireland or the United Kingdom of
people involved in terrorism related to
Northern Ireland affairs and for the banning
of specified terrorist organisations in Great
Britain. It also gives the police powers to
arrest terrorist suspects without warrant and
hold them for 48 hours. Ministerial approval
may be given to extend detention for up to a
further five days. This provision also applies
to suspected international terrorists.
It is a criminal offence to finance
terrorism or receive funds for use in the
furtherance of terrorism. Police can apply for
a court order to freeze a suspect’s assets once
he or she has been charged. Funds can be
forfeited if a person is convicted. The
legislation allows for reciprocal enforcement
agreements with other countries.
The Government maintains that there
should be no concessions to terrorist demands
and that international co-operation is essential
in tracking down terrorists and impeding
their movement between countries.
82
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
THE POLICE SERVICE
Organisation
There are 52 police forces in Britain, mainly
organised on a local basis: 43 in England and
Wales, eight in Scotland and one (the Royal
Ulster Constabulary) in Northern Ireland.
The Metropolitan Police Force and the City
of London force are responsible for policing
London. The police service is financed by
central and local government.
At the end of 1993 police strength in
Britain was about 150,000, of which the
Metropolitan Police numbered over 28,000.
The establishment of the Royal Ulster
Constabulary was around 8,500. Police
strength in Scotland was just over 14,000.
Each force has volunteer special constables
who perform police duties in their spare time,
without pay, acting in support of regular
officers. The Government is planning to
recruit a further 10,000 special constables by
the end of 1996, so increasing the overall
number by 50 per cent. In Northern Ireland
there is a 5,000-strong part-time and full-time
paid reserve.
Police forces are maintained in England
and Wales by the local police authority; two-
thirds of an authority’s members are local
councillors and one-third are magistrates. The
Home Secretary is responsible for London’s
Metropolitan Police Force. The police
authorities in Scotland are the regional and
islands councils. In Northern Ireland the
police force is responsible to a police
authority appointed by the Government.
Chief constables run their police forces
and are responsible for the appointment,
promotion and discipline of all ranks below
assistant chief constable. They are generally
answerable to the police authorities, and must
submit an annual report. The police
authorities appoint the chief constable and
other top officers. They also fix the
maximum strength of the force, subject to
approval by the Government, and provide
buildings and equipment.
London’s Metropolitan Police
Commissioner and his immediate subordinates
are appointed on the recommendation of the
Home Secretary.
Central Authorities
The Home Secretary and the Scottish and
Northern Ireland Secretaries approve the
appointment of chief, deputy and assistant
chief constables. Where necessary they can:
• approve a police authority’s decision to
retire a chief constable in the interests of
efficiency;
• call for a report from a chief constable on
matters relating to local policing; and
• institute a local inquiry.
These ministers can also make regulations
covering:
• qualifications for appointment, promotion
and retirement;
• discipline;
• hours of duty, leave, pay and allowances;
• uniform; and
• ranks.
Police forces are inspected by inspectors of
constabulary, whose reports to central
government are published. Lay inspectors,
with a range of professional experience
outside the police service, have been
appointed for the first time.
Police officers are not allowed to join a
trade union or to go on strike. All ranks,
however, have their own staff associations.
Reform Programme
New legislation has been passed that is
designed to change the relationship
between central government, police
authorities and chief constables, to improve
the management of the police and to reduce
cumbersome central controls. The main
provisions of the Police and Magistrates’
Courts Act include:
• setting key objectives for the police
which give priority to fighting crime and
protecting the public;
• placing a greater emphasis on community
needs through local policing plans;
• strengthening the role of the Inspectorate
of Constabulary, which will have a
statutory responsibility to inspect the
Metropolitan Police;
83
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
• ending detailed government controls on
finance and manpower by giving chief
constables new freedom to manage police
and civilian staff and to determine staff
numbers; and
• introducing fixed-term appointments for
senior police officers and abolishing the
ranks of deputy chief constable and chief
superintendent.
The first two of these will not apply in
Scotland, where the duties of the police have
been set out in statute for many years.
New7 legislation provides for the
appointment of independent members
to police authorities in England and
Wales outside London. The standard
size of a police authority w ill be 17
members, comprising nine locally
elected councillors, three magistrates
and five independent members. The
Home Secretary will be able to
increase the size of a police authority
beyond 17 if local circumstances make
it desirable. The independent
members will be chosen by the other
members of the police authority, from
a list of 10 names forwarded by the
Home Secretary from a shortlist of 20
prepared by a local selection panel.
The Government has accepted all the
recommendations of a 1993 report on
reducing police paperwork in England and
Wales. The report called for more effective use
of information technology and better liaison
between the police and the Crown Prosecution
Service (see p. 88). Work is well advanced on
implementing the recommendations.
Co-ordination of Police Operations
Certain police services are provided centrally
either by the Government or through co¬
operation between forces. In England and
Wales these include criminal intelligence,
telecommunications, and research and
development. In Scotland the main common
services are centralised police training, the
Scottish Crime Squad and the Scottish
Criminal Record Office.
The National Criminal Intelligence
Service, with a headquarters in London and
five regional offices, provides police forces
with information about major criminals and
serious crime. Its Drugs Unit helps to co¬
ordinate police and Customs intelligence on
drug trafficking. The Service also liaises with
the International Criminal Police
Organisation, which promotes international
co-operation between police forces.
Britain has taken the lead in developing,
with other European Union countries, a
European police organisation designed to
provide Union-wide intelligence about serious
crime (see p. 127).
Almost all British police forces have
specialist units to investigate company fraud.
Regional crime squads, co-ordinated at
national level in England and Wales, deal
with serious criminal activities, such as drug
trafficking, which transcend individual force
boundaries and may have national or
international links.
The Police National Computer provides
all British police forces with rapid 24-hour-a-
day access to operationally essential
information. Phoenix, formerly known as the
National Criminal Records System, is being
implemented on the Police National
Computer in 1994, giving the police direct
on-screen access to national records of
arrests, bail decisions, and convictions. This
will gradually replace the manual record¬
keeping service currently operated by the
National Identification Bureau (NIB), which
is located at Metropolitan Police headquarters
but financed by all police forces. Phoenix will
eventually provide information direct to other
agencies such as the courts, the Prison
Service and the Crown Prosecution Service.
The Police National Network, providing
integrated voice and data communications,
should be fully operational by mid-1995.
Scottish criminal records are held on
computer at the Scottish Criminal Record
Office, which has an automatic national
fingerprint record system; plans for a similar
national system in England and Wales are on
course for implementation during 1996-97.
The Police National Missing Persons
Bureau, which comes under the NIB, was
launched in March 1994. It is the first
84
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
national database of vulnerable missing
people, holding information which all forces
and international agencies can share.
Forensic Science Service
The Forensic Science Service (FSS) provides
scientific support primarily for forces in
England and Wales. It has 600 staff, of whom
about 400 are scientists. There are six
operational laboratories and a research
establishment. London’s Metropolitan Police
Force has its own forensic science laboratory,
which is the largest in Europe.
As well as the 41 provincial police forces
in England and Wales, other FSS customers
include the Crown Prosecution Service,
defence lawyers, coroners and civil litigants.
In Scotland forensic science services are
provided by forces’ own laboratories.
Northern Ireland has its own forensic
science laboratory.
Police Discipline
A police officer may be prosecuted if
suspected of a criminal offence. Officers are
also subject to a disciplinary code designed to
deal with abuse of police powers and maintain
public confidence in police impartiality. If
found guilty of breaching the code, an officer
can be dismissed from the force.
New disciplinary procedures for the police
in Great Britain, similar to those in operation
elsewhere in the public service, were
announced by the Government in September
1993. They include splitting the disciplinary
system into two categories—unsatisfactory
performance and misconduct. Guidance on
operating the new procedures is being
developed in consultation with police staff
associations and police authority
representatives. Its introduction awaits the
coming into force of the Police and
Magistrates’ Courts Act. Similar reforms have
been proposed in Northern Ireland.
Members of the public have the right to
make complaints against police officers if they
feel that they have been treated unfairly or
improperly. In England and Wales the
investigation and resolution of complaints is
scrutinised by the independent Police
Complaints Authority. In Scotland
complaints against police officers involving
allegations of any form of criminal conduct
are referred to the procurator fiscal for
investigation (see p. 89). The Police and
Magistrates’ Courts Act includes provisions
to give the Scottish Inspectorate of
Constabulary a newr role regarding the
handling of a complaint where the
complainant is dissatisfied.
In Northern Ireland the Independent
Commission for Police Complaints is
required to supervise the investigation of a
complaint regarding death or serious injury
and has the power to supervise that of any
other complaint. In certain circumstances, the
Secretary of State may direct the Commission
to supervise the investigation of matters that
are not the subject of a formal complaint.
Community Relations
Police/community liaison consultative groups
operate in every police authority; they consist
of representatives from the police, local
councillors and community groups.
Particular efforts are made to develop
relations with young people through greater
contact with schools. School governing bodies
and head teachers have to describe in their
annual reports the steps taken to strengthen
their schools’ links with the community,
including the police.
The Government is committed to
improving relations between the police and
ethnic minorities. Central guidance
recommends that all police officers should
receive thorough training in community and
race relations issues.
Several Home Office initiatives are
designed to tackle racially motivated crime
and to ensure that the issue is treated as a
police priority. These include the issue of
guidance to forces on their response to such
crimes and the production of a booklet for
victims. In addition, forces’ arrangements for
responding to racial incidents are monitored
by the Inspectorate of Constabulary.
Discriminatory behaviour by police officers,
either to other officers or to members of the
public, is an offence under the Police
Discipline Code.
85
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In October 1993 the Government launched
the Parish Constables initiative in England
and Wales, inviting police and parish councils
(see p. 73) to set up pilot schemes to test new
ideas on community policing. By April 1994,
46 schemes were in operation.
All police forces recognise the need to
recruit women and members of the ethnic
minorities in order to ensure that the police
represent the community. At the end of 1993
there were 1,730 ethnic minority officers and
16,750 women police officers in England and
Wales. Scottish police forces had 1,559
women officers. Every force has an equal
opportunities policy.
Police Powers
Officers in Great Britain do not normally
carry firearms, although in an emergency they
can be issued on the authority of a senior
officer. Officers in armoured response vehicles
in London can wear their sidearms in holsters
at all times. In Northern Ireland police
officers are issued with firearms for personal
protection and other firearms are available for
duty purposes.
The Government can authorise
interception of postal and telephone services
by the police in order to:
• prevent and detect serious crime;
• protect national security; or
• safeguard Britain’s economic well-being.
Any interception outside these procedures
is a criminal offence.
A police officer in England and Wales has
a general power of stop and search if he or
she has reasonable grounds for suspecting that
a person is carrying stolen goods, offensive
weapons or implements that could be used for
theft, burglary and other offences. 4 he officer
must, however, state and record the grounds
for taking this action and what, if anything,
was found.
Under new legislation before Parliament,
police officers would be able to stop and
search all people and vehicles for offensive
weapons or knives if violence is likely to break
out. This power would be linked to a
specified time and area, and would require the
authority of a superintendent or higher rank.
Arrest
In England and Wales the police have wide
powers to arrest suspects with or without a
warrant issued by a magistrate. For serious
offences, known as ‘arrestable offences’, a
suspect can be arrested without a warrant;
this covers all offences for which a maximum
period of five years’ imprisonment can be
imposed. Arrest without a warrant also
applies to people suspected of committing
serious ‘arrestable offences’ such as murder,
rape and kidnapping. For lesser offences,
arrest without warrant exists if it is not
possible or appropriate to send out a
summons to appear in court.
Detention, Treatment and Questioning
A government code of practice regulates
detention, treatment and questioning of
suspects by the police in England and Wales.
A police officer can be disciplined if he or
she fails to comply with the code. Evidence
obtained in breach of the code may be ruled
inadmissible in court.
An arrested person has a statutory right
to consult a solicitor and to ask the police
to notify a relative or other named person
about the arrest. Where a person has been
arrested in connection with a serious
arrestable offence, but not yet charged, the
police may delay for up to 36 hours the
exercise of these rights if certain strict
criteria are met.
The police must caution a suspect before
any questions are put to him or her for the
purpose of obtaining material which may be
given in evidence in court. The caution
informs the suspect that he or she is entitled
to refuse to answer questions—the so-called
‘right to silence’. In England and Wales this
would be amended under the provisions of
new legislation so that courts could draw an
inference from a suspect’s refusal to answer
questions from police officers or during court
proceedings. Such legislation is already in
place in Northern Ireland.
Questions relating to an offence may not
normally be put to a person after he or she
has been charged or informed that he or she
may be prosecuted.
86
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
The time a suspect is held in police
custody before charge is strictly regulated.
For lesser offences this may not exceed
24 hours. A person suspected of committing a
serious arrestable offence, such as murder,
rape, or kidnapping, can be detained for up to
96 hours without charge but only beyond
36 hours if a warrant is obtained from a
magistrates’ court. Reviews must be made of
a person’s detention at regular intervals—six
hours after initial detention and thereafter
every nine hours as a maximum—to check
whether the criteria for detention are still
satisfied. If they are not, the person must be
released immediately.
Tape recording of interviews with suspected
offenders takes place at police stations; a code
of practice governing these tape recordings has
been approved by Parliament.
A person who thinks that the grounds for
their detention are unlawful may apply to the
High Court for a writ of habeas corpus,
requiring the person who detained them to
appear before the court to justify the
detention. Habeas corpus proceedings take
precedence over others. Similar procedures
apply in Northern Ireland and a similar
remedy is available to anyone who is
unlawfully detained in Scotland.
Recognising that the use of DNA
analysis has become a powerful tool
in the investigation of crime, the
Government is extending police
powers to take body samples from
suspects. New legislation would allow
the police to take non-intimate
samples without consent from anyone
who is detained or convicted for a
recordable offence, and to use the
samples to search against existing
records of convicted offenders or
unsolved crimes. In time a national
database would be built up.
Charging
Once there is sufficient evidence, the police
have to decide whether to charge the person
with the offence. As an alternative, they can,
for example, decide to defer charging or to
take no further action and release the person
with or without bail. They may also issue a
formal caution (see p. 96), which may be
taken into account if the person reoffends.
If charged, a person may be kept in
custody if there is a risk that they might fail
to appear in court or might interfere with the
administration of justice. When no such
considerations apply, the person must be
released on or without bail. Where someone
is detained after charge, they must be
brought before a magistrates’ court as soon as
practicable. This is usually no later than the
next working day.
Scotland
In Scotland the police have common law
powers of arrest and may search an arrested
person. A police officer may also search a
person for stolen property if he or she has
reasonable grounds for suspicion.
The police may detain and question a
suspected person for up to six hours. After
this period the person must either be released
or charged. Tape recording of interviews with
suspects is common practice. A court will
only allow as evidence statements fairly
obtained by the police. Anyone arrested must
be brought before a court on the first
working day after arrest. In less serious cases
the police may release a person who gives a
written undertaking to attend court.
Where the charges involve serious crime,
the accused is brought before the sheriff in
private, either to be committed for a period
not exceeding eight days to allow further
enquiries to be made or to be committed
for trial.
Awaiting Trial
There are time limits on the period a
defendant may be kept in custody awaiting
trial in England and Wales. In cases tried
before a magistrates’ court these are 56 days
from first appearance to trial or 70 days
between first appearance to committal for
trial (see p. 91) in the Crown Court. The
limit in Crown Court cases is 112 days from
committal to taking of the plea. When a time
limit expires, the defendant is entitled to bail
87
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
unless the court extends the limit; it can only
do this if satisfied that there is a good and
sufficient reason, and that the prosecution has
acted expeditiously.
Bail
Most accused people are released on bail
pending trial. They are not remanded in
custody except where strictly necessary. In
England and Wales, the court decides
whether a defendant should be released on
bail. Unconditional bail may only be withheld
if the court believes that the accused would:
• abscond;
• commit an offence;
• interfere with witnesses; or
• otherwise obstruct the course of justice.
A court may also impose conditions before
granting bail. If bail is refused, the
defendant may apply to a High Court judge
or to the Crown Court for bail. In certain
circumstances the prosecution may appeal to
a Crown Court judge against the granting of
bail by magistrates. An application can also be
made to the Crown Court for conditions
imposed by a magistrates’ court to be varied.
It has been estimated that 50,000
offences in England and Wales are
committed every year by people on
bail. To curb this abuse, new
legislation before Parliament would
give the police powers of immediate
arrest for breach of police bail and
remove the presumption in favour of
bail for people alleged to have
offended while on bail. It would also
restrict the right to bail for someone
charged with murder, manslaughter
or rape if previously convicted of the
same offence.
In some cases a court may grant bail to a
defendant on condition that he or she lives in
an approved bail or probation/bail hostel.
The probation service’s bail information
schemes provide the Crown Prosecution
Service with information about a defendant
which assists it to decide whether to oppose
bail and enables the courts to take an
informed decision on whether to grant bail.
Scotland
Anyone accused of a crime, except murder or
treason, is entitled to apply for release on
bail. Even in murder cases, bail may
exceptionally be granted at the discretion of
the Lord Advocate or a quorum of the High
Court. There is a right of appeal to the High
Court by the accused person against the
refusal of bail, or by the prosecutor against
the granting of bail, or by either party against
the conditions imposed.
If a person charged with a serious crime
has been kept in custody pending trial, the
trial must begin within 110 days of the date
of full committal. Where the person is not in
custody, the trial must begin within 12
months of first appearance before the sheriff.
The trial of a person charged with a
summary offence and held in custody must
begin within 40 days of the date of first
appearance in court.
Northern Ireland
In Northern Ireland bail may be granted by a
resident magistrate except in cases dealt with
under emergency provisions (see p. 14),
where the decision is made by a judge of the
High Court.
CRIMINAL COURTS
Prosecution
England and Wales
Once the police have instituted criminal
proceedings against a person, the
independent Crown Prosecution Service
(CPS) takes control of the case, reviews the
evidence and decides whether the case
should be continued.
The CPS is divided into 13 regional areas,
each of which is run by a locally based Chief
Crown Prosecutor. CPS lawyers prosecute in
the magistrates’ courts, while barristers
appear in the Crown Court.
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
A prosecution will only proceed if the
prosecutor is satisfied that there is, on the
evidence, a realistic prospect of conviction,
and if so, that it is in the public interest for
the prosecution to proceed. In nearly all
cases the decision to prosecute is delegated to
the lawyers in the area offices. However,
some especially sensitive or complex cases,
including terrorist offences and breaches of
the Official Secrets Act, are dealt with by
CPS headquarters.
Scotland
The Lord Advocate is responsible for
prosecutions in the High Court of Justiciary,
sheriff courts and district courts. There is no
general right of private prosecution. The
Lord Advocate is advised by the Crown
Agent, who is head of the Procurator Fiscal
Service and is assisted in the Crown Office
by a staff of legally qualified civil servants.
Prosecutions in the High Court of
Justiciary are prepared by procurators fiscal
and Crown Office officials. They are
conducted by the Lord Advocate, the
Solicitor General for Scotland (the Lord
Advocate’s ministerial deputy) and
advocate deputes, collectively known as
Crown Counsel.
Crimes tried before the sheriff and district
courts are prepared and prosecuted by
procurators fiscal. The police and other law
enforcement agencies investigate crimes and
offences and report to the fiscal, who decides
whether to prosecute, subject to the
directions of Crown Counsel.
When dealing with minor crime, the fiscal
can use alternatives to prosecution, such as
formal warnings, diversion to social work and
offers of fixed penalties. In the latter case,
the offender does not have to accept such an
offer; if he or she chooses to do so,
proceedings are not brought and the payment
does not count as a criminal conviction.
Northern Ireland
The Director of Public Prosecutions for
Northern Ireland, appointed by the Attorney
General, prosecutes all offences tried on
indictment and may do so in other
(summary) cases. Most summary offences are
prosecuted by the police.
Prosecutions for Fraud
The Serious Fraud Office prosecutes the
most serious and complex cases of fraud in
England, Wales and Northern Ireland.
Investigations are conducted by teams of
lawyers, accountants, police officers and other
specialists. In Scotland the Crown Office
Fraud Unit, which is part of the public
prosecution service, directs the investigation
and preparation for prosecution of serious
and complex fraud cases.
Courts
England and Wales
Very serious offences such as murder,
manslaughter, rape and robbery can only be
tried on indictment in the Crown Court,
where all contested trials are presided over by
a judge sitting with a jury. Summary offences
—the less serious offences and the vast
majority of criminal cases—are tried by
unpaid lay magistrates or, in a few areas, by
paid stipendiary magistrates; both sit
without a jury.
Offences in a third category—such as
theft, the less serious cases of burglary and
some assaults—are known as ‘either way’
offences. They can be tried either by
magistrates or by jury in the Crown Court.
Where magistrates consider an ‘either way’
case to be too serious for them to deal with,
they may commit the accused to the Crown
Court for trial. Even if magistrates consider
the case suitable for summary trial, the
accused has the right to choose trial by jury
in the Crown Court.
All those charged with offences to be tried
in the Crown Court must first appear before
a magistrates’ court, which decides whether
to commit them to the Court for trial.
However, under 1994 legislation, these
committal proceedings will be abolished and
replaced by a procedure allowing cases to be
transferred administratively to the Crown
Court. As recommended by the Royal
Commission, the defence will still be able to
89
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
argue that there is no case to answer in
advance of trial at the Crown Court.
A magistrates’ court, which is open to the
public and the media, usually consists of
three lay magistrates—known as justices of
the peace—who are advised by a legally
qualified clerk or a qualified assistant. There
are about 29,400 lay magistrates. The 79 full¬
time, legally qualified stipendiary magistrates
may sit alone and usually preside in courts
where the workload is heavy.
Most cases involving people under 18 are
heard in youth courts. These are specialist
magistrates’ courts which either sit apart
from other courts or are held at a different
time. Restrictions are placed on access by
ordinary members of the public. Media
reports must not identify a young person
concerned in the proceedings, whether as
defendant, victim or witness.
Where a young person under 18 is charged
jointly with someone of 18 or over, the case is
heard in an ordinary magistrates’ court or the
Crown Court. If the young person is found
guilty, the court may transfer the case to a
youth court for sentence.
An independent inspectorate has been set
up to inspect the administration and
management of magistrates’ courts in order to
improve performance and spread good
practice. It does not comment on the judicial
decisions of magistrates or their clerks in
particular cases.
The Crown Court sits at 93 venues and is
presided over by High Court judges, full-time
Circuit Judges and part-time Recorders.
Courts Charter
A Courts Charter, setting out the standards
of service which apply in the higher courts in
England and Wales, came into operation in
January 1993.
It outlines arrangements to help court
users and ease the strains associated with
court attendance. The procedure for
dealing with complaints is displayed in
all courts.
The Charter also covers the conduct of
court business, and sets guideline time limits
covering, among other things, the period
between the start of proceedings and first
appearance in court. It does not cover judicial
decisions. Similar standards have been
adopted by many magistrates’ courts.
Scotland
The High Court of Justiciary tries the most
serious crimes and has exclusive jurisdiction
in cases involving murder, treason and rape.
The sheriff court is concerned with less
serious offences and the district court with
minor offences.
Criminal cases in Scotland are heard
under solemn or summary procedure. In
solemn procedure, a defendant is tried by a
judge sitting with a jury of 15 people. Details
of the alleged offence are set out in a
document called an indictment. In summary
procedure the judge sits without a jury.
All cases in the High Court and the more
serious ones in sheriff courts are tried by a
judge and jury. Summary procedure is used
in the less serious cases in the sheriff courts,
and in all cases in the district courts. District
court judges are lay justices of the peace. In
Glasgow there are also stipendiary magistrates
who are full-time lawyers with the same
criminal jurisdiction in summary procedure
as the sheriff.
Children under 16 who have committed an
offence are normally dealt with by children’s
hearings (see p. 101).
The levels of service which citizens are
entitled to expect from the main criminal
justice agencies are set out in the Justice
Charter for Scotland.
Northern Ireland
Cases involving minor summary offences are
heard by magistrates’ courts presided over by
a full-time, legally qualified resident
magistrate. Young offenders under 17 are
dealt with by a juvenile court consisting of
the resident magistrate and two specially
qualified lay members, at least one of whom
must be a woman.
The Crown Court deals with criminal
trials on indictment. It is served by High
Court and county court judges. Contested
cases are heard by a judge and jury, although
people charged with terrorist offences are
90
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
tried by a judge sitting alone, because of the
possibility of jurors being intimidated by
terrorist organisations.
In non-jury Crown Court trials the onus
remains on the prosecution to prove guilt
beyond reasonable doubt and defendants have
the right to be represented by a lawyer of
their choice. The judge must set out in a
written statement the reasons for convicting
and there is an automatic right of appeal
against conviction and sentence on points of
fact as well as of law.
Trial
Criminal trials in Britain have two parties:
the prosecution and the defence. The law
presumes the innocence of an accused
person until guilt has been proved by the
prosecution. An accused person has the right
to employ a legal adviser and may be granted
legal aid from public funds (see p. 106). If
remanded in custody, he or she may be
visited by a legal adviser to ensure a properly
prepared defence.
Disclosure to the Defence
In England and Wales, the prosecution in
Crown Court cases must disclose to the
defence all the statements from the witnesses
on whom it proposes to rely. This must be
done before any committal proceedings begin.
This duty does not apply to offences tried in
the magistrates’ court, except when advance
information is requested by the defence in
‘either way’ cases (see p. 89); in practice,
however, the CPS adopts a more generous
approach than is strictly required.
There is also a general duty to disclose to
the defence evidence, documents and
information which might have a bearing on
the defence case. In circumstances where the
material attracts public interest immunity
or is otherwise subject to a duty of
confidentiality, the prosecution is obliged to
place it before the court for a ruling.
In Scottish solemn cases the prosecution
must give the defence advance notice of the
witnesses it intends to call and of the
documents and other items on which it will
rely. In summary cases this is usually done as
a matter of practice, although there is no
obligation on the Crown to do so.
Trial Procedure
Criminal trials normally take place in open
court and rules of evidence, which are
concerned with the proof of facts, are
rigorously applied. If evidence is improperly
admitted, or excluded, a conviction can be
quashed on appeal.
During the trial the defendant has the
right to hear and cross-examine prosecution
witnesses. He or she can call his or her own
witnesses who, if they will not attend
voluntarily, may be legally compelled to do
so. The defendant can also address the court
in person or through a lawyer, the defence
having the right to the last speech before the
judge sums up. The defendant cannot be
questioned without his or her consent. When
a defendant does testify, he or she may be
cross-examined about character or other
conduct only in exceptional circumstances.
Generally the prosecution may not introduce
such evidence.
In Scotland cross-examination about the
character or other conduct of the accused
may be made in certain circumstances.
In Northern Ireland the judge can draw
inferences from a refusal by a defendant to
give evidence.
Child Witnesses
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland,
child witnesses in cases involving offences of
sex, violence or cruelty may give evidence in
Crown Court proceedings from outside the
courtroom by means of a live television link.
In this way the child need not see his or her
alleged attacker in court. In Scotland similar
provisions apply. A child’s sworn statement
no longer has to be corroborated by other
evidence for the court to hear it.
The Criminal Justice Act 1991 extended
the availability of the live television link to
youth court proceedings, and made further
reforms to the law of evidence and procedure
relating to child witnesses in England and
Wales. Video-recorded interviews are
admissible as the main evidence of a child
91
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
witness, with any cross-examination taking
place through the live television link.
In Scotland corroboration of the child’s
evidence is necessary to sustain a conviction.
Fraud Proceedings
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland the
judge in complex fraud cases may order a
preparatory open Crown Court hearing to
determine questions regarding admissibility
of evidence and any other questions of law.
The judge also has the power to order the
prosecution and the defence to serve certain
statements on each other and to prepare the
case in such a way that it is easier to
understand.
Appeals may be made to the Court of
Appeal from decisions of the judge in the
preparatory hearings. The law on evidence
has been changed to enable courts to have
before them a wider range of written
evidence in the form of business documents.
Information technology is increasingly used
in complex cases to present the material to
the jury in a more comprehensible form.
The Jury
In jury trials the judge decides questions
of law, sums up the evidence for the jury,
and discharges or sentences the accused.
The jury is responsible for deciding
questions of fact. In England, Wales and
Northern Ireland the verdict may be ‘guilty’
or ‘not guilty’, the latter resulting in
acquittal. If the jury cannot reach a
unanimous decision the judge may allow a
majority verdict provided that, in the
normal jury of 12 people, there are no more
than two dissenters.
In Scotland the jury’s verdict may be
‘guilty’, ‘not guilty’ or ‘not proven’; the
accused is acquitted if either of the last two
verdicts is given. The jury consists of 15
people and a verdict of ‘guilty’ can only be
reached if at least eight members are in
favour. As a general rule no one may be
convicted without corroborated evidence
from at least two sources.
If the jury acquits the defendant, the
prosecution has no right of appeal and the
defendant cannot be tried again for the
same offence.
A jury is independent of the judiciary.
Any attempt to interfere with a jury is a
criminal offence. Potential jurors are put on
a panel before the start of the trial. In
England and Wales the prosecution and the
defence may challenge individual jurors on
the panel, giving reasons for doing so. In
Scotland the prosecution or defence may
challenge up to three jurors without reason.
In Northern Ireland each defendant has the
right to challenge up to 12 potential jurors
without giving a reason.
People between the ages of 18 and 70 (65
in Scotland) whose names appear on the
electoral register, with certain exceptions, are
liable for jury service and their names are
chosen at random. Ineligible people include,
for example, judges and people who have
within the previous ten years been members
of the legal profession or the police, prison
or probation services. People convicted of
certain offences within the previous ten
years cannot serve on a jury. Anyone who
has received a prison sentence of five years
or more is disqualified for life.
Sentencing
If a person is convicted, the magistrate or
judge (or their Scottish equivalent) decides
on the most appropriate sentence, taking
into account the facts of the offence, the
circumstances of the offender, any previous
convictions or sentences and any statutory
limits on sentencing. The defence lawyer
may make a speech in mitigation.
The Criminal Justice Act 1991 placed a
requirement on the courts in England and
Wales to obtain a ‘pre-sentence’ report from
the probation service in all cases involving
an offence triable either way before passing a
custodial or more complex community
sentence. However, to avoid unnecessary
delays and costs, legislation before
Parliament would give the courts discretion
to dispense with this requirement where
they are satisfied that they can properly
sentence without one.
In Scottish cases where a custodial
sentence may be imposed, it is mandatory
92
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
for a court to obtain a pre-sentence report if
the accused is under 21, has never served a
custodial sentence or is a first offender. In
other cases the judge decides whether to
obtain such a report.
Appeals
England and Wales
A person convicted by a magistrates’ court
may appeal to the Crown Court against the
sentence if he or she has pleaded guilty. An
appeal may be made against both conviction
and sentence, or sentence alone, if a ‘not
guilty’ plea has been made. The High Court
hears appeals on points of law and procedure
—by either prosecution or defence—in cases
originally dealt with by magistrates. If
convicted by the Crown Court, a defendant
can appeal to the Court of Appeal (Criminal
Division) against both the conviction and
the sentence imposed. The House of Lords is
the final appeal court, but it will only
consider cases that involve a point of law of
general public importance and where leave to
appeal is granted.
The Home Secretary may consider
representations and intervene in cases tried
on indictment where appeal rights have been
exhausted. This is normally done only if
there is new evidence or some other
consideration of substance which was not
before the original trial court. In such cases
the Home Secretary refers the matter to the
Court of Appeal.
Following a Royal Commission
recommendation, the Government has
published a consultation paper on the
establishment of a new independent
Criminal Cases Review Authority,
which would consider alleged
miscarriages of justice and refer cases
to the Court of Appeal.
The Attorney General may seek a ruling
of the Court of Appeal on a point of law
which has been material in a case where a
person is tried on indictment. The Court of
Appeal has power to refer the point to the
House of Lords if necessary. The ruling will
constitute a binding precedent, but an
acquittal in the original case is not affected.
The Attorney General has the power to
refer a case to the Court of Appeal if he or
she considers that a sentence passed by the
Crown Court for an offence triable only on
indictment is unduly lenient. The Attorney
General can also refer unduly lenient
sentences for offences of indecent assault,
making threats to kill, and of cruelty to, or
neglect of, children; these offences can also
be dealt with in magistrates’ courts, but may
only be referred if the defendant is
sentenced in the Crown Court (see p. 89).
The Court of Appeal may increase an
unduly lenient sentence within the statutory
maximum laid down by Parliament for
the offence.
Scotland
All appeal cases are dealt with by the High
Court of Justiciary and are heard by at least
three judges. In both solemn and summary
procedure, the accused may appeal against
conviction, or sentence, or both. The Court
may authorise a retrial if it sets aside a
conviction. There is no further appeal to the
House of Lords. In summary proceedings
the prosecutor may appeal on a point of law
against acquittal or sentence. The Lord
Advocate may seek the opinion of the High
Court on a point of law in a case where a
person tried on indictment is acquitted. The
acquittal in the original case is not affected.
Northern Ireland
In Northern Ireland, appeals from
magistrates’ courts against conviction or
sentence are heard by the county court. An
appeal on a point of law alone can be heard
by the Northern Ireland Court of Appeal,
which also hears appeals from the Crown
Court against conviction or sentence.
Procedures for a further appeal to the
House of Lords are similar to those in
England and Wales.
A person convicted of a terrorist offence
in a non-jury court has an automatic right
of appeal against conviction and sentence.
93
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Coroners’ Courts
In England and Wales, the coroner must hold
an inquest if the deceased died a violent or
unnatural death, a sudden death where the
cause is unknown, or in prison or in other
specified circumstances. In Northern Ireland
in such circumstances the coroner investigates
the matter to decide whether an inquest is
necessary. The coroner’s court establishes
how, when and where the deceased died. A
coroner may sit alone or, in certain
circumstances, with a jury.
In Scotland the local procurator fiscal
inquires privately into all sudden and
suspicious deaths and may report the findings
to the Crown Office. In a minority of cases a
fatal accident inquiry may be held before the
sheriff; this is mandatory in cases of death
resulting from industrial accidents and of
deaths in custody.
TREATMENT OF OFFENDERS
The Government considers that offenders
who commit very serious crimes,
particularly crimes of violence, should
receive long custodial sentences, but that
many other crimes can best be punished
within the community through compensation
and reparation.
Legislation sets the maximum penalties for
offences, the sentence being entirely a matter
for the courts, subject to these maxima. The
Court of Appeal in England and Wales issues
guidance to the lower courts on sentencing
issues when points of principle have arisen on
individual appeal cases.
The Royal Commission, noting that people
pleading guilty in the Crown Court have
usually been given a reduction of 25 per cent
to 30 per cent in their sentence,
recommended that there should be a more
open system of sentence discounts, with
earlier guilty pleas attracting higher discounts.
Instituting a statutory basis for the court’s
action could help to achieve greater
consistency in the application of discounts.
Provision for this has been included in
legislation before Parliament.
In Scotland, where many offences are not
created by statute, the penalty for offences at
common law range from absolute discharge
to life imprisonment.
Custody
England and Wales
A custodial sentence is the most severe
penalty ordinarily available to the courts.
Under the Criminal Justice Act 1991, a
custodial sentence can only be imposed
where the offence is so serious that only
such a sentence would be appropriate, or
where there is a need to protect the public
from a sexual or violent offender. A court is
required to explain to the offender why it is
passing a custodial sentence. The length of
the sentence must reflect the seriousness of
the offence.
A magistrates’ court cannot impose a
term of more than six months’
imprisonment for an individual offence tried
summarily. It can impose consecutive
sentences for ‘either way’ offences
(see p. 89), subject to an overall maximum
of 12 months’ imprisonment. If an offence
carries a higher maximum penalty, the court
may commit the offender for sentence at the
Crown Court. The Crown Court may
impose a custodial sentence for any term up
to life, depending on the seriousness of the
offence and the maximum penalty available.
If a court decides that an offence is
sufficiently serious to justify an immediate
custodial sentence of not more than two
years, the sentence may be suspended lor a
period of at least one year and not more
than two years if exceptional circumstances
justify the suspension. If the offender
commits another imprisonable offence
during the period of suspension, the court
may order the suspended sentence to be
served in addition to any punishment
imposed for the second offence. When
passing a suspended sentence, the court
must consider whether it would also be
appropriate to impose a fine or make a
compensation order. The court may also
order supervision of the offender by a
probation officer if the suspended sentence
is for more than six months.
There is a mandatory sentence of life
94
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
imprisonment for murder throughout Britain.
Life imprisonment is the maximum penalty
for a number of serious offences such as
robbery, rape, arson and manslaughter.
Scotland and Northern Ireland
In Scottish trials on indictment the High
Court of Justiciary may impose a sentence of
imprisonment for any term up to life, and the
sheriff court any term up to three years. The
latter may send any person to the High Court
for sentence if the court considers its powers
are insufficient. In summary cases, the sheriff
or stipendiary magistrate may normally
impose up to three months’ imprisonment or
six months’ for some repeated offences. The
district court can impose a maximum term of
imprisonment of 60 days.
In Northern Ireland the position is
generally the same as for England and Wales.
A magistrates’ court, however, cannot commit
an offender for sentencing at the Crown
Court if it has tried the case.
Non-custodial Treatment
Non-custodial sentences include:
• fines;
• compensation orders;
• probation and supervision orders;
• community service orders; and
• a combination order, which includes
elements of probation and community
service.
Fines
About 80 per cent of offenders are punished
with a fine. There is no limit to the fine
which the Crown Court (and High Court of
Justiciary in Scotland) may impose on
indictment. The maximum fine that can be
imposed by a magistrates’ court in England
and Wales is £5,000, although many
summary offences carry lower maxima. When
fixing the amount of a fine, courts are
required to reflect the seriousness of the
offence and to take into account the financial
circumstances of the offender.
Probation
The locally organised probation service in
England and Wales supervises offenders in
the community under direct court orders and
after release from custody. It also provides
offenders in custody with help and advice.
A court probation order can last between
six months and three years; if the offender
fails to comply with the order or commits
another offence while on probation, he or she
can be brought before the court again. A
probation order can be combined with a
community service order or a fine.
A probation order requires the offender to
maintain regular contact with the probation
officer. Special conditions attached to the
order may require the offender to attend a
day centre for up to 60 days. Probation is
intended as a punishment, although the time
spent by offenders under supervision in the
community offers an opportunity for
constructive work to reduce the likelihood
of reoffending.
In England and Wales the probation
service also administers supervision
orders, the community service scheme
and supervises those released from prison
on parole.
The statutory Probation Inspectorate
monitors the work of the voluntary and
private sectors with the probation service in
addition to its inspection and advisory duties.
In Scotland local authority social work
departments supervise offenders on probation
and supervision orders or on parole.
In Northern Ireland the service is
administered by the government-funded
Probation Board, whose membership is
representative of the community.
Community Service
Offenders aged 16 or over convicted of
imprisonable offences may, with their
consent, be given community service orders.
The court may order between 40 and 240
hours’ unpaid service to be completed within
12 months. Examples of work done include
decorating the houses of elderly or disabled
people and building adventure playgrounds.
National standards for community service
95
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
orders ensure that all orders meet a common
set of minimum requirements.
In England and Wales the court may make
an order combining community service and
probation. The maximum term for the
probation element is the same as a probation
order and the maximum period of community
service is 100 hours.
Curfew Order
Legislation before Parliament would allow
for the use of curfew orders with
electronic monitoring in trial areas. Courts
in the trial areas would be able to require
offenders to remain at home for periods of
between two and 12 hours a day. The order
could be combined with probation or
community service. A decision on whether
to extend the order to courts throughout
England and Wales would be taken in the
light of the trials.
Compensation
The courts may order an offender to pay
compensation for personal injury, loss or
damage resulting from an offence. In England
and Wales courts are required to give reasons
for not awarding compensation to a victim.
Compensation takes precedence over fines.
Other Measures
A court in England and Wales may discharge
a person either absolutely or conditionally if
it believes that it is not necessary to inflict
punishment. If he or she is conditionally
discharged, the offender remains liable to
punishment for the offence if convicted of
another offence within a period specified by
the court (not more than three years).
Courts may also require an offender to
keep the peace and/or be of good behaviour.
If this requirement is not complied with, the
offender is liable to forfeit a sum of money.
Similar powers are available to courts in
Northern Ireland.
Courts have the power to defer sentence,
during which period the accused is required
to be of good behaviour and to meet any
other conditions stipulated by the court. The
court may also warn the offender or grant an
absolute discharge.
Police cautions are used particularly for
young offenders; the caution is a form of
warning and no court action is taken. New
guidelines designed to stop the use of
cautions for serious offences and to cut the
number of repeated cautions were published
by the Government in March 1994.
Prisons
The Prison Service in England and Wales
and the Scottish Prison Service became
executive agencies in April 1993. Government
ministers remain accountable for policy but
the Chief Executives are responsible for the
delivery of services.
Prisoners are housed in accommodation
ranging from open prisons to high security
establishments. In England, Scotland and
Wales sentenced prisoners are classified into
groups for security purposes. There are
separate prisons for women. There are no
open prisons in Northern Ireland, where the
majority of offenders are serving sentences
for terrorist offences. People awaiting trial
in custody are entitled to privileges not
granted to convicted prisoners. Those under
21 are, where possible, separated from
convicted prisoners.
There are about 130 prison establishments
in England and Wales and some 20 in
Scotland, many of which were built in the
19th century. Improvements are in progress
to eliminate cells without access to integral
sanitation, and a prison building programme
is helping to alleviate overcrowding.
In Northern Ireland there are four prisons
and a young offenders’ centre. Four of these
establishments have been built since 1972.
The average prison population in 1993
was 44,566 in England and Wales,
1,933 in Northern Ireland, and 5,637
in Scotland.
A White Paper published in 1991 set out a
programme of reforms for the prison service
in England and Wales. The aim is to provide
a better prison system, with more effective
96
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
measures for security and control, more
constructive relationships between prisoners
and staff, and more stimulating and useful
programmes for prisoners.
Private Sector Involvement
The Home Secretary is empowered to
contract out the management of prisons in
England and Wales to the private sector, as
well as escort and guarding functions. A new
privately-run remand centre—the Wolds in
Humberside—came into use in April 1992.
Blakenhurst local prison in Worcestershire,
also under private management, opened in
May 1993. Doncaster prison opened in
June 1994.
In September 1993 the Government
announced an increased role for the private
sector in prison management. The intention
is that about 10 per cent (12 prisons) should
be managed by the private sector. The six
new prisons that are planned will be
designed, built, managed and financed by the
private sector.
The court escort and custody services in
the East Midlands and Humberside are run
by a private security company and court work
in London has begun to be contracted out. It
is being phased in over 12 months. Education,
health care and catering, and some other
service functions are also being subjected to
competitive processes.
Provision for the further contracting out of
prisons and prisoner escort services in
England and Wales—and, for the first time,
in Scotland—is included in new legislation
before Parliament. The legislation would also
enable the prisoner escort service in Northern
Ireland to be contracted out.
Early Release of Prisoners
The Criminal Justice Act 1991 has reformed
the remission and parole systems in England
and Wales, with new arrangements for the
early release of prisoners and for their
supervision and liabilities after release. The
Parole Board continues to advise the Home
Secretary on the early release or recall of
long-term prisoners.
Prisoners serving terms of less than four
years may be released once they have served
half of their sentences in custody. Long¬
term prisoners (those serving more than four
years) may be released once they have served
two-thirds of their sentence; the Parole
Board may release them on licence half-way
through their sentence if they are serving
between four and seven years. The Home
Secretary has to give final consent to such
parole if the prisoner is serving more than
seven years. All prisoners sentenced to a
year or more may be supervised on release
until three-quarters of their sentence has
passed. Certain sex offenders may be
supervised to the end of their sentence.
If convicted of another offence punishable
with imprisonment and committed before
the end of the original sentence, a released
prisoner may be liable to serve all or part of
the original sentence outstanding at the time
the fresh offence was committed. Similar
changes have been adopted in Scotland.
Northern Ireland
In Northern Ireland prisoners serving a
sentence of more than five days are eligible
for remission of half their sentence. A
prisoner serving a sentence of more than 12
months who is given remission is liable to be
ordered to serve the remainder of this
sentence if convicted of fresh imprisonable
offences during this period.
Remission for those convicted of terrorist
offences and serving sentences of five years
or more is one-third. Any released prisoners
convicted of another terrorist offence before
the expiry of the original sentence must
complete that sentence before serving any
term for the second offence.
Life Sentence Prisoners
Arrangements for the early release of
prisoners serving life sentences for offences
other than murder are set out in the
Criminal Justice Act 1991. The Home
Secretary is required to release such
prisoners after an initial period set by the
trial judge if so directed by the Parole
Board, which has to be satisfied that the
protection of the public does not require
97
BRI TAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
their further eonfinement. These
provisions conform with the requirements
of the European Convention on Human
Rights. Similar procedures have been
adopted in Scotland.
The release on licence of prisoners serving
mandatory life sentences for murder may
only be authorised by the Home Secretary on
the recommendation of the Parole Board. A
similar policy applies in Scotland.
On release, life sentence prisoners
remain on licence for the rest of their lives
and are subject to recall if their behaviour
suggests that they might again be a danger to
the public.
People serving life sentences for the
murder of police or prison officers, terrorist
murders, murder by firearms in the course
of robbery and the sexual or sadistic murder
of children are normally detained for at least
20 years.
In Northern Ireland the Secretary of
State reviews life sentence cases on the
recommendation of an internal review body.
At the end of 1993 there were about 3,150
prisoners serving life sentences in Prison
Service establishments in England and Wales,
of whom about 350 had been detained for
over 15 years.
Repatriation
Sentenced prisoners who are nationals of
countries which have ratified the Council of
Europe Convention on the Transfer of
Sentenced Persons or similar international
arrangements may apply to be returned to
their own country to serve the rest of their
sentence there.
Independent Oversight of the Prison System
Every prison establishment has a Board of
Visitors—a Visiting Committee in Scotland
—drawn from the local community. In order
to see that prisoners are being treated fairly,
members may go to any part of the prison
and interview any inmate at any time.
The independent Prisons Inspectorates
report on the treatment of prisoners and
prison conditions. Each establishment is
visited about every two years.
Prison Industries
Prison industries aim to give inmates work
experience which will assist them when
released and to secure a return which will
reduce the cost of the prison system. The
main industries are clothing and textile
manufacture, engineering, woodwork,
laundering, farming and horticulture. In
England and Wales most production caters
for internal needs and for other public
services, whereas in Scotland a greater
proportion is sold to the private sector. A few
prisoners are employed outside prison, some
in community service projects.
Prison Education
Full-time education of 15 hours a week is
compulsory for young offenders below school
leaving age. For older offenders it is
voluntary. Some prisoners study for public
examinations, including those of the Open
University. Competitive tendering for the
provision of education services in prisons in
England and Wales has taken place and
contracts have been awarded, many to further
and higher education establishments. In
England, Wales and Scotland, increased
emphasis is being placed on the development
and implementation of National Vocational
Qualifications (see p. 425) for inmates.
All new prisons have purpose-built
education units, and schemes to build new
education accommodation or enhance existing
facilities are also under way or planned at
many other establishments.
Physical education is voluntary for adult
offenders but compulsory for young
offenders. Practically all prisons have physical
education facilities, some of which are
purpose-built. Opportunities are given for
inmates to obtain sporting proficiency awards.
Inmates also compete against teams in the
local community.
Health Care
The Health Care Service for Prisoners in
England and Wales is responsible for the
physical and mental health of all those in
custody. A Health Advisory Committee
98
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
provides independent medical advice
to government ministers, the Prison
Service Chief Executive and the Director
of Health Care.
A greater emphasis is being placed on
‘buying in’ health care services either from the
National Health Service (NHS—see p. 369)
or the private sector. The Prison Service is
also committed to transferring mentally
disordered offenders to the care and
treatment of the NHS and social services
where possible.
In Scotland psychiatric and
psychological services are bought in from
local Health Boards responsible for the
National Health Service.
Privileges and Discipline
Prisoners may write and receive letters and
be visited by relatives and friends, and those
in all establishments in England and Wales
may make telephone calls. Privileges include
a personal radio; books, periodicals and
newspapers; watching television; and the
opportunity to make purchases from the
prison shop with money earned in prison.
Depending on facilities available, prisoners
may be granted the further privileges of
dining and recreation in association.
Breaches of discipline are dealt with by
the prison governor. A Prisons Ombudsman
for England and Wales has been appointed as
a final appeal stage for prisoners’ grievances.
The appointment of a Prisons’ Complaints
Adjudicator for Scotland is in hand and
revised internal grievance procedures were
implemented in February 1994.
Religion
Anglican, Church of Scotland, Roman
Catholic and Methodist chaplains provide
opportunities for worship and spiritual
counselling, supported by visiting ministers
of other denominations and faiths
as required.
starts at the beginning of an offender’s
sentence and ties in with all the training,
education and work experience provided. It is
directed at equipping prisoners to fit back
into society and to cope with life without
reoffending. Risk assessment and confronting
offending behaviour are essential elements of
this process. Sentence planning is being
extended progressively to all prisoners serving
substantial sentences, in conjunction with
extended arrangements for aftercare. Many
medium- and long-term prisoners in the later
parts of their sentences may be granted home
leave for short periods.
The Pre-Release Employment Scheme in
England and Wales and the Training for
Freedom Scheme in Scotland enable
selected long-term prisoners to spend
their last six months before release in
certain hostels attached to prisons in order
to help them readapt to society. Hostellers
work in the outside community and return
to the hostel each evening. Frequent
weekend leave allows hostellers to renew ties
with their families.
In Northern Ireland prisoners serving
fixed sentences may have short periods of
leave near the end of their sentences and
at Christmas. Life-sentence prisoners
are given a nine-month pre-release
programme which includes employment
outside the prison.
Aftercare
Professional support is given to offenders
following their release. All young offenders
and all adult offenders in England and Wales
sentenced to 12 months’ imprisonment and
over are supervised on release by the
probation service—or, in the case of certain
young offenders, by local authority social
services departments. In Scotland, this
support is provided by local authority social
work services.
Young Offenders
England and Wales
Criminal proceedings cannot be brought
against children below the age of 10 years.
Preparation for Release
The Prison Service has a duty to prepare
prisoners for release. Planning for safe release
99
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Offenders between the ages of 10 and 18 fall
within the jurisdiction of youth courts.
Sixteen- and 17-year-olds may be given the
same probation, curfew and community
service orders as older offenders; also
available to the court are the same
supervision orders or attendance centre
orders as are given to younger offenders.
Under a supervision order—which may
remain in force for not more than three
years—a child (10-13 years old) or young
person (14-17 years old) normally lives at
home under the supervision of a social
worker or a probation officer. The order
can be used to provide for remedial
activities through a short residential course
or, more usually, attendance at a day or
evening centre.
Anyone under 21 years of age found
guilty of an offence for which an adult
may be imprisoned can be ordered to go
to an attendance centre, as can an
offender who refuses to comply with another
order (for example, default in paying a fine
or breach of a probation order). The
maximum number of hours of attendance is
36 (or 24 if the offender is aged under 16)
spread over a period; the minimum is 12
hours. The order aims to encourage
offenders to make more constructive use of
their leisure time.
Custodial sentences are available for
juveniles from the age of 10 for murder or
manslaughter, from the age of 14 for grave
crimes and from the age of 15 for other
imprisonable offences. Such a sentence can
be given only if it can be justified by the
seriousness of the offence or, in the case of
violent or sexual offences, if it is necessary to
protect the public.
In the case of a very serious crime
committed by a young person aged 18 or
under, detention in a place approved by
the Home Secretary may be ordered, and
must be ordered in the case of murder.
Detention may be in a secure local authority
residential unit, a centre managed by the
Youth Treatment Service or a young
offender institution.
The custodial sentence for those aged
18-20 is detention in a young offender
institution. Alternatives include fines and
compensation, attendance centre orders (for
up to 36 hours) and community service
orders (for between 40 and 240 hours).
In the area of parental responsibility, new
legislation before Parliament would extend
the powers given to the courts by the
Criminal Justice Act 1991. The 1991 Act:
• strengthened courts’ powers to make
parents attend hearings in cases
involving offenders up to the age of 18;
• strengthened the liability on parents
to pay fines and compensation arising
from the crimes committed by their
children;
• contained greater power for courts to
order parents to take proper care and
control of their children if necessary to
prevent further offences; and
• allowed such orders to be imposed for
up to three years, or the offender’s 18th
birthday.
Where local authorities have assumed
parental responsibility, the duty to attend
court and pay any fines also applies.
Under the new legislation, courts would
be able to order parents to ensure their
children comply with community sentences.
In every case when an offender aged
between 10 and 15 years receives a
community sentence, the court would be
under a duty to consider such an order.
Courts would have a power, as opposed to a
duty, in the case of 16- and 17-year-olds.
Courts would also be empowered to impose
a secure training order on persistent
offenders aged between 12 and 14. The
order would mean a period of detention in a
secure training centre followed by a period
of supervision; it would be available for
young offenders who have committed three
or more imprisonable offences and who have
failed to respond to punishment in the
community. A further provision would
double the maximum sentence for 15-17
year-olds in a young offender institution
from one to two years. In addition, court
powers to order long terms of detention for
young offenders who commit serious
crimes would be extended to include 10-13
year-olds.
100
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
Scotland
Criminal proceedings may be brought against
any child aged 8 years or over, but the
instructions of the Lord Advocate are
necessary before anyone under 16 years of age
is prosecuted.
Children under 16 who have committed an
offence or are considered to be in need of
care and protection may be brought before a
children’s panel. The panel, consisting of
three lay people, determines in an informal
setting whether compulsory measures of care
are required and, if so, the form they should
take. An official known as the reporter
decides whether a child should come before a
hearing. If the grounds for referral are not
accepted by the child or parent, the case goes
to the sheriff for proof. If he finds the grounds
established, the sheriff remits the case to the
reporter to arrange a hearing. The sheriff also
decides appeals against a hearing’s decision.
Young people aged between 16 and 21
serve custodial sentences in a young offender
institution. Remission of part of the sentence
for good behaviour, release on parole and
supervision on release are available.
Northern Ireland
Those aged between 10 and 16 who are
charged with a criminal offence are normally
brought before a juvenile court. If found
guilty of an offence punishable in the case of
an adult by imprisonment, the court may
order the offender to be placed in care, under
supervision or on probation. The offender
may also be required to attend a day
attendance centre, be sent to a training school
or committed to residence in a remand home.
Non-custodial options are the same as in
England and Wales.
Offenders aged between 16 and 24 who
receive custodial sentences of less than three
years serve them in a young offenders’ centre.
Civil Justice
The Civil Law
The civil law of England, Wales and
Northern Ireland covers business related to
the family, property, contracts and torts
(non-contractual wrongful acts suffered by
one person at the hands of another). It also
includes constitutional, administrative,
industrial, maritime and ecclesiastical law.
Scottish civil law has its own, broadly
similar, branches.
CIVIL COURTS
England and Wales
Magistrates’ courts have a concurrent
jurisdiction with the county courts and the
High Court in cases relating to children. The
courts also have jurisdiction regarding, for
example, appeals against local authority
decisions and the recovery of unpaid local
and central taxes.
The jurisdiction of the 270 county
courts covers:
• actions founded upon contract and tort;
• trust and mortgage cases;
• actions for the recovery of land;
• cases involving disputes between
landlords and tenants;
• complaints about race and sex
discrimination;
• admiralty cases (maritime questions and
offences) and patent cases; and
• divorce cases and other family matters.
Specialised work is concentrated in
certain designated courts. In some types of
cases, for example, admiralty cases, a
county court is restricted to an upper
financial limit. For small claims not
exceeding £1,000, there are special arbitration
facilities and simplified procedures. There are
also special care centres and family hearing
centres which deal with contested family
matters involving children.
The High Court, which is divided into
three, deals with the more complicated civil
cases. Its jurisdiction covers mainly civil and
some criminal cases; it also deals with appeals
from tribunals and from magistrates’ courts
in both civil and criminal matters. The three
divisions are:
101
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
• the Family Division, which is concerned
with family law, including adoption
and wills;
• the Chancery Division, which deals with
corporate and personal insolvency;
disputes in the running of companies,
between landlords and tenants and in
intellectual property matters; and the
interpretation of trusts and contested
wills; and
• the Queen’s Bench Division, which is
concerned with contract and tort cases,
and deals with applications for judicial
review. Maritime law and commercial law
are the responsibility of the Division’s
admiralty and commercial courts.
In the event of overlapping jurisdiction
between the High Court and the county
courts, cases of exceptional importance,
complexity or financial substance are reserved
or transferred for trial in the High Court.
Appeals
Appeals in matrimonial, adoption,
guardianship and child care proceedings
heard by magistrates’ courts go to the Family
Division of the High Court. Appeals from
the High Court and county courts are heard
in the Court of Appeal (Civil Division), and
may go on to the House of Lords.
The Law Lords deal with cases submitted
to the House of Lords. They are professional
judges who have been given life peerages. In
addition, peers who have held high judicial
office are qualified to sit as Lords appeal
judges. A group of five judges usually deals
with cases. The Lord Chancellor is president
of the House in its judicial capacity.
Scotland
The civil courts are the Court of Session and
the sheriff court, which have the same
jurisdiction over most civil litigation,
although cases with a value of less than
£1,500 are dealt with only by the sheriff
court. Appeals from the sheriff court may be
made to the sheriff principal or directly to
the Court of Session in ordinary actions.
In cases where the value of the claim is
between £750 and £1,500, the case may be
appealed to the sheriff principal on a point of
law and to the Court of Session thereafter
only if the sheriff principal certifies the case
as suitable. In small claims cases where the
value of the claim does not exceed £750 there
may be an appeal to the sheriff principal on a
point of law.
The Court of Session sits in Edinburgh,
and in general has jurisdiction to deal with all
kinds of action. It is divided into the Outer
House (a court of first instance) and the
Inner House (mainly an appeal court).
Appeals to the Inner House may be made
from the Outer House and from the sheriff
court. From the Inner House an appeal may
go to the House of Lords.
The Scottish Land Court deals exclusively
with matters concerning agriculture. Its
chairman has the status and tenure of a judge
of the Court of Session and its other
members are lay specialists.
Northern Ireland
Civil cases up to the value of £15,000 are
dealt with in county courts. The magistrates’
court in Northern Ireland also deals with
certain limited classes of civil case. The
superior civil law court is the High Court of
Justice, from which an appeal may be made
to the Court of Appeal. The House of Lords
is the final civil appeal court. Appeals from
county courts are dealt with by the High
Court or the Court of Appeal.
Civil Proceedings
England and Wales
Civil proceedings are started by the aggrieved
person. Actions in the High Court are usually
begun by a writ served on the defendant by
the plaintiff, stating the nature of the claim.
Before the case is tried, documents
(pleadings) setting out the scope of the
dispute are filed with the court; the pleadings
are also served on the parties. County court
proceedings are initiated by a summons,
usually served on the defendant by the court.
Child care cases are initiated by an
application in the magistrates’ courts.
102
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
In order to encourage parties to confine
the issues in dispute, the High Court and the
county courts have power to order pre-trial
exchange of witness statements. Courts may
impose penalties in costs on parties who
unreasonably refuse to admit facts or to
disclose documents before trial.
Civil proceedings, as a private matter, can
usually be abandoned or ended by settlement
between the parties at any time. Actions
brought to court are usually tried without a
jury, except in defamation, false
imprisonment or malicious prosecution cases
or where fraud is alleged, when either party
may apply for trial by jury. The jury decides
questions of fact and determines the damages
to be paid to the injured party; majority
verdicts may be accepted. The Court of
Appeal is able to increase or reduce damages
awarded by a jury if it considers them
inadequate or excessive.
A decree of divorce must be pronounced
in open court, but a procedure for most
undefended cases dispenses with the need to
give evidence in court and permits written
evidence to be considered by the county court
district judge.
In civil cases heard by a magistrates’ court,
the court issues a summons to the defendant
setting out details of the complaint and the
date on which it will be heard. Parties and
witnesses give their evidence at the court
hearing. Family proceedings are normally
heard by not more than three lay justices,
including both men and women. Members of
the public are not allowed to be present. The
court may make orders concerning residence,
contact and supervision of children, and in
some cases maintenance payments for spouses
and children.
Most judgments are for sums of money
and may be enforced, in cases of non¬
payment, by seizure of the debtor’s goods or
by a court order requiring an employer to
make periodic payments to the court by
deduction from the debtor’s earnings. Other
court remedies may include an injunction
restraining someone from performing an
unlawful act. Refusal to obey a court order
may result in imprisonment for contempt.
Normally the court orders the costs of an
action to be paid by the party losing it, but,
in the case of family law maintenance
proceedings, a magistrates’ court can order
either party to pay the whole or part of the
other’s costs.
Scotland
Proceedings in the Court of Session or
ordinary actions in the sheriff court are
initiated by serving the defender with a
summons—or, in sheriff court cases, an
initial writ. A defender who intends to
contest the action must inform the court; if
he or she fails to do so, the court normally
grants a decree in absence in favour of the
pursuer. Where a case is contested, both
parties must prepare written pleadings. Time
is allowed for either party to adjust their
pleadings in the light of what the other has
said. At the end of this period a hearing will
normally be arranged.
In cases involving sums between £750 and
£1,500 in the sheriff court, a statement of
claim is incorporated in the initial writ. The
procedure is designed to enable most actions
to be settled without the parties having to
appear in court. Normally they, or their
representatives, need appear only when an
action is defended.
Northern Ireland
There are differences between proceedings in
Northern Ireland and in England and Wales
—for example, procedures in the county
court start with the issue of a civil bill, which
is served by the plaintiff on the defendant.
Tribunals
Tribunals exercise separate judicial functions.
They are intended to be more accessible, less
formal and less expensive than courts. They
are normally set up under statutory powers,
which also govern their constitution,
functions and procedure. Tribunals often
consist of lay people, but they are generally
chaired by a legally qualified person.
Some tribunals settle disputes between
private citizens. Industrial tribunals, for
example, have a major role in employment
disputes. Others, such as those concerned
103
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
with social security, resolve claims by
private citizens against public authorities. A
further group, including tax tribunals,
decide disputed claims by public authorities
against private citizens. Tribunals usually
consist of an uneven number of people so
that a majority decision can be reached.
In the case of some tribunals a two-tier
system operates, with an initial right of
appeal to a lower tribunal and a further
right of appeal, usually on a point of law, to
a higher one, and in some cases to the
Court of Appeal. Appeals from single tier
tribunals can be made on a point of law
only to the High Court in England and
Wales, to the Court of Session in Scotland,
and generally to the Court of Appeal in
Northern Ireland.
The independent Council on
Tribunals exercises general supervision
over many tribunals. A Scottish
Committee of the Council exercises the
same function in Scotland.
Administration of the Law
GOVERNMENT RESPONSIBILITIES
England and Wales
The Lord Chancellor is the head of the
judiciary and is responsible for the
administration of all courts other than
coroners’ courts, and for a number of
administrative tribunals. The highest
judicial appointments are made by the
Queen on the advice of the Prime Minister.
The Lord Chancellor recommends all other
judicial appointments to the Crown and
appoints magistrates. He has general
responsibility for the legal aid and advice
schemes and for the administration of civil
law reform.
The Home Secretary has overall
responsibility for:
• criminal law;
• the police service;
• the prison system;
• the probation and after-care service;
and
• advising the Queen on the exercise of
the royal prerogative of mercy to pardon
a person convicted of a crime or to
remit all or part of a penalty imposed by
a court.
The Attorney General and the Solicitor
General are the Government’s principal legal
advisers and represent the Crown in
appropriate domestic and international cases.
They are senior barristers, elected members
of the House of Commons and hold
ministerial posts. The Attorney General is
also Attorney General for Northern Ireland.
As well as exercising various civil law
functions, the Attorney General has final
responsibility for enforcing the criminal law.
The Solicitor General is the Attorney’s
deputy. As head of the Crown Prosecution
Service, the Director of Public Prosecutions
is subject to superintendence by the Attorney
General, as are the Director of the Serious
Fraud Office and the Director of Public
Prosecutions for Northern Ireland.
Scotland
The Secretary of State recommends the
appointment of all judges other than the most
senior ones, appoints the staff of the High
Court of Justiciary and the Court of Session,
and is responsible for the administration and
staffing of the sheriff courts. (The district
and islands local authorities are responsible
for the district courts.)
The Secretary of State is also responsible
for Scottish criminal law, crime prevention,
the police, the penal system and legal aid; he
or she is advised on parole matters by the
Parole Board for Scotland.
The Lord Advocate and the Solicitor
General for Scotland are the chief legal
advisers to the Government on Scottish
questions and the principal representatives of
the Crown for the purposes of Scottish
litigation. Both are government ministers.
Northern Ireland
Court administration is the responsibility of
the Lord Chancellor, while the Northern
Ireland Office, under the Secretary of
State, deals with policy and legislation
104
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
concerning criminal law, the police and the
penal system. The Lord Chancellor has
general responsibility for legal aid, advice
and assistance.
JUDGES AND LAWYERS
Judges are not subject to ministerial direction
or control. They are normally appointed from
practising barristers, advocates (in Scotland),
or solicitors (see below). Lay magistrates in
England and Wales and Scottish district
court justices are trained to give them
sufficient knowledge of the law, including the
rules of evidence, and of the nature and
purpose of sentencing.
In Northern Ireland members of a lay
panel who serve in juvenile courts undertake
training courses; resident magistrates are
drawn from practising solicitors or barristers.
The Legal Profession
The legal profession has two branches:
barristers (advocates in Scotland) and
solicitors. Barristers and advocates advise on
legal problems submitted through solicitors
and present cases in all courts. Solicitors
undertake legal business for individual and
corporate clients; they can also, after
appropriate training, present cases in all
courts. Although people are free to conduct
their own cases, most people prefer to be
legally represented, especially in more
serious cases.
Legislation in 1990 was designed to
stimulate the development of good quality
legal services for clients in Great Britain by
lifting restrictions on who can provide these
services, and by extending solicitors’ rights of
audience to the higher courts. In Scotland,
solicitor-advocates were introduced to the
higher courts in 1993. The first English
solicitor-advocates appeared in the higher
courts in February 1994.
The 1990 legislation also contains
provisions which allow building societies,
banks and other financial organisations to
offer conveyancing and probate services
under a scheme providing new safeguards
to clients. People will also be able to
negotiate a form of ‘no win, no fee’
agreement with their legal advisers in certain
types of case in due course. The
implementation of these provisions is subject
to parliamentary approval.
Similar proposals regarding the legal
profession and legal services in Northern
Ireland are being considered.
Complaints systems against solicitors,
barristers and licensed conveyancers are
backed up by the Legal Services Ombudsman
for England and Wales, who conducts
investigations into the way the professional
bodies handle these complaints. There is a
separate Ombudsman for Scotland.
LEGAL AID
A person needing legal advice or legal
representation in court may qualify for help
with the costs out of public funds, either free
or with a contribution according to means.
Green Form Scheme
People whose income and capital are within
certain limits are entitled to free advice from
a solicitor on certain legal matters. In
England and Wales the scheme provides for
up to three hours’ work for matrimonial cases
where a petition is drafted and two hours’ for
other work. A similar scheme operates in
Northern Ireland.
Legal Aid in Civil Proceedings
Civil legal aid, which covers representation
before the court, may be available for most
civil proceedings to those who satisfy the
financial eligibility conditions. An applicant
for legal aid must also show that he or she
has reasonable grounds for taking, defending
or being a party to proceedings. In England
and Wales payments to lawyers are made
through the Legal Aid Fund, administered by
the Legal Aid Board. Scotland has a separate
Legal Aid Fund, administered by the
Scottish Legal Aid Board. Legal aid in
Northern Ireland is administered by the Law
Society for Northern Ireland.
In certain limited circumstances the
successful unassisted opponent of a legally
aided party may recover his or her costs in
105
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the case from the Legal Aid Board. Where
the assisted person recovers or preserves
money or property in the proceedings, the
Legal Aid Fund will usually have a first
charge on that money or property to recover
money spent on the assisted person’s behalf.
Legal Aid in Criminal Proceedings
In criminal proceedings in England, Wales
and Northern Ireland legal aid may be
granted by the court if it appears to be in the
interests of justice and if a defendant is
considered to require financial assistance. A
legal aid certificate must be granted (subject
to means) when a person is committed for
trial on a murder charge or where the
prosecutor appeals or applies for leave to
appeal from the Court of Appeal to the
House of Lords. In England and Wales a
financial contribution may be payable. Where
legal aid is granted for criminal cases in
Northern Ireland it is free.
The Legal Aid Board in England and
Wales makes arrangements for duty solicitors
to assist unrepresented defendants in the
magistrates’ courts. Solicitors are available, on
a 24-hour basis, to give advice and assistance
to those being questioned by the police. The
services of a solicitor at a police station and of
the duty solicitor at court are free.
In Northern Ireland a voluntary duty
solicitor scheme has been introduced at the
main magistrates’ court in Belfast.
Scotland
A duty solicitor is available to represent
people in custody on their first appearance in
the sheriff courts and the district courts
without enquiry into the person’s means. In
other cases, a person seeking legal aid in
summary criminal proceedings must apply to
the Scottish Legal Aid Board, which must be
satisfied that the costs of the case cannot be
met by the applicant without undue hardship,
and that it is in the interests of justice that
legal aid is awarded.
In solemn proceedings the court decides
on the availability of legal aid and must be
satisfied that the accused cannot meet the
costs of the defence without undue financial
hardship. Where legal aid is granted to the
accused in criminal proceedings, he or she
is not required to pay any contribution
towards expenses.
Free Representation Units
The Bar Council, the barristers’ professional
body, runs free representation units in
England and Wales for clients at a variety of
tribunals for which legal aid is not available.
Most of the representation in London is
carried out by Bar students supported and
advised by full-time case workers. Elsewhere
the work is carried out by barristers.
Law Centres
In some urban areas law centres provide free
legal advice and representation. Financed
from various sources, often including local
government authorities, they usually employ
full-time salaried lawyers and many have
community workers. Much of their time is
devoted to housing, employment, social
security and immigration problems.
Free advice is also available in Citizens
Advice Bureaux, consumer and housing
advice centres and in specialist advice centres
run by voluntary organisations.
Further Reading
Britain's Legal Systems. Aspects of Britain series, HMSO, 1993.
Criminal Justice. Aspects of Britain series, HMSO, forthcoming.
Home Office Annual Report. HMSO, 1994.
Report of the Royal Commission on Criminal Justice. HMSO, 1993.
Royal Commission on Criminal Justice. Interim Government Response. 1994.
106
External
Affairs
9
Overseas Relations
Administration of Foreign
Policy 109
International Organisations 110
Britain’s Dependent
Territories 114
European Union Policy 116
International Peace and
Security 119
Central and Eastern Europe 120
Other Regions 122
Arms Control 123
Human Rights 125
International Crime 127
Development Co-operation 127
Cultural Relations 130
Britain is a member of some 120 international organisations, including the
United Nations (UN), North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) and the
European Union (EU). Closer co-operation between member states of the EU
is the central aim of the Maastricht Treaty on European Union, which came
into effect in November 1993. Britain plays an active part in maintaining
international peace and security and has been fully involved, for example, in
efforts to bring about peace in former Yugoslavia. Britain also protects the
interests of its dependent territories, which include Hong Kong, the Falkland
Islands and Gibraltar.
ADMINISTRATION OF FOREIGN
POLICY
Foreign & Commonwealth Office
The Foreign & Commonwealth Office (FCO)
is in charge of overall foreign policy. The
Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary is
responsible for the work of the FCO and the
Diplomatic Service. He is assisted by five
ministers without Cabinet rank, one of
whom is the Minister for Overseas
Development responsible for the Overseas
Development Administration (ODA). The
FCO’s Permanent Under-Secretary of State
is head of the Diplomatic Service and
provides advice to the Foreign and
Commonwealth Secretary on all aspects of
foreign policy.
About 2,500 FCO staff serve overseas, of
whom 200 are seconded from other
government departments and other public
and private organisations. British diplomatic
missions also employ about 7,100 locally-
engaged staff.
About 26 per cent of frontline diplomatic
staff are engaged on political/economic work,
18 per cent on commercial work, 20 per cent
on entry clearance to Britain, 8 per cent on
consular work, 5 per cent on aid
administration, 3 per cent on information and
5 per cent on other activities, such as culture,
science and technology. Heads of post
account for the remaining 15 per cent, their
time being divided between their embassy’s
various diplomatic tasks.
The FCO administers pre-entry control
109
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
overseas for people wishing to enter Britain.
The first contact with Britain for many
foreign nationals who wish to visit or settle
is the visa section or consulate of a British
mission, which deals with applications for
entry clearance.
Britain remains committed to maintaining
a worldwide diplomatic presence.
Diplomatic or consular relations are
maintained with 183 countries and there are
missions at nine international organisations.
The FCO’s only executive agency,
Wilton Park Conference Centre, contributes
to the solution of international problems by
organising high-quality conferences in
Britain, attracting top politicians, officials,
business people, academics and other
professionals from all over the world. Its
home is the Wilton House Conference
Centre in Sussex.
Other Departments
Other government departments, too, are
concerned with overseas relations and
foreign policy. The Ministry of Defence is
responsible for British defence policy and
for military liaison with Britain’s allies and
NATO; it also controls and administers the
armed forces (see p. 133). The Department
of Trade and Industry (DTI) has an
important say on international trade policy
and commercial relations with other
countries, including EU member states. The
FCO and the DTI have a joint export
promotion organisation — Overseas Trade
Services (see p. 172). The Treasury is
involved in British international economic
policy and is responsible for Britain’s
relations with the World Bank and other
international financial institutions.
When other departments are involved the
FCO decides policy in consultation with
them. The department with the main
interest usually takes the lead, particularly
in EU matters and international economic
policy. The FCO co-ordinates British
EU policy through the Cabinet Office
European Secretariat.
The British Council is responsible for
British cultural relations with other
countries (see p. 130).
INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS
The United Nations
Britain is a member of the United Nations
and one of the five permanent members of
the Security Council along with France, the
People’s Republic of China, Russia and the
United States. It is the sixth largest
contributor to the UN budget. Britain is fully
committed to the principles of the UN
Charter and believes that all member states
should ensure that the organisation maintains
peace, assists developing countries effectively
and protects human rights and fundamental
freedoms. Under the UN Charter, member
states are committed to:
• refrain from the threat or use of force
against the territory or political
independence of any state; and
• seek solutions to their disputes by
peaceful means.
The Charter recognises and permits the
right of individual or collective defence
against armed attack and the existence of
regional arrangements designed to
maintain security.
The European Union
Britain is an active and committed member of
the European Union (EU), which comprises
the European Community (EC) and
intergovernmental co-operation on foreign
and security policy, and on justice and
home affairs.
As one of the larger countries, Britain
provides two of the 17 members of the
European Commission, which puts forward
policy proposals, executes decisions taken by
the Council of the European Union and
ensures that European Union rules are
correctly observed. Britain is represented at
each meeting of the Council, which is the
main decision-making body. Each Council
consists of government ministers from the 12
member states, representing national interests
in the subjects under discussion — for
example, trade, agriculture or transport. Each
member state has a permanent representative
at Union headquarters in Brussels.
110
The European Union
in
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
There are 567 members of the directly
elected European Parliament, which is
consulted about major decisions and has
substantial shared power with the Council
over the European Community budget.
Britain has 87 seats. The fourth election to
the Parliament took place in June 1994.
A British judge serves on the European
Court of Justice, which is the Union’s
supreme legal authority. Its rulings must be
applied by member states and sanctions can
be imposed on those failing to do so. The
Court is assisted by a Court of First Instance,
which handles certain cases brought by
individuals and companies.
Britain is also represented on the Court of
Auditors, which examines Community
revenue and expenditure to see that it is
legally received and spent.
European Union policies are implemented
by:
• legally binding regulations;
• legally binding directives, which allow
member states to decide on methods of
implementation;
• decisions, which are binding on member
states, firms or individuals; and
• recommendations, which have no
binding force.
North Atlantic Treaty Organisation
Membership of NATO is the keystone of
British defence policy (see pp. 133-4).
NATO is based on the principle of collective
security and its core security functions are to:
• provide a foundation for security in
Europe;
• deter aggression and defend member
states against it; and
• provide a forum for allied transatlantic
consultation.
Each of the 16 member states has a
permanent representative at NATO
headquarters in Brussels. The main decision¬
taking body is the North Atlantic Council, at
which foreign ministers meet at least twice a
year. Permanent representatives meet on a
weekly basis at the other meetings of the
Council. Defence ministers attend meetings
of the Defence Planning Committee and the
Nuclear Planning Group.
Western European Union
Britain is one of the ten members of the
Western European Union, which is the main
forum for co-operation and consultation on
defence issues for NATO’s European
members. The current membership is
Belgium, Britain, France, Germany, Greece,
Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal
and Spain. Iceland, Norway and Turkey are
associate members, and Denmark and the
Irish Republic observer members.
Council of Europe
Britain is a founding member of the Council
of Europe, which is open to any European
parliamentary democracy accepting the rule
of law and the protection of fundamental
human rights and freedoms. The member
states co-operate on culture, education, sport,
health, crime and drug misuse prevention,
youth affairs and the improvement of the
environment. In 1950 the Council adopted its
European Convention on Human Rights
(see p. 125).
The Commonwealth
There are 51 members of the
Commonwealth, including Britain. It is a
voluntary association of states, nearly all of
which were British territories to which
independence was granted. The members are
Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, Bahamas,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Botswana,
Britain, Brunei, Canada, Cyprus, Dominica,
The Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guyana,
India, Jamaica, Kenya, Kiribati, Lesotho,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta,
Mauritius, Namibia, Nauru, New Zealand,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Saint
Christopher and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Swaziland,
Tanzania, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tuvalu, Uganda, Vanuatu, Western Samoa,
112
The Commonwealth
British Antarctic Territory
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Zambia and Zimbabwe. Nauru and Tuvalu
are special members, entitled to take part in
all Commonwealth meetings and activities,
with the exception of Commonwealth Heads
of Government meetings. South Africa
rejoined on 1 June 1994.
Consultation between member states takes
place through:
• meetings of heads of government;
• specialised conferences of other ministers
and officials;
• diplomatic representatives known as high
commissioners; and
• non-governmental organisations.
The Queen is recognised as head of the
Commonwealth and is head of state in Britain
and 15 other member countries.
The Commonwealth Secretariat promotes
consultation, disseminates information, and
organises heads of Government meetings,
ministerial meetings and other conferences. It
administers co-operative programmes agreed
at these meetings, including the
Commonwealth Fund for Technical
Co-operation, which provides expertise to
Commonwealth developing countries.
Membership of the Commonwealth
enables Britain to play a responsible part
alongside other nations in aiding the
development and stability of the Third
World. Some two-thirds of British aid (see
p. 127) goes to Commonwealth countries.
The British Government participates fully in
all Commonwealth activities and welcomes it
as a means of consulting and co-operating
with peoples of widely differing cultures.
Other International Bodies
Britain is a member of many other
international bodies, including the
International Monetary Fund, which
regulates the international financial system
and provides a source of credit for member
countries facing balance-of-payments
difficulties.
In addition, Britain, along with 24 other
industrialised countries, belongs to the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD), which promotes
economic growth, support for less developed
countries and worldwide trade expansion.
Other organisations to which Britain
belongs or extends support include the
regional development banks in Africa, the
Caribbean, Latin America and Asia.
BRITAIN’S DEPENDENT
TERRITORIES
Britain’s dependent territories have a
combined population of about 6 million, of
whom 5.8 million live in Hong Kong. Most
territories have considerable self-government,
with their own legislature. With the exception
of the British Indian Ocean Territory,
governors appointed by the Queen are
responsible for external affairs, internal
security (including the police) and the public
service. Certain responsibilities are delegated
to locally elected ministers but the ultimate
responsibility for all government affairs rests
with the Foreign and Commonwealth
Secretary. The British Indian Ocean
Territory has a Commissioner, not a
Governor; the Commissioner is not
responsible for external affairs. Britain seeks
to provide the territories with security and
political stability, ensure efficient and
honest government and help them achieve
economic and social development on a par
with neighbouring countries.
The territories are:
• Anguilla;
• Bermuda;
• British Antarctic Territory;
• British Indian Ocean Territory;
• British Virgin Islands;
• Cayman Islands;
• Falkland Islands;
• Gibraltar;
• Hong Kong;
• Montserrat;
• Pitcairn, Ducie, Henderson and Oeno;
• St Helena and St Helena Dependencies
(Ascension and Tristan da Cunha);
• South Georgia and the South Sandwich
Islands; and
• Turks and Caicos Islands.
114
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
Few are rich in natural resources, and
some are scattered groups of islands. There
are no indigenous inhabitants in the British
Antarctic Territory, British Indian Ocean
Territory or South Georgia and the South
Sandwich Islands.
Britain’s policy is to help the inhabitants
of the dependent territories to take
independence if they want it and where it is
practicable to do so. The reasonable needs of
the dependent territories are a first call on
the British aid programme.
Hong Kong
In 1984 Britain and the People’s Republic of
China signed the Sino-British Joint
Declaration on Hong Kong, 92 per cent of
which is leased from China until 1997. Under
this agreement, Britain is responsible for the
administration of Hong Kong until 30 June
1997. Hong Kong will then become a Special
Administrative Region (SAR) of China, but
its capitalist system and lifestyle will remain
unchanged for at least 50 years. With the
exception of foreign affairs and defence, the
Hong Kong SAR will enjoy a high degree of
autonomy and its government and legislature
will be composed of Hong Kong people.
In September 1991 direct elections took
place for the first time for 18 seats in the
Legislative Council. Another 21 of the 60
seats were elected indirectly from functional
constituencies. The remaining members are
appointed.
The next Legislative Council elections will
take place in September 1995. At these
elections 20 members will be directly elected,
30 will be indirectly elected and the
remaining 10 will be chosen by an election
committee. In April 1993 the British and
Chinese Governments began talks aimed at
reaching agreement on arrangements for these
elections and for elections to the municipal
councils and district boards. Despite seven
months of intensive negotiation, agreement
was not reached. In June 1994 the Legislative
Council passed the second of two bills
covering electoral arrangements based on
the Hong Kong Government’s package of
constitutional proposals announced in
October 1992.
Falkland Islands
The Falkland Islands are the subject of a
territorial claim by Argentina but the
inhabitants wish to remain under British
sovereignty. The Government does not
accept the Argentine claim to sovereignty
and is committed to defend the Islanders’
right to live under a government of their
own choosing. The Islanders’ right of self-
determination is set out in the 1985 Falkland
Islands Constitution.
In 1982 Argentina invaded and occupied
the Islands, but its forces were expelled as a
result of British military action following
Argentina’s failure to abide by United
Nations resolutions requesting its forces to
withdraw. In recent years Britain and
Argentina, while maintaining their respective
positions on sovereignty, have restored
diplomatic relations and continue to discuss
their common interests in the South
Atlantic, such as fisheries conservation and
exploration for oil.
Gibraltar
Gibraltar is the subject of a territorial claim
by Spain. Britain is committed to honouring
the wishes of the people of Gibraltar on
their future, as set out in the 1969 Gibraltar
Constitution. Britain and Spain, while
maintaining their respective positions on
sovereignty, are pledged to increase practical
co-operation between Gibraltar and Spain to
the benefit of both peoples.
Caribbean Territories
The Dependent Territories Regional
Secretariat in Barbados administers aspects
of British Government policy towards the
Caribbean territories. Jointly agreed country
policy plans for each territory receiving
British aid have been introduced.
An FCO minister chairs a ministerial
group for the Caribbean territories, drawn
from a number of Government
departments and agencies, and benefiting
from wider expertise than the FCO and
ODA alone can offer. It meets two or three
times a year.
115
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
EUROPEAN UNION POLICY
As a European power, Britain is concerned
first of all with the prosperity and security of
this area of the world.
The main instrument for achieving
European prosperity is the European Union
(EU), an association of 12 democratic nations
— Belgium, Britain, Denmark, France,
Germany, Greece, the Irish Republic, Italy,
Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal and
Spain. Negotiations on an Accession Treaty
for Austria, Finland, Norway and Sweden
were completed in April 1994 and they
signed the Treaty in June 1994 at the Corfu
European Council meeting. Austria held a
referendum on 12 June 1994, and voters
supported accession. The other three
countries will hold referendums in the
autumn of 1994. Britain regards the Union as
a means of strengthening democracy and
reinforcing political stability in Europe, and of
increasing the collective strength of member
states in international negotiations. The
Government wants Britain to be at the heart
of a Union in which member states work
effectively together by pooling their ideas and
resources for shared purposes, provided that
such objectives cannot be achieved by
member states acting on their own.
The Union had its origins in the post-
World War II resolve by Western European
nations, particularly France and Germany,
not to allow wars to break out again between
themselves. The 1957 Rome Treaty, which
established the European Community (EC—
now part of the European Union), defined its
aims as the harmonious development of
economic activities, a continuous and
balanced economic expansion and an
accelerated rise in the standard of living.
These objectives were to be achieved by the
creation of a common internal market and
progressive harmonisation of economic
policies, involving:
• the elimination of customs duties
between member states;
• free movement of goods, people, services
and capital;
• a common commercial policy towards
other countries;
• the elimination of distortions in
competition within the common market;
• the creation of a Social Fund to improve
job opportunities for workers and raise
their standard of living;
• the adoption of common agricultural and
transport policies; and
• the association of overseas developing
countries with the Community in order
to increase trade and promote economic
and social development.
These objectives were confirmed and
augmented by the Single European Act of
1986 and the 1992 Maastricht Treaty on
European Union.
Maastricht Treaty
The Maastricht Treaty amends the Rome
Treaty and makes other new commitments.
It:
• introduces the concept of European
Union citizenship as a supplement to
national citizenship, provides some
measure of institutional reform, and
strengthens control of the
Community’s finances;
• provides on an intergovernmental basis
for a common foreign and security policy
and for greater co-operation on issues
concerned with interior/justice policy;
• clarifies and codifies Union competences
in areas such as regional strategy,
consumer protection, education and
vocational training, the environment and
public health;
• provides for moves towards economic
and monetary union; and
• embodies the principle of subsidiarity
under which action is taken by the
European Union only if its objectives
cannot be achieved by member states
acting alone.
Under an agreement reached in 1992 a
subsidiarity test is applied to all European
Commission proposals for action.
The Treaty was ratified by Britain and the
other member states and came into force in
November 1993.
116
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
Economic and Monetary Union
During the negotiations on economic and
monetary union (EMU), the Government
sought to ensure that:
• there would be no commitment by
Britain to move to a single monetary
policy or single currency;
• monetary matters would remain a
national responsibility until the Union
moved to a single currency and
monetary policy;
• member states would retain primary
responsibility for their economic policies;
and
• there were clear and quantifiable
convergence conditions which member
states would have to satisfy before
moving to a single currency.
The Maastricht Treaty provides for
progress towards EMU in three stages: the
first—completion of the single market—
ended at the end of 1993. The second stage,
which began on 1 January 1994, includes the
establishment of a European Monetary
Institute with a largely advisory and
consultative role. Although the Institute will
prepare for stage 3, monetary policy will still
be a national responsibility. Member states
will co-ordinate economic policies in the
context of agreed non-binding policy
guidelines. The British Government is
participating in Stage 2.
Under the Treaty a single currency is
envisaged by 1 January 1999, although
member states will have to satisfy certain
criteria on inflation rates, government deficit
levels, currency fluctuation margins and
interest rates. A special protocol recognises
that Britain is not obliged or committed to
move to this final stage of EMU without a
separate decision to do so by the Government
and Parliament at the appropriate time.
The Community Budget
The Community’s revenue consists of:
• levies on agricultural imports;
• customs duties;
• the proceeds of a notional rate of value
added tax of up to 1.4 per cent on a
standard ‘basket’ of goods and services;
and
• contributions from member states based
on gross national product (GNP).
Overall revenue is limited by a ceiling of
1.2 per cent of Union GNP. Britain has an
annual rebate worth some £2,000 million
because of the fact that, without it, British
net contributions would be far greater than
that justified by its share of Union GNP.
An agreement on future finance was
reached at the 1992 Edinburgh summit.
Under this the revenue ceiling will remain
at 1.2 per cent until 1995, when it will rise
in steps, reaching 1.27 per cent of Union
GNP in 1999. Agricultural spending will be
less than half the budget by the end of the
century, compared with 80 per cent in 1973
and 60 per cent at present. It was also
agreed that more resources would be
allocated to the poorer regions of the Union.
Single Market
The single market has been completed in
several essential respects. It covers, among
other things, the liberalisation of capital
movements, the opening up of public
procurement markets and the mutual
recognition of professional qualifications. It
is designed to reduce business costs,
stimulate efficiency and encourage the
creation of jobs and wealth. The British
Government is supporting continuing
work on extending the single market to
important areas such as telecommunications
and energy.
Transport
Britain fully supports the liberalisation of
transport in the Union. Considerable
progress has been made so far. Permits and
quotas for international road haulage have
been abolished. EU shipowners are entitled
to operate on all international routes within
the Union.
A single market has been established in
civil aviation. Airlines of member states
117
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
meeting established criteria, such as safety
and financial fitness, are entitled to an
operating licence allowing virtually
unrestricted access to routes within the
Union. They are free to set fares and rates
acccording to commercial judgement. In
1993 a regulation came into effect regarding
the allocation of take-off and landing slots at
airports in order to back up the single
market in aviation; it aims to protect the
legitimate interests of established carriers
while promoting competition by assisting
new entrants.
With the opening of the Channel Tunnel
in 1994 (see p. 293), there is a permanent
rail link between Great Britain and
continental Europe, allowing rail services to
compete for international freight and
passenger services.
Britain supports a number of initiatives
designed to improve maritime safety and
reduce the threat of pollution by shipping.
European Economic Area
The European Economic Area (EEA)
Agreement entered into force on 1 January
1994. It extends most of the single market
measures to Austria, Finland, Iceland,
Norway and Sweden. It is hoped that
Liechtenstein will join the EEA in the
near future.
Trade
Britain is the world’s fifth largest trading
nation. EEA member states comprise the
world’s largest trading bloc, accounting for
about a third of all trade.
The British Government fully supports
an open world trading system, on which EU
member states depend for future economic
growth and jobs.
Under the Rome Treaty, the European
Commission speaks on behalf of Britain and
the other EU member states in international
trade negotiations, such as the recently
concluded GATT Uruguay Round. The
Commission negotiates on a mandate agreed
by the Council.
For further information on trade, see
Chapter 12.
The Environment
European Union member states are at the
forefront of many international measures on
environmental issues, such as car exhaust
pollution and the depletion of the
ozone layer.
For further information, see p. 129.
Agriculture and Fisheries
The Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) is
designed to secure food supplies and to
stabilise markets. It has also, however,
created overproduction and unwanted food
surpluses, placing a burden on the
Community’s budget.
The Common Fisheries Policy is
concerned with the rational conservation and
management of fishery resources.
The operation of these policies, and
Britain’s advocacy of CAP reform, are
described in Chapter 17.
Regional and Infrastructure
Development
There are a number of Structural Funds
designed to:
• promote economic development in poorer
regions;
• improve regions seriously affected by
industrial decline;
• combat long-term unemployment;
• train young people to find jobs; and
• promote development in rural areas.
Infrastructure projects and productive
investments are financed by the European
Regional Development Fund. The European
Social Fund supports training and
employment measures for the long-term
unemployed and young people. The
Guidance Section of the European
Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund
supports agricultural restructuring and some
rural development measures. A new fund to
support restructuring in the fishing industry
was created in 1993.
A new cohesion fund has been set up
under the Maastricht Treaty to reduce
118
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
disparities between levels of development in
the poorer and richer member states.
Other programmes aim to assist the
development of new economic activities in
regions affected by the restructuring of
traditional industries such as steel, coal and
shipbuilding.
The European Investment Bank, a non-
profit-making institution, lends at competitive
interest rates to public and private capital
projects. Lending is directed towards:
• less-favoured regions;
• transport infrastructure;
• protection of the environment;
• improving industrial competitiveness;
and
• supporting loans to small and medium¬
sized enterprises.
The Bank also provides loans in support
of the Community’s policy of co-operation
with the countries of the Mediterranean
basin; Central and Eastern Europe; and the
African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) states
(see p. 171).
Employment and Social Affairs
In Britain’s view, EC social policy should be
primarily concerned with job creation and
with maintaining a well-educated and trained
workforce to ensure competitiveness in world
markets. The Government supports:
• measures to safeguard health and safety
at work, freedom of movement for
workers, Union-wide recognition of
professional and vocational qualifications,
equal opportunities at work;
and
• practical measures to increase jobs and
cut unemployment which do not place
more costs on employers.
At Maastricht the Government opposed
the extension of Community social policy
and qualified majority voting into new areas
of social affairs on the grounds that the main
responsibility for such policies should remain
with individual member states. It negotiated
the Social Protocol to the Maastricht
Treaty, which allows other member states to
agree social legislation in these areas which
is not applicable in Britain.
Research and Development
Research collaboration among EU member
states is promoted primarily through a series
of framework programmes defining priorities
and setting out the overall level of funding.
The Fourth Framework Programme was
adopted in April 1994. The British
Government actively encourages British
companies and organisations to participate in
collaborative research and development
(R & D) with European partners.
The Fourth Framework Programme gives
priority to information and communications
technology, industrial materials and
technologies, the environment,
biotechnology, agriculture, health and
energy. There are also schemes for the
exchange of researchers and for scientific
collaboration with developing countries and
the states of the former Soviet Union.
INTERNATIONAL PEACE AND
SECURITY
Britain believes that states should not use,
or threaten, force against other sovereign
states and that they should resolve their
disputes by peaceful means. The United
Nations has the authority to seek to resolve
disputes which threaten international peace
and stability.
Peacekeeping
Britain is playing a full role in the expansion
of UN peacekeeping and is one of the
largest contributors of troops to UN
operations. In addition, it pays its assessed
share of nearly 6.4 per cent of the costs of
UN peacekeeping.
Britain and France have taken a joint
initiative to strengthen the UN’s ability to
conduct preventive diplomacy as a way of
avoiding conflicts breaking out. Both
countries have submitted a paper to the UN
setting out the type of assistance they are
prepared to provide and the range of
military units available. Britain also seconds
119
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
military officers to the UN’s Department for
Peacekeeping Operations. The British
Government has proposed that there should
be a UN general staff for peacekeeping.
Nearly 4,000 British troops are serving
on peacekeeping missions in Cyprus,
Kuwait and former Yugoslavia.
Their tasks include monitoring
ceasefires, logistical support, relief
convoy escort, naval monitoring and
acting as unarmed military observers.
In June 1994 Britain was the fourth
largest contributor of troops to
UN operations.
Former Yugoslavia
Britain is committed to supporting efforts to
establish a lasting and equitable peace in
former Yugoslavia and is deeply involved in
efforts to relieve suffering caused by the
fighting in Bosnia-Herzegovina and to
prevent it spreading.
Since the outbreak of inter-ethnic
hostilities in mid-1991 the European Union
and the UN have sought to bring peace to
the area. In September 1991 EU member
states established a peace conference to try
and obtain a ceasefire between Serbian and
Croatian forces. In February 1992 the UN
Protection Force (UNPROFOR) was set up
to monitor a ceasefire between Serbia
and Croatia.
Britain and the other EU member states
recognised Slovenia and Croatia in January
1992 and Bosnia-Herzegovina in April
1992. Serbia and Montenegro proclaimed
themselves the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, which has not achieved
international recognition. In December 1993
Britain and most of its EU partners decided
to establish diplomatic relations with the
former Yugoslav republic of Macedonia.
In April 1992 the conflict in Bosnia
between Serbs, Croats and Muslims
escalated. The UN imposed sanctions in
May on Serbia and Montenegro because of
their failure to take measures to cease
military intervention in Bosnia. In August
1992 Britain convened the London
Conference, co-chaired by the British Prime
Minister and the UN Secretary General,
which led to the creation of the International
Conference on the Former Yugoslavia
(ICFY). The main parties to the conflict
agreed to documents setting out clear
principles for a negotiated settlement.
Successive efforts by the co-chairmen of
ICFY to resolve the conflict on the basis of
these principles foundered because of the
Bosnian parties’ failure to honour them. UN
and EU mediators continued their work to
see if a settlement could be reached. The
United States and Russia, too, sent envoys
to the area.
Following a British initiative, mediation
efforts have been placed in the hands of an
international contact group comprising
Britain, France, Germany, Russia and the
United States. The group has put forward a
plan under which the Muslim-Croat
federation would receive 51 per cent of the
land area of Bosnia-Herzegovina, the
remaining 49 per cent being allocated to the
Bosnian Serbs. The latter, however, rejected
the plan, while the Muslim-Croat federation
accepted it.
Fighting in Bosnia displaced many people
from their homes, and millions became
dependent on humanitarian relief. As at
September 1994 Britain had 3,350 troops in
UNPROFOR in the former Yugoslavia,
protecting aid convoys and supporting the
ceasefires in and around Sarajevo and in
central Bosnia.The British Government has
contributed over £\70 million to the aid
effort and has made possible the delivery of
almost 300,000 tonnes of aid.
CENTRAL AND EASTERN EUROPE
AND THE FORMER SOVIET UNION
With the disintegration of the Warsaw Pact
and the formation of democratically elected
governments in Eastern and Central Europe
and the former Soviet Union, the European
security situation has been transformed.
In November 1990 NATO Allies and
former Warsaw Pact states signed a joint
declaration in Paris saying that:
• they were no longer adversaries and
would build new partnerships;
120
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
• they would maintain only enough
military forces to prevent war and
provide for effective defence; and
• they would form the North Atlantic Co¬
operation Council to foster co-operation
and understanding.
In January 1994, a NATO summit
meeting invited the non-NATO states in
Eastern and Central Europe and the former
Soviet Union to join a Partnership for Peace
in order to:
• develop a practical working relationship;
and
• enlist the Partners’ assistance in
peacekeeping operations and guide their
armed forces towards compatibility with
those of NATO countries.
The Partnership will also monitor things
like the Partners’ respect for international
treaties, civilian control of the military and
openness in defence budgeting.
Economic Help
Because of the vast economic problems
following the fall of Communism, Britain
and other Western countries took action to
help deal with these and promote the
development of market economies. Britain
and other OECD countries set up the
European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development to channel investment to the
region. The European Community’s
PHARE scheme is designed to assist the
process of reform and development of
infrastructure. Independent states of the
former Soviet Union receive help through
a separate Community programme
(TACIS), which concentrates on financial
services, transport, energy (including
nuclear safety) and human resource
development. Britain contributes about
16 per cent of both budgets.
Know How Fund and Other Schemes
The British Government’s Know How Fund
is designed to promote the transition to
pluralist, democratic and market-based
economies in Central Europe and the former
Soviet Union. It covers 24 countries and
since 1989 has spent over £160 million on
some 2,000 projects. The Know How Fund
budget in 1994-5 is about £78 million.
The Fund concentrates its efforts in the
former Soviet Union on energy, financial
services (with a focus on privatisation and the
creation of a strong commercial banking
sector), food production and distribution,
small business creation, health management
and good government. The main emphasis in
Central and Eastern Europe is on projects in
banking, financial services, management of
privatisation, management training and the
development of small businesses. There are
separate Know How Fund schemes covering
environmental projects, voluntary
organisations, support for local government
and educational links.
Efforts are made to involve the British
private sector in order to stimulate inward
investment into the region. One scheme is
designed to help firms appraise the
commercial and financial viability of proposed
investment operations, while another has been
set up to help key local staff in new
enterprises acquire management and business
skills. A third scheme enables managers from
the region to gain managerial experience
during attachments of up to 5 weeks with
British companies.
In addition, a scheme financed by the
Treasury supports secondments in Britain
for young and able financial managers
from Russia.
Association Agreements
The European Community has strengthened
relations with Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Hungary, Poland, Romania and Slovakia by
concluding Association Agreements with
these countries. The agreements envisage
European Union membership when these
countries are able to assume the obligations
of membership. Negotiations for similar
agreements with the Baltic States will begin
soon and are underway with Slovenia.
In 1992 the EC agreed to negotiate
Partnership and Co-operation Agreements
with all the states of the former Soviet
Union. Agreements have been signed with
Russia and Ukraine and concluded with
121
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Kyrgyzstan and Kazakhstan. Negotiations
with Belarus and Moldova are continuing.
Trade and Co-operation Agreements have
been concluded with Albania and Slovenia
and free trade agreements were negotiated
with the three Baltic states in 1994.
The purpose of all these agreements is
to reduce trade barriers, develop co-operation
and increase political dialogue at all levels.
OTHER REGIONS
The Middle East
Middle East Peace Process
Britain warmly welcomed the breakthrough in
the Middle East peace process in September
1993, when Israel and the Palestine
Liberation Organisation (PLO) agreed to
mutual recognition and signed a declaration
of principles on interim self-government for
the Palestinians in Israeli-held territories
occupied in 1967. The first stage of the
declaration was implemented in May 1994
when the Palestinians adopted self-
government in the Gaza Strip and the Jericho
area. Negotiations are continuing on increased
transfer of responsibilities. Britain is also
encouraging peace negotiations between
Israel, Jordan, Syria and Lebanon. An
agreement between Israel and Jordan was
concluded in Washington in July 1994.
Britain, along with its other European
Union partners, is supporting peace moves,
politically and economically. Britain plans to
spend £70 million on aid to the Palestinians
and the peace process over the period from
1994 to 1996 through bilateral and multilateral
channels. Many programmes are already under
way and are designed to support Palestinian
administration, police training, the Palestinian
Monetary Authority, legal structures and the
judiciary, water management, and health care.
Assistance is also being provided for the
planned Palestinian elections.
The Gulf Conflict
As a permanent member of the UN Security
Council, Britain strongly condemned Iraq’s
invasion of Kuwait in August 1990 and
supported all the Council’s resolutions
designed to force Iraqi withdrawal and restore
international legality. Because of Iraq’s failure
to withdraw, its forces were expelled in
February 1991 by an international coalition
led by the United States, Britain, France and
Saudi Arabia, acting under a UN mandate.
UN Security Council Resolution 687,
adopted in April 1991, formalised the
ceasefire in the Gulf War and stipulated
conditions for Iraqi acceptance, including
measures to prevent the development of
weapons of mass destruction, recognition of
the border with Kuwait and the payment of
compensation to those who suffered as a
result of the invasion of Kuwait. The
resolution, fully supported by Britain,
imposed sanctions on Iraq which remain in
force until the Security Council is satisfied
that Iraq is fully in compliance with it.
As part of the agreement ending
hostilities, the Security Council authorised
the creation of a Special Commission
(UNSCOM) to supervise the elimination of
Iraq’s weapons of mass destruction. Britain
has provided considerable support to
UNSCOM and the International Atomic
Energy Authority in the form of personnel,
equipment and information since the first
inspection in May 1991.
The Security Council approved a separate
resolution (688) in response to continued
oppression by the Iraqi regime of the civilian
population in Northern Iraq and the marshes
of Southern Iraq. ‘No fly’ zones operate over
both areas to monitor Iraqi actions and to
deter air attacks. Britain takes an active part
in both operations.
Sub-Saharan Africa
For many years Britain has been concerned
with the affairs of sub-Saharan Africa.
Positive developments in the region since
1989 have included:
• a trend towards more accountable
government (for example, multi-party
elections in Kenya, Malawi and Zambia)
and liberal economic policies, with
countries committed to a greater degree
of democracy; and
122
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
• the abolition of apartheid and the
establishment of non-racial democracy in
South Africa.
British policy towards South Africa has
been to:
• encourage multi-party negotiations on the
building of a new constitution; and
• help end political violence and intimidation.
The British Government maintains close
relations with all the main parties associated
with political reform in South Africa and
welcomed the country’s first non-racial
elections in April 1994. Britain spent nearly
£4 million on aid for the elections, of which
£3 million was used to assist peacekeeping
and £520,000 to train election officials and
monitor policing of the elections. Observers
were also sent as part of UN, European
Union and Commonwealth missions.
The British Government is working with
President Mandela and his Government of
National Unity to prepare black South Africans
to play their full part in the government and
economy of their country. In addition to a
£100 million aid package over the three years
1994—96, Britain is supporting South Africa’s
development through trade and investment,
and with the backing of £1,000 million in
official export credit guarantees.
Asia-Pacific Region
The dynamic growth of the East Asian
economies has made the Asia-Pacific region
more important for world affairs. There is
also an encouraging trend towards political
liberalisation. Britain has a long association
with the region and is giving it an even
higher priority in its foreign policy. Close
relations are maintained with Japan, China,
India and Pakistan, the ASEAN countries
(Brunei, Thailand, Malaysia, the Phillipines
and Singapore), Australia and New Zealand.
Britain has defence links with some countries
in the region. It is also contributing to the
economic development of Vietnam.
The Indo-British Partnership Initiative,
established in 1993, has done much to
encourage commercial and investment links
between the two countries.
Britain is stepping up political dialogue
with the countries of the region, developing
British commercial activity through more
trade and investment, and co-operating even
more closely on international problem
solving. Britain is keen to be associated with
Asia-Pacific regional structures both
bilaterally and through its membership of the
European Union. It is also taking advantage
of growing opportunities for English language
teaching, co-operation in science and
technology, and educational exchanges.
North and South America
Britain has long-established political, trade
and cultural links with the United States. In
particular, as founding members of NATO,
both countries are closely involved in
Western defence arrangements (see pp.
136-7) and, as permanent members of the
UN Security Council, work together on all
major international issues. Strong links are
also maintained with Canada, with whom
Britain shares membership of the
Commonwealth, NATO and other key
international organisations. All three countries
are members of the Group of Seven who meet
each year at the annual Economic Summit.
Important British connections with South
America date from the participation of British
volunteers in the wars of independence in the
early 19th century. Britain has welcomed the
fact that democratically elected governments
are now the norm in the region; this, together
with the trend towards free market
economies, presents many opportunities for
Britain to strengthen its relations with
countries in the region.
There is a British post in every Latin
American country and the programme of
ministerial visits to the region has increased
in recent years; notable examples have been
the Prime Minister’s visit to Columbia and
Brazil in 1992 and the Foreign and
Commonwealth Secretary’s visits to
Argentina and Chile in 1993, and Brazil
in 1994.
ARMS CONTROL
Britain and the other members of NATO are
pledged to pursue further progress in arms
123
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
control and confidence-building measures.
Under recent agreements nuclear forces in
the former Soviet Union have been reduced
and Russian forces have been withdrawn
from Eastern Europe.
Nuclear Weapons
In July 1991 the United States and the
former Soviet Union signed the first
Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START),
under which an equal limit of 6,000 nuclear
warheads on both sides was agreed, with an
equal sub-limit of 4,900 ballistic missile
warheads. The Treaty required the parties to
reduce their strategic missiles and warheads
by about 35 per cent over 15 years, including
a cut of up to 50 per cent in the most
destabilising systems.
In January 1993 the United States and
Russia signed a new treaty agreeing to
reduce their strategic nuclear weapons by
two-thirds within ten years. Both countries
eliminated their intermediate range nuclear
weapons under a separate treaty signed
in 1987.
Nuclear Testing
Britain is committed to the successful
outcome of the current negotiations on a
comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty. It
supports a treaty of indefinite duration, with
effective verification and the widest possible
adherence, in order to prevent the
development of a sophisticated nuclear
weapon by a would-be proliferator.
Given the possibility of an agreement on a
nuclear test ban, British plans are based on
the use of simulation and alternative
technologies in order to ensure continued
warhead safety and reliability in the
long term.
Conventional Weapons
The Conventional Armed Forces in Europe
(CFE) Treaty, signed in November 1990,
commits the NATO allies and members of
the former Warsaw Pact to reductions in five
major classes of conventional weapons.
The ceilings for both groups of states in
the area between the Atlantic and the Ural
Mountains are 20,000 tanks, 30,000 armoured
combat vehicles, 20,000 artillery pieces, 2,000
attack helicopters and 6,800 combat aircraft.
No individual state may hold more than two
thirds of the equipment the Treaty allows
its group.
Weapons above the agreed ceilings must
be destroyed or rendered permanently unfit
for further military use. Intrusive
arrangements to verify compliance are
included in the Treaty.
In July 1992 a fresh agreement, to which
Britain is a party, was concluded on
permitted strengths of armed forces personnel
within Europe.
Chemical Weapons
Britain took a leading part in the lengthy
negotiations on a chemical weapons ban,
having abandoned its own chemical weapons
in the late 1950s. These negotiations were
completed in June 1992 and 157 countries,
including Britain, have signed a convention
which enters into force 6 months after
65 states have ratified (but not before
13 January 1995).
The Chemical Weapons Convention
will prohibit the production, stockpiling and
use of chemical weapons. There is a system
of challenge inspections to verify
compliance and provisions for the
monitoring of chemicals which can be used
to make weapons.
Biological Weapons
The 1972 Biological and Toxin Weapons
Convention prohibits the development,
production and stockpiling of these weapons
but currently lacks methods of verification. A
1991 review conference introduced
confidence-building measures providing for
exchange of information between the parties
to the Convention and set up an expert
group to identify and examine potential
verification measures. This completed its
work and its findings are being considered by
a special conference of the parties to the
Convention with a view to establishing
arrangements for verification.
124
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
Non-Proliferation
Britain aims to:
• prevent the proliferation of nuclear
weapons;
• ban the manufacture and possession of
chemical and biological weapons;
• control the transfer of ballistic missiles
and their components and technology;
and
• prevent accumulations of conventional
armaments which create regional
instability.
Britain has signed a number of agreements
designed to control the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. These include
the 1968 Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) on
nuclear weapons, the 1972 Biological and
Toxin Weapons Convention and the 1993
Chemical Weapons Convention (see p. 124).
A review conference is to be held in 1995 to
consider the extension of the NPT Treaty;
Britain is seeking its unconditional and
indefinite extension.
UN Register of Arms Transfers
Following a British initiative, the UN
General Assembly voted to establish a
universal and non-discriminatory register of
conventional arms transfers. The register,
covering seven categories of equipment, is
designed to introduce greater openness and
make it easier for the international
community to monitor an excessive arms
build-up in any one country. The register
came into effect in January 1992. Britain is
represented on a Panel of Government
Experts which is considering whether the
register’s coverage should be expanded.
Confidence-Building Measures
Important confidence-building measures
regarding military exercises and other
activities in Europe are in force.
The Conference on Security and
Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) provides a
forum for dialogue on such matters as arms
control. Participants include the republics of
the former Soviet Union, the other European
states and the United States and Canada.
Under the 1992 Vienna Document,
CSCE participating states agreed on a
number of further confidence-building
measures, including:
• annual exchanges of information on
military forces, equipment and budgets;
• prior notification of certain military
activities; and
• challenge inspections and evaluation
visits to military bases.
Open Skies Treaty
Britain played an important role in the
negotiations leading to the signing in March
1992 of the Open Skies Treaty, which will
allow flights over the entire territories of its
participants by aircraft equipped with
sensors, cameras and radar with the ability
to detect military activity and equipment in
all weathers, day and night. The Treaty has
been signed by all NATO members, Belarus,
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Georgia,
Hungary, Kyrgyzstan, Poland, Romania,
Russia, Slovakia and Ukraine.
The Treaty, which is of unlimited
duration, will be phased in over three years;
when fully in force, it will play a valuable
stabilising role by allowing the major CSCE
countries to check on military deployments.
HUMAN RIGHTS
The protection of human rights is an
important part of British foreign policy.
Universal respect for human rights is an
obligation under the UN Charter, reinforced
by human rights law in the form of UN and
regional human rights treaties. The British
Government played a key role at the 1993
Vienna UN World Conference on Human
Rights, which reaffirmed that human rights
are a legitimate concern of the international
community. The expressions of concern
about human rights do not, therefore,
constitute interference in the internal affairs
of another state.
The Universal Declaration of Human
Rights was adopted by the UN General
Assembly in 1948. Since this is not a legally
125
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
binding document, the General Assembly
adopted two international covenants in 1966,
placing legal obligations on those states
ratifying or acceding to them. The covenants
came into force in 1976, Britain ratifying both
in the same year. One covenant deals with
economic, social and cultural rights and the
other with civil and political rights. States
which are parties to the covenants undertake
to submit periodic reports detailing
compliance with their terms. Each covenant
has a UN treaty monitoring committee which
examines these reports. Britain recognises the
competence of these committees to receive
and consider state-to-state complaints.
Other international conventions to which
Britain is a party include those on:
• the elimination of racial discrimination;
• the elimination of all forms of
discrimination against women;
• the rights of the child;
• torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment;
• prevention of genocide;
• the abolition of slavery; and
• the status of refugees.
The Council of Europe
Britain is bound by the Council of Europe’s
Convention for the Protection of Human
Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, which
covers:
• the right to life, liberty, security and a
fair trial;
• respect for private and family life, home
and correspondence;
• freedom of thought, conscience and
religion;
• freedom of expression;
• freedom of peaceful assembly and
association;
• the right to have a sentence reviewed by
a higher tribunal; and
• the prohibition of torture and other
inhuman or degrading treatment.
Complaints about violations of the
Convention are made to the European
Commission of Human Rights in
Strasbourg. Although one state may lodge a
complaint against another, most
complaints are brought against states by
individuals or groups. The Commission
decides whether cases are admissible and, if
so, examines the matter with the parties with
a view to achieving a friendly settlement. If
this fails, the Commission or the state
concerned can refer the case to the European
Court of Human Rights, which rules on
whether the Convention has been
breached. Britain accepts the Court’s
compulsory jurisdiction and the right of
individual petition. Britain has signed, and is
in the process of ratifying, the 11th Protocol
to the Convention, which will replace the
existing Commission and Court with a
full-time Court.
Conference on Security and
Co-operation in Europe
Britain is a signatory to the 1975 Helsinki
Final Act, which established a framework for
co-operation between CSCE states on
European security, respect for human rights,
economics, the environment and
humanitarian issues. It was agreed that the
Helsinki commitments should be reviewed at
regular follow-up conferences. The Helsinki
process contributed to the collapse of
Communism, the reunification of Germany
and the end of the Cold War.
The 1990 Charter of Paris committed
CSCE participants to democracy, human
rights and market economies. The CSCE has
a Secretariat in Vienna, where Britain has a
permanent delegation. Day-to-day business is
conducted in the Permanent Committee. A
Prague office organises the quarterly meetings
of senior officials. The CSCE has 53
members, including virtually every country in
Europe, the states of the former Soviet
Union, and the United States and Canada.
Yugoslavia was suspended in July 1992. All
states participate on an equal basis, and
decisions are taken by consensus.
The main areas of CSCE work are:
• early warning of potential conflict
through preventive diplomacy missions
and the CSCE High Commissioner on
National Minorities;
126
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
• providing advice on human rights,
democracy and law through the CSCE
Office for Democratic Institutions, in
Warsaw; and
• promoting security through arms control
and military confidence building.
Westminster Foundation for Democracy
The Westminster Foundation for Democracy
helps strengthen pluralistic democratic
institutions in other countries.
The three main political parties (see p. 53)
are represented on the Board of Governors,
who are appointed by the Foreign and
Commonwealth Secretary. There is also a
representative of the smaller political parties,
plus non-party figures drawn from business,
trade unions, the academic world and other
non-governmental organisations. The
Foreign & Commonwealth Office has a
non-voting advisory member. The
Foundation is independent and the British
Government cannot veto projects the Board
chooses to support.
Advice is given by the Foundation on the
development of:
• election systems, administration or
monitoring;
• parliaments or other representative
institutions;
• political parties;
• free media;
• trade unions; and
• human rights groups.
The Foundation is concentrating its efforts
initially on Central and South-Eastern
Europe, the former Soviet Union and on
anglophone Africa. It does, however, consider
sympathetically applications for projects
elsewhere in the world.
INTERNATIONAL CRIME
The British Government attaches importance
to action against international terrorism and
to international co-operation against drug
traffickers and organised crime. Britain and
the other members of the European Union
have agreed not to export arms or other
military equipment to countries clearly
implicated in supporting terrorist activity,
and to take steps to prevent such material
being diverted for terrorist purposes.
It is EU policy that:
• no concessions should be made to
terrorists or their sponsors; and
• there should be solidarity between
member states in the prevention of
terrorism.
Britain participates actively in international
forums on co-operation against illegal drug
trafficking, maintains a substantial
programme of overseas assistance in this field
and stations drug liaison officers in a number
of countries in order to liaise with the host
authorities in the fight against drug
trafficking. In recent years Britain has
contributed over £20 million to the UN
Drug Control Programme, which has the
leading international role against the illegal
drugs trade
In December 1991 EU member states
agreed to set up a central European Police
Office (EUROPOL) to provide Union-wide
intelligence about serious crime. As a first
step in this process, a EUROPOL Drugs
Unit has been established. EU member states
belong to the International Criminal Police
Organisation (INTERPOL). British liaison
with INTERPOL is provided by the National
Criminal Intelligence Service (see p. 84).
Under the Maastricht Treaty, work in
these areas is being intensified through
increased intergovernmental co-operation.
DEVELOPMENT CO-OPERATION
The aim of Britain’s overseas aid effort is to
improve the quality of life and reduce
poverty, suffering and deprivation in
developing countries.
In 1992-93 British aid to developing
countries was over £2,245 million. Of this,
£1,278 million was allocated bilaterally and
£903 million through international
organisations such as the European Union
(£412 million), the World Bank Group
(nearly £250 million), the United Nations
agencies (£173 million) and the regional
development banks (£38 million). Some
127
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
I #
£64 million was spent on aid administration.
Assistance to former Communist countries in
Europe totalled £146 million; bilateral
technical assistance to these countries is given
through the Know How Fund (see p. 121).
The British aid programme seeks to:
• promote economic reform;
• enhance productive capacity;
• promote good government;
• help developing countries reduce poverty;
• promote better education and health;
• improve the status of women in
developing countries; and
• assist developing countries to tackle their
environmental problems.
Economic Reform
Britain provides bilateral technical assistance,
including advice on privatisation and the
improvement of essential public services.
British multilateral aid supports the
financing of reforms through contributions to
the World Bank Group and the European
Development Fund.
Most bilateral financial British support
for reforms consists of technical assistance to
eight low-income countries in the Special
Programme of Assistance for Africa led by
the World Bank.
The Private Sector
Help is given to encourage the private sector.
The ODA’s Small Enterprise Development
Fund investigates and promotes new projects
and activities. Private sector activity is
supported by help to build up infrastructure.
The Commonwealth Development
Corporation provides loans, equity funds and
management services for financially viable
investments in agriculture, fisheries, minerals,
industry, public utilities, transport,
communications and housing. By the end of
1993 it had investments and commitments
worth £1,600 million in 341 projects.
Good Government
Respect for human rights, popular
participation in decision-making and the rule
of law are central concerns of the British aid
programme because these are vital to
successful development. In 1992-93, over
£56 million was spent on public sector and
civil service reform, strengthening police and
judicial systems, improved accounting and
audit procedures, and help to meet the cost
of elections.
Reducing Poverty
Most direct or bilateral aid goes to the
poorest countries. In India, Pakistan and
Bangladesh—the major grant recipients in
Asia—projects include rural development,
urban slum upgrading and the provision of
health, population and education services for
poor people. Some of these are carried out in
conjunction with non-governmental
organisations; in 1992, for example, the ODA
gave £7.8 million to the Bangladesh Rural
Advancement Committee to support a special
bank providing cheap credit to landless
rural people.
Education
Assistance is given to education projects
emphasising literacy and numeracy, and
skills which build on these. British aid also
helps education ministries to plan and
manage their systems more efficiently
and equitably.
One of the most ambitious education
projects supported by British aid is
the provision of teacher training to
150,000 primary school teachers in
50,000 schools in Andhra Pradesh,
India. Another is the provision of
books for all primary schools
in Zambia.
In 1992-93 some 13,000 training and
scholarship awards were granted, most of
which were taken up in British universities
and further education colleges. Some training
is provided in the trainee’s own country or in
other countries.
Assistance is given for the provision of
books and journals. The Education Low-
Priced Books Scheme provides textbooks for
128
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
purchase by students at subsidised prices in
about 86 developing countries.
Health
The ODA invests over £100 million a year
on health care, water and sanitation, and
population projects. The main aim is to help
bring affordable health care services to the
poorest and most vulnerable sections of the
community. Assistance is targeted on a
number of countries and special attention is
given to:
• strengthening primary health care
services, particularly for women and
children;
• improving control of communicable
diseases;
• helping to establish management
systems to ensure the provision of
good-quality care at an affordable cost;
and
• improving access to reproductive health
services.
Britain assists countries to improve the
accessibility and quality of family planning
services. No support is given for any such
programme in which there is an element
of coercion.
Over £33 million has been committed
to the World Health Organisation’s
Global Programme on AIDS, which
provides technical support and policy
guidance to developing countries on
national AIDS control programmes. In
addition nearly £11 million has been
allocated in direct support for 17 national
AIDS programmes.
Status of Women
In 1992-93 some 8 per cent of bilateral aid
was targeted on improving the status of
women. Britain supports the promotion of
female literacy and recognises the need to
remove barriers to economic participation by
women. The ODA funds projects aimed at
providing women with additional skills, giving
them access to credit and enabling them to
develop small-scale business initiatives.
Support is also given to training courses to
help women overcome the barriers to
advancement in public administration.
The Environment
British aid, in partnership with developing
countries, promotes sustainable development
to safeguard the world environment for
current and future generations.
Britain is contributing £130 million to the
Global Environment Facility (GEF) to help
developing countries play their part in
protecting the environment in the areas of
climate change, biodiversity, depletion of the
ozone layer and the pollution of international
waters. It is the fifth largest contributor to
the GEF.
Climate Change
Britain signed a convention on climate change
at the 1992 Earth Summit and ratified it in
December 1993. The aim of the Convention
is to stabilise atmospheric concentrations of
greenhouse gases at a level which will prevent
dangerous climate change. It commits all
parties to prepare national programmes
identifying sources of such gases and steps to
limit emissions. Britain has also financed
country studies and the participation of
developing countries in the work of the
International Panel on Climate Change, which
investigates and reports on climate change and
on the responses which should be adopted.
Ozone Depletion
Britain is contributing $40 million towards the
programme of the Montreal Protocol
Multilateral Fund for its first six years of
operation. The Protocol is a detailed agreement
on restricting chemicals that contribute to
ozone depletion. The Fund covers the extra
costs faced by developing countries in
complying with the Protocol as well as
feasibility studies and technical assistance.
Biodiversity
Britain signed the Biodiversity Convention at
the 1992 Earth Summit and ratified it on
World Environment Day in June 1994. In
129
BRITAIN 1995. AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
addition to its contributions to the GEF,
Britain is funding about £40 million worth of
biodiversity projects through the bilateral aid
programme. In Kenya, for example, the ODA
is helping the National Museum to conserve
the country’s native flora; a British botanist is
working with museum staff on a system to
identify plant species at risk and to conserve
them. The ODA also assists conservation of
the world’s genetic material in gene banks,
botanic gardens and zoos.
Forestry
There are about 200 British aid projects under
way or in preparation. These are designed to:
• help developing countries use their
forests on a sustainable basis;
• limit deforestation by tackling its causes;
and
• promote replanting on degraded land.
These programmes are worth some £152
million. In March 1994, £2.9 million was
approved for the pilot phase of the Himachel
Pradesh Forestry Project in India, which
promotes the sustainable management of
forest lands while maintaining and improving
the livelihoods of local people dependent on
the forests.
Urban Aid
Britain is financing a £68 million project to
improve the living conditions of people in five
Indian cities—Calcutta, Vijayawada, Hyderabad,
Indore and Vishakhapatnam. This includes
investment in roads and other essential
services, health facilities and nursery schools.
Water
In 1992 British aid provided £39.7 million for
water-related projects, including £16.8 million
devoted to the provision of clean drinking
water and/or sanitation in over 30 developing
countries.
New projects committed in 1993 included:
• training in water resources management
in Bangladesh, China and Chile;
• groundwater assessment studies in China
and Mexico; and
• provision of rural drinking water supply
and sanitation in Zimbabwe.
Renewable Natural Resources
Britain funds some £34 million of research
each year in programmes covering agriculture,
fisheries, forestry, livestock, land resources,
pest control and post-harvest technology.
The Natural Resources Institute is the
ODA’s scientific arm and runs
programmes focused on environmental
concerns. These include:
• environmental monitoring and
identification of areas for conservation;
and
• improvement of pest control by
minimising disturbance of wildlife
habitats and relying less heavily on
chemical pesticides.
Emergency Relief
The ODA’s Disaster Unit co-ordinates the
British Government’s response to natural
and man-made disasters worldwide; it
also provides relief to refugees and
displaced people.
As part of co-ordinated international
responses, the ODA provides funds, supplies
and trained personnel to direct the British
effort on the ground.
In 1992 a joint British-German proposal
led to the establishment of the UN’s
Department of Humanitarian Affairs,
responsible for co-ordinating prompt
responses to emergencies.
In 1992-93 British humanitarian assistance
amounted to about £290 million. In addition,
the British public sends substantial sums for
emergency relief overseas through non¬
governmental organisations.
CULTURAL RELATIONS
British cultural relations are promoted by
the British Council, which works in 228
towns and cities in 108 countries. The
Council:
• helps people to study, train or make
professional contacts in Britain;
J30
ENVIRONMENTAL DESIGN
Woodley Primary School in Bordon,
Hampshire, which won the BBC Design
Award 1994. The architects, Nev Churcher
and Sally Daniels, aimed to integrate the
school into its woodland setting and to
provide an environment for the children
which was both practical and beautiful.
A demonstrator vehicle at
Ricardo Consulting Engineers,
winner of a Queen’s Award for
Environmental Achievement for
its work in developing more
energy-efficient engines.
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
A dry stone waller at work in a village
near the Mourne Mountains area of
Northern Ireland. The local
community had the idea of converting
derelict cottages into self-catering
tourist accommodation. They
produced a business plan, and work
went ahead with the help of funding
from a government rural development
scheme.
A knitwear exhibition at the Business
Design Centre, London. The Rural
Development Commission provides
funding for small businesses to exhibit
at trade exhibitions.
An oyster farm in a
nature reserve in
Lochinver, Scotland, set
up with the help of a
grant from Ross and
Cromarty Enterprises.
Pacific oysters, which can
be eaten all year round,
are sold to local hotels
and restaurants.
Aberystwyth Science Park in
Wales: all the units, which
house organisations committed
to scientific research and
development, were built and
funded by the Development
Board for Rural Wales.
COMPUTER TECHNOLOGY
Parallel processing uses a
number of separate
computers in co¬
operation, allowing data
to be accessed and
processed more quickly.
Here, the director of the
£1 million Parallel
Computer Architectures
Laboratory at Edinburgh
University integrates
geographical data from a
variety of sources.
This virtual reality simulator developed by Denne
Developments of Bournemouth, Dorset, responds to
body movements, giving a realistic impression of
surfing. The new technology has potential beyond
leisure activities: among those who have already
ordered a version of the simulator is NASA, which
will use it with virtual reality headsets to train
astronauts in the skills of spacewalking and its
associated tasks.
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
• enables British specialists to teach, advise
or establish joint projects abroad;
• teaches English and promotes its use;
• provides library and information services;
and
• makes British arts and literature more
widely known.
The Council runs 185 libraries, resource
centres and information centres, and 86
English language teaching centres. In 1993-94
about 8.2 million loans of books and other
materials were made to 440,000 library
members. Up to 100,000 people at any one
time were taking part in the Council’s
English courses.
The Council is financed partly by a grant
from the Foreign & Commonwealth Office.
The training and education programmes
organised by the Council as part of the
British aid programme are another important
source of income. About a quarter of the
Council’s income comes from other earnings.
Educational Exchanges
The British Council recruits teachers for
work overseas, organises short overseas visits
by British experts, encourages cultural
exchange visits and organises academic
interchange between British universities and
colleges and those in other countries.
The ODA helps fund certain Council
programmes such as:
• recruitment of staff for overseas
universities;
• secondment of staff from British higher
education establishments; and
• organisation of short-term teaching and
advisory visits.
The Central Bureau for Educational
Visits and Exchanges, which is now part
of the British Council, administers
teacher exchanges in Europe and the
United States, short courses for language
teachers and international study visits.
Opportunities for young people include
school and class links and English language
summer camps. For the post-16 age group,
there are work placements and English
language assistants’ posts as well as other
exchange programmes.
Association of Commonwealth Universities
The Association of Commonwealth
Universities promotes contact and co¬
operation between hundreds of member
universities in Commonwealth countries or
regions. It assists student and staff mobility
by administering award schemes, and
operates an academic appointments service.
The Association publishes information
about Commonwealth universities, courses
and scholarships, and organises meetings in
different parts of the world.
The arts
The British Council initiates or supports
overseas tours by British theatre companies,
orchestras, choirs, opera and dance
companies and jazz, rock and folk groups,
as well as visits by individual actors,
musicians and artists. The Council also
arranges for directors, designers,
choreographers and conductors to work in
other countries. In addition it organises and
supports fine arts and other exhibitions as
well as British participation in international
exhibitions and film festivals.
Further Reading
Britain in the European Community. Aspects of Britain series, HMSO, 1992.
Britain, NATO and European Security. Aspects of Britain series, HMSO, 1994.
British Council Annual Report.
Departmental Report 1994: The Government’s Expenditure Plans 1994-95 to 1997-98.
Foreign & Commonwealth Office, including Overseas Development Administration.
European Union. Aspects of Britain series, HMSO 1994.
Statement on the Defence Estimates 1994. HMSO, 1994.
131
10 Defence
Introduction 132
The North Atlantic Treaty
Organisation 133
United Kingdom Defence
Policy 134
Nuclear Forces 137
United Kingdom Force
Structures 138
The Armed Forces 139
Administration 13
By April 1995, the strength of the armed forces will be around 120,000 in the
Army, about 70,000 in the RAF and about 51,000 in the Royal Navy. Under
plans outlined in the Defence Costs Study, there will be a net reduction of
just under 19,000 defence jobs by the year 2000—2,200 in the Army, 7,500 in
the RAF, 1,900 in the Royal Navy and 7,100 British-based civil servants.
INTRODUCTION
Britain’s defence policy supports its wider
security policy, which is to maintain the
country’s freedom and territorial integrity
and that of its dependent territories, as well
as its ability to pursue its legitimate interests
at home and abroad.
With the removal of the strategic threat to
Britain as a result of the end of the Cold
War, progress is being made in security¬
building and co-operation with states in
central and eastern Europe. However, the end
of East-West confrontation has been followed
by problems of instability, nationalism and
extremism within Europe and beyond. These
developments are the major factors shaping
defence policy today. Britain and its allies in
the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation
(NATO) have responded to these changes by
adapting their policies and the structure of
their armed forces to meet the defence
requirements of the future.
NATO remains the foundation of Britain’s
defence and security policies. In addition
Britain works to increase security through its
membership of the Western European Union
(WEU), the European Union (EU), the
Conference on Security and Co-operation in
Europe (CSCE) and the United Nations
(UN). These organisations have been
involved in activities such as negotiating an
end to conflicts, peacekeeping deployments
and humanitarian missions.
The current fundamental restructuring of
Britain’s armed forces recognises the need for
flexibility in the face of future uncertainty.
The armed forces are, therefore, equipped
to take part in integrated operations,
ranging from small-scale peacekeeping or
humanitarian missions to large-scale high
intensity conflict. Britain’s nuclear forces
(see p. 137) provide the ultimate guarantee
for its security.
The highest priority continues to be
placed on maximising the cost effectiveness
and military capabilities of the armed
forces. Launched in December 1993, the
Defence Costs Study (see p. 140) examined
all areas of administration and support to
132
DEFENCE
the front line to ensure that the money
spent contributes directly or indirectly to
fighting capability.
THE NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY
ORGANISATION
NATO has provided Britain’s main means of
defence against a major external threat for the
past 45 years. It is the only security
organisation with the military means to back
up its security guarantees and has
consequently undertaken action on behalf of
the UN. NATO unites the interests of
Europe and North America in the pursuit of
peace, stability and well-being in the whole of
Europe. All Britain’s nuclear forces and most of
its conventional forces are committed to NATO.
NATO is continuing the process of
adaptation started with the 1991 Rome
Declaration and the resulting new Strategic
Concept to allow it to play a wider role in
maintaining stability throughout Europe.
January 1994 NATO Summit
The January 1994 NATO Summit marked an
important step in the Alliance’s post-Cold
War evolution. It launched a major initiative
called Partnership for Peace, which seeks to
deepen political and military ties between
NATO and the central and eastern European
countries in areas such as peacekeeping and
humanitarian operations.
Partnership for Peace has been generally
welcomed and supported. Over 20 states have
already signed, including Russia, almost all
the central and eastern European states,
Sweden and Finland, and most of the central
Asian and Trans-Caucasian states of the
former Soviet Union.
In addition to its work within NATO on
Partnership for Peace, Britain has signed
formal Memoranda of Understanding on
bilateral defence contacts with Albania,
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Russia, Slovakia and the Ukraine. Similar
agreements have recently been reached with
Belarus and Slovenia. The Memoranda are
designed to promote stability in central and
eastern Europe, exchange military information
and encourage co-operation on defence
equipment. Britain provides advice on
civil-military relations, including democratic
control and accountability, and defence
budgeting and management. These contacts
are complementary to those within NATO.
The 1994 NATO Summit also:
• committed the Alliance to continued
adaptation of its political and military
structures in order to reflect all its roles
and the development of the emerging
European security and defence identity;
• endorsed the concept of joint task forces
which will allow a flexible and effective
response to a broad range of missions
and for the inclusion of non-NATO
forces and operations under WEU
auspices;
• reaffirmed that the Alliance remains open
to the membership of other European
countries; and
• declared NATO’s intentions to intensify
its efforts against the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.
NATO Force Structures
The size, availability and deployment of
NATO forces continue to reflect the
Alliance’s defensive nature. Current NATO
strategy involves:
• deployment in Europe of smaller and
highly mobile forces;
• a move away from the concept of forward
presence;
• a reduced reliance on nuclear weapons;
• the scaling back of the state of readiness
of allied armed forces; and
• a reduction in training requirements and
exercises.
NATO’s Strategic Concept recognises that
the far-reaching changes in the strategic
setting, together with the growth of new
risks to international order and stability,
require an active response from the Alliance.
While the primary role of Alliance military
forces remains to guarantee the security
and territorial integrity of its members,
force levels are being reduced and
133
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
restructured while missions are being
broadened. Force structures comprising
reaction, main defence and augmentation
forces have been established and are intended
to be mutually supporting.
NATO Command Structures
The NATO command structure has been
adapted to the changing environment. At the
highest level, the number of Commands
has been cut back from three to two—
Allied Command Europe and Allied
Command Atlantic.
There have been considerable
modifications in Allied Command Europe. Of
importance to Britain is the formation of
Allied Forces North West Europe, which
incorporates the land mass of Britain and
Norway, the United Kingdom air defence
region and the North Sea; formed in July
1994, it is commanded from headquarters at
RAF High Wycombe, in Buckinghamshire.
UNITED KINGDOM DEFENCE
POLICY
Defence Roles and Military Tasks
British defence policy is defined in terms of
overlapping Defence Roles One, Two and
Three, which are to:
• ensure the protection and security of
Britain and its dependent territories, even
when there is no major external threat;
• insure against any major external threat
to Britain and its allies; and
• contribute to promoting Britain’s wider
security interests through the
maintenance of international peace and
stability.
Within these three defence roles are 50
military tasks which define the military
activities to be undertaken by the Ministry of
Defence and the armed forces in order to
give effect to defence and security policy.
Britain and Its Dependencies
The armed forces continue to have
day-to-day responsibility for safeguarding
Britain’s territory, airspace and territorial
waters. They also provide for the security
and reinforcement, as necessary, of the
dependent territories and, when required,
support for the civil authority.
Maritime Defence
The Royal Navy ensures the integrity of
British territorial waters and the protection of
British rights and interests in the
surrounding seas. The maintenance of a 24-
hour-a-day, year-round presence in
British waters provides considerable
reassurance to merchant ships and other
mariners. The Royal Air Force (RAF) also
contributes to maritime requirements; the
Nimrod MR2 force, in particular, provides
invaluable surveillance of surface and sub¬
surface vessels.
Land Defence
By 1995 it is planned to have 24 regular
infantry battalions earmarked for activities in
Defence Role One. These will be augmented
by the Territorial Army. Tasks include
contributing to national and NATO nuclear
forces and maintaining the security of the
dependent territories.
Air Defence
Air defence of Britain and the surrounding
seas is maintained by a system of layered
defences. Continuous radar cover is provided
by the Improved United Kingdom Air
Defence Ground Environment (IUKADGE),
supplemented by the NATO Airborne Early
Warning Force, to which the RAF
contributes six E-3D aircraft. The RAF also
provides six squadrons of all-weather
Tornado F3 air defence aircraft, supported
by tanker aircraft and, in wartime, an
additional F3 squadron and armed Hawk
trainer aircraft. Royal Navy air defence
destroyers are also linked to the IUKADGE,
providing radar and electronic warfare
coverage and surface-to-air missiles. Ground-
launched Rapier missiles defend the main
RAF bases. Naval aircraft also contribute to
British air defence.
134
DEFENCE
Overseas Garrisons
Britain maintains garrisons in Hong Kong,
Gibraltar, the Sovereign Base Areas of Cyprus
and the Falkland Islands. The Hong Kong
garrison is being reduced in stages until 1997,
when the territory will revert to Chinese
sovereignty (see p. 115). Gibraltar provides
headquarters and communications facilities
for NATO in the western Mediterranean and
Cyprus acts as a base for operations in the
Middle East and North Africa.
British forces are stationed in the Falkland
Islands to deter possible aggression from
Argentina, which maintains its claim to the
Islands (see p. 115).
Northern Ireland
The armed forces continue to provide
support to the Royal Ulster Constabulary
(RUC) in the fight against terrorism. There
are currently 18 Army infantry units,
including six battalions of the Home Service
element of the Royal Irish Regiment. The
Royal Navy patrols territorial waters around
Northern Ireland and its inland waterways in
order to deter and intercept the movement of
terrorist weapons and personnel. The Royal
Marines provide troops to meet Navy and
Army commitments, while RAF helicopters
provide support to ground forces.
The armed forces’ operations meet
requirements set by the RUC. The majority
of operations are carried out jointly with the
RUC, for example, setting up vehicle check
points and providing escorts for police mobile
patrols and foot patrols to guard police
officers to enable them to carry out their
duties in safety. The Army also provides
specialist skills in bomb disposal, helicopter
support and search.
Since the ceasefire announcement by the
Provisional IRA on 31 August 1994
(see p. 14), the armed forces have continued
their support for the RUC. Although the
frequency of patrols has remained the same,
the security forces have reduced their
profile in line with the reduction in terrorist
threat; for example, they wear berets
instead of helmets and helicopter activity
has declined.
Other Tasks
Other Defence Role One tasks include the
provision of:
• military support to the machinery of
government in war;
• military assistance to civil ministries,
including assistance to maintain the
essentials of life in the community and
carrying out work of national importance;
• military aid to the civil community in
emergencies and in routine situations;
• military search and rescue;
• military intelligence and surveillance;
• physical protection and security; and
• state ceremonial and routine public
duties.
Britain and Its Allies
This second major defence role is discharged
through Britain’s membership of NATO.
Maritime Forces
Most Royal Navy ships are committed to
NATO. Permanent contributions are made to
NATO’s standing naval forces in the
Atlantic, the English Channel and the
Mediterranean. The main components of the
Fleet consist of:
• three aircraft carriers operating Sea
Harrier aircraft and Sea King anti¬
submarine warfare helicopters;
• 35 destroyers and frigates;
• 12 nuclear-powered attack submarines;
and
• amphibious forces, including two assault
ships and a helicopter carrier which is
currently under construction.
Land Forces
The multinational Allied Command Europe
Rapid Reaction Corps (ARRC) is the key
land component of NATO’s rapid reaction
forces and is scheduled to be fully operational
by 1995. The Alliance invited Britain to be
135
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the lead nation of the Corps, recognising that
its substantial professional forces, wide
range of capabilities and recent operational
experience made it well placed to assume
this role.
Modified RAF Tornado GR1 aircraft
(designated GRlb), equipped with the
Sea Eagle missile, have assumed the
maritime attack role previously
undertaken by Buccaneer aircraft.
The introduction into service of the
Tornado GRlb force will be
completed in 1995. The RAF will
continue to provide Nimrod maritime
patrol aircraft and search and rescue
helicopters.
Britain is providing the Corps
headquarters and an armoured division
based in Germany in peacetime. In addition,
it is providing a second, more lightly
armoured division, based in Britain and
comprising two mechanised brigades and an
airborne brigade. An airmobile brigade, also
based in Britain, will join one of the two
multinational divisions in the Corps. Some
55,000 regular British soldiers will be
assigned to ARRC, together with a substantial
number of Territorial Army (see p. 139) and
individual reservists.
Air Forces
The RAF makes a major contribution to
NATO’s Immediate and Rapid Reaction
Forces. In all around 100 fixed wing aircraft
and 40 helicopters are allocated to support
these Reaction Forces. Tornado F3 and
Rapier surface-to-air missiles form part of the
Supreme Allied Commander Europe’s
Immediate Reaction Force, while Harrier,
Tornado GR1 and GRla provide offensive
support and tactical reconnaissance to the
Rapid Reaction Force. Chinook and Puma
helicopters provide troop airlift facilities for
the ARRC (see above) or other deployed land
forces. Tornado F3 and Tornado GRlb
aircraft provide air defence or anti-surface
attack in support of NATO’s maritime
reaction forces.
Since 1991, the number of RAF squadrons
in Germany has been reduced to four
Tornado GR1 strike/attack squadrons, two
Harrier offensive support squadrons and a
Puma/Chinook support helicopter squadron
at RAF Bruggen and RAF Laarbruch. It is
intended that RAF Laarbruch will close in
1999, subject to consultation with the
German authorities; the two Harrier
squadrons and the support helicopters
currently based there will be withdrawn to
existing air bases in Britain. The four
squadrons of Tornados, however, will remain
at RAF Bruggen. These aircraft and
personnel, alongside the continuing and
significant Army presence in Germany, are a
visible sign of Britain’s continuing
commitment to the defence of Europe.
Other Forces
Britain contributes to NATO’s maritime
augmentation forces. These will be held at
the lowest state of readiness and in peacetime
comprise ships mainly in routine refit or
maintenance. It also contributes special forces
to support reaction and main defence force
deployments for surveillance, reconnaissance,
offensive action and military assistance
operations. The United Kingdom Amphibious
Force, together with its Dutch counterpart, is
assigned to the Supreme Allied Commander
Atlantic for the reinforcement of Norway and
could be deployed by the Supreme Allied
Commander Europe, for example, with the
ARRC. The Force is also a candidate for a
range of WEU operations. Assisting these
forces are RAF fighter aircraft and a
strengthened air transport force.
Wider Security Interests
Military tasks within Defence Role Three are
carried out to promote Britain’s wider security
interests. They may be undertaken unilaterally
or multilaterally with support from NATO or
directly for UN or CSCE operations.
United Nations Operations
Britain remains a major contributor to UN
operations. Contingents are currently
136
DEFENCE
deployed in former Yugoslavia (see below),
Cyprus, Iraq/Kuwait and Georgia; Britain
has previously deployed contingents in
Cambodia, the Western Sahara and Rwanda.
The British manpower contribution to the
UN force in Cyprus has been reduced by 50
per cent since 1992, although Britain remains
the largest contributor.
Former Yugoslavia
Britain continues to make a substantial
contribution to the UN Protection Force
(UNPROFOR) in the former Yugoslavia,
with over 3,300 ground troops deployed,
including two infantry battalions, in central
Bosnia as part of the humanitarian and
peacekeeping mission. Another 3,000 Service
personnel are deployed in the Adriatic; these
include a Carrier Task group available to
reinforce the two battalions if required and
Royal Navy ships which contribute to joint
NATO/WEU operations designed to enforce
the UN arms embargo against the former
Yugoslavia and trade sanctions against Serbia
and Montenegro, supported by RAF
maritime patrol aircraft. In addition, RAF
Jaguars in Italy, together with Royal Navy
Sea Harriers on the aircraft carrier, are
available if needed to provide close support to
UNPROFOR troops. RAF early warning
aircraft, with Tornado F3s and their
air-to-air refuelling support, continue
operations to enforce the UN no-fly zone
over Bosnia.
Other Operational Deployments
Royal Navy ships of the Armilla Patrol
continue to provide reassurance and
assistance to entitled merchant shipping in
the Gulf area and regularly participate in
maritime exercises with navies of Gulf states
and coalition allies. The Patrol has conducted
interception and boarding operations to
ensure that ships do not breach UN sanctions
on Iraq (see p. 122); these operations ceased
in August 1994.
The number of operations against
trafficking in illicit drugs has increased in
recent years, especially in the Caribbean,
where the West Indies Guardship and other
Royal Navy ships work closely with the
authorities of the United States, the
Dependent Territories and the Regional
Security System to combat drug trafficking.
Primary responsibility for this work rests
with other government departments but the
armed forces assist where this can be done
without detriment to the performance of
other military tasks.
British Garrisons
A British garrison is maintained in Brunei at
the request of the Brunei Government. The
withdrawal of the British garrison in Belize,
originally maintained to deter and, if
necessary, defend against, possible
Guatemalan aggression, was completed at the
end of September 1994. This was made
possible by Guatemalan recognition of Belize
as a sovereign and independent state in 1991
and the establishment of diplomatic relations
between the two countries. However, a
British military presence will be maintained
in Belize in the form of the British Army
Training Support Unit, Belize, which is
geared to provide training (jungle,
conventional and adventure) to deployments
from Britain from October 1994.
Military Assistance
During 1993-94, some 4,000 students from
97 countries attended military training
courses in Britain. On 1 January 1994, nearly
400 British Service personnel were on loan in
37 countries, their duties including the
provision of assistance, advice and training
for armed forces. British armed forces also
participated in almost 200 exercises and
training periods in 22 countries outside
Europe in 1993.
NUCLEAR FORCES
The Royal Navy’s independent nuclear
deterrent remains the ultimate guarantee of
Britain’s security. The current submarine-
launched Polaris strategic force is assigned to
NATO but remains at all times under the
control of the British Government; it enables
Britain to provide a second independent
137
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
centre of decision-making within NATO,
thereby enhancing deterrence.
The Polaris force now comprises two
nuclear submarines, each capable of carrying
16 Polaris missiles armed with improved
British nuclear warheads. The Polaris force is
being replaced by four British-built
submarines, each of which will carry Trident
missiles purchased from the United States. A
four-boat force will ensure that one boat is
always at sea, invulnerable to pre-emptive
attack. Trident’s nuclear warheads are
British-designed and built. Two Trident
submarines have been manufactured, with the
first, HMS Vanguard, entering service at the
beginning of the year.
The Government is committed to
maintaining only the minimum deterrent
level required for Britain’s security. Each
Trident submarine will deploy no more than
96 warheads and possibly significantly fewer.
On current plans, the explosive power of
each submarine will not be much changed
from Polaris. When Trident is fully in
service, the explosive power of Britain’s
operational nuclear inventory will be over 25
per cent lower than it was in 1990.
The armed forces also possess sub-
strategic nuclear weapons, which provide a
link between strategic and conventional
forces. Following the end of the Cold War,
Britain has made substantial reductions in
these weapons, including the elimination of
tactical maritime nuclear weapons and a
reduction of over 50 per cent in the stockpile
of WE 177 free-fall nuclear bombs. The
remaining WE 177s are deployed on dual-
capable Tornado aircraft, all of which are
available to NATO. In addition, Britain plans
to exploit the flexibility and capability of
Trident to provide the vehicle for delivery of
its sub-strategic deterrent, once the WE 177
leaves service.
UNITED KINGDOM FORCE
STRUCTURES
Defence Equipment Programme
Modern equipment is essential if one of the
key aims of Britain’s force restructuring
programme is to be achieved, namely that of
increasing the flexibility and mobility of the
armed forces. The successful outcome of the
Defence Costs Study (see p. 140) has enabled
the British Government to preserve the front
line (and its essential operational support)
and to make a number of important
improvements to its capability. Current and
planned front line improvements for the
Royal Navy equipment programme include:
• introduction of Trident submarines to
replace Polaris;
• substantial updating of existing
nuclear-powered submarines and an
invitation to tender for the design and
building of a second batch of Trafalgar
Class submarines;
• a substantially modernised destroyer and
frigate fleet;
• a follow-on batch of 7 Sandown Class
single role minehunters;
• introduction of a new helicopter carrier
to enhance Britain’s amphibious forces;
• 18 new Sea Harrier F/A2 aircraft and
the upgrading of in-service Sea Harriers
to F/A2 standard; and
• invitations to tender for the design and
building of a replacement for the assault
ships Fearless and Intrepid.
The Army front line is being enhanced by:
• Challenger 2 tanks, which are expected to
enter service in 1995;
• a new attack helicopter to replace the
Lynx;
• the Multiple Launch Rocket System and
the AS90 self-propelled howitzer,
replacing Abbot and M-109 guns;
• improved Rapier short-range missiles;
• the new Starstreak high velocity close air
defence missile;
• a new medium-range anti-tank missile;
and
• a new generation of combat radios.
Improvements for the Royal Air Force
include:
• The Eurofighter 2000 from the beginning
of the next century;
• upgrading of the Tornado GR1 aircraft;
138
DEFENCE
• programmes to enhance the RAF’s
inventory of air-launched missiles;
• planned purchase of additional support
helicopters; and
• plans to upgrade or replace the Hercules
Cl30 fleet.
THE ARMED FORCES
Commissioned Ranks
Commissions, either by promotion from the
ranks or by direct entry based on educational
and other qualifications, are granted for short,
medium and long terms. All three Services
have schemes for school, university and
college sponsorships.
Commissioned ranks receive initial
training at the Britannia Royal Naval College,
Dartmouth; the Royal Military Academy,
Sandhurst; or the Royal Air Force College,
Cranwell. This is followed by specialist
training, which may include degree courses at
service establishments or universities.
Higher training for officers is currently
provided by the Royal Naval College and
Joint Services Defence College, Greenwich;
the Army Staff College, Camberley; and the
Royal Air Force Staff College, Bracknell. The
Defence Costs Study (see p. 140) concluded
that courses should be subsumed into a
tri-Service course which will reinforce the
joint approach to the tactical and operational
levels of conflict. As such, the Joint Services
Command and Staff College will be
established in 1997 at either Camberley or
Greenwich. The Higher Command and
Staff Course, currently conducted at
Camberley, will remain as a focus for the
study of the operational level of command,
but will be expanded to 30 students to
increase the joint aspect.
Non-commissioned Ranks
Engagements for non-commissioned ranks
in the Army and the RAF range from
6 months to 22 years; they can be for a
maximum of 37 years in the Royal Navy
and 32 years in the Royal Marines. There
is a wide choice of engagement length
and terms of service. Subject to a
minimum period of service, entrants may
leave at any time, at 18 months’ notice
(12 months for certain engagements).
Discharge may also be granted on
compassionate or medical grounds, by
purchase or on grounds of conscience.
Throughout their Service careers,
non-commissioned personnel receive basic
training supplemented by specialist
training. Study for educational qualifications
is encouraged and Service trade and
technical training lead to nationally
recognised qualifications.
Reserve Forces
Reserve forces are a central component of
Britain’s armed forces. They include
members who become reservists following a
period of regular service (regular reserve);
others are volunteers who train in their
spare time. Volunteer reserve forces include
the Royal Naval Reserve, the Royal
Marines Reserve, the Territorial Army, the
Royal Auxiliary Air Force and the Royal
Air Force Volunteer Reserve. Reserves are
available to support regular forces, either
as units or as individuals, in time of
tension or war. In particular, reserves can
provide skills and units not available or
required in peacetime. Reserves are also a
valuable link between the Services and the
civil community.
In April 1994, regular reserves totalled
around 259,600 and volunteer reserves and
auxiliary forces some 71,100.
ADMINISTRATION
The Defence Budget
The estimated defence budget for 1994—95 is
£22,890 million, with expenditure plans for
1995-96 and 1996-97 of £22,130 million and
£22,230 million respectively. The
Government anticipates a reduction of
around 16 per cent in real terms between
1990-91 and 1996-97, excluding costs of
redundancies and the Gulf War. Britain spent
3.7 per cent of Gross Domestic Product on
defence in 1993; this is expected to fall to 2.9
per cent by 1996-97.
139
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Defence Management
Within the Ministry of Defence, a
civilian-military Defence Staff is responsible
for defence policy and strategy, operational
requirements and commitments. Each
Service Chief of Staff reports through the
Chief of the Defence Staff to the Defence
Secretary on matters related to the
fighting effectiveness, management,
efficiency and morale of his Service. The
management of the three Services is exercised
through the executive committees of their
Service Boards, which are chaired by their
respective Chiefs of Staff and act in
accordance with centrally determined policy
objectives and budgets. The Office of
Management and Budget handles budgets and
resources. Purchase of equipment and spares
is dealt with by the Procurement Executive.
As a result of the Defence Costs Study,
changes are planned in defence management,
under which a head office would be created,
composed of a unified Central Staff and
three small headquarters staffs supporting
the individual Chiefs of Staff; under
these proposals the titles of ‘Office of
Management and Budget’ and ‘Defence Staff
would be abolished.
Since 1991, military and civilian managers
have been given greater responsibility to
determine the most efficient use of their
allocated resources. This approach aims to
promote better value for money and to
provide clear direction and accountability for
local managers. Under Defence Costs Study
proposals, further responsibilities will be
delegated to Commands and budget holders
outside London.
Defence Procurement
About 40 per cent of the defence budget is
spent on military equipment, including the
procurement of spares and associated costs.
The aim is to meet the operational
requirements of the armed forces by
procuring equipment, works and services
from the suppliers offering the best value for
money, taking all relevant factors into
account. When assessing options,
particular consideration is given not just to
the initial procurement cost of a project, but
also to the costs that could be necessary to
support it through its Service life.
Competition is fundamental to obtaining
value for money and takes place wherever
possible. In general, competitions are open to
prime and sub-contractors from overseas.
Britain also seeks to promote the creation of
an open market for defence equipment
within Europe.
International Procurement Collaboration
International collaborative projects are
becoming increasingly important as
equipment development and production costs
increase and defence budgets reduce. Britain
favours such co-operation wherever it makes
economic and military sense by reducing
costs and improving standardisation. It,
therefore, plays an active role in NATO’s
Conference of National Armaments
Directors, which promotes equipment
collaboration between NATO members.
Britain is also a member of the WEU’s
Western European Armaments Group, which
is the main European forum for consultations
about armaments.
Current collaborative programmes
include:
• the Eurofighter 2000 development (with
Germany, Italy and Spain);
• anti-tank guided weapons (with Belgium,
France, Germany and the Netherlands);
• a common new generation frigate (with
France and Italy);
• the Multiple Launch Rocket System
(with the United States, Germany,
France and Italy); and
• the EH 101 helicopter (with Italy).
The Defence Costs Study
The 1993-1994 Defence Costs Study was a
radical and comprehensive examination of all
aspects of support to the front line. Its aims
were to identify support area cost savings
without reducing front line effectiveness.
Twenty major studies and 13 minor ones
were commissioned, covering all aspects of
140
DEFENCE
the Ministry of Defence’s business, other
than the front line itself. In addition to the
key elements dealt with in earlier parts of this
chapter, others include:
• a proposed reorganisation of the
Ministry’s Head Office, involving a
reduction in Head office staff from a
planned level of 5,200 in 1995 to
2,500-2,700 in London in 1998;
• establishment of the Employment
Services Agency as the first point of
contact for suitable candidates for the
armed forces. Potential recruits would
then be sent to regional Defence Careers
Information Offices for more specific
career counselling. This process would
replace the existing network of regional
Service Careers Information Offices;
• further development and streamlining
of contracting methods;
• integration of the five existing defence
telecommunications networks into a
single coherent service and adoption of
a more flexible approach to
information technology and
communications systems procurement;
and
• rationalisation of spares stores and
storage.
The Defence Costs Study succeeded in
identifying ways of saving of some
£750 million a year in 1996-97 and more
thereafter, without reducing Britain’s
fighting capability. There will be no
reduction in the front line and the forward
equipment programme has been protected.
Further Reading
Britain, NATO and European Security. Aspects of Britain series, HMSO, 1994.
The Government's Expenditure Plans 1994-95 to 1996—97. Cm 2501. Departmental Report by the
Ministry of Defence. HMSO 1994.
Defending Our Future: Statement on the Defence Estimates 1993. HMSO, 1993.
Statement on the Defence Estimates 1994. HMSO, 1994.
Front Line First—the Defence Costs Study. HMSO, 1994.
141
Economic
Affairs
11 Economy
National Economy 145
Economic Background 145
Economic Strategy 149
National Income and
Expenditure 151
Public Finance 152
Public Expenditure Terms 154
Control of Public Expenditure 155
Main Sources of Revenue 158
Public Sector Financial
Operations 162
Having emerged from the recent recession, the British economy has been
growing since 1992, with inflation having been brought down to its lowest
level for 25 years. The current economic climate is also characterised by
rising output, falling unemployment, an upward trend in retail sales, an all-
time high level of manufacturing productivity and increased business
confidence. A prime objective of government economic policy is to achieve
sound public finances by exerting tight control over public expenditure.
National Economy
From 1981 to 1989 the British economy
experienced eight years of sustained growth
at an annual average rate of over 3 per cent.
Subsequently, Britain in common with other
major industrialised nations was severely
affected by recession. In 1990 growth in
Britain slowed to 0.6 per cent, and in 1991
gross domestic product (GDP) fell by 2.3 per
cent. GDP rose slightly in the second half of
1992 as economic recovery began. Following
growth of 1.9 per cent during 1993, GDP in
the second quarter of 1994 reached a level
3.8 per cent higher than a year earlier.
The economy is benefiting from low
interest rates: at 5.75 per cent in September
1994, base interest rates are among the lowest
in the European Union (EU).
ECONOMIC BACKGROUND
The economy is primarily based on private
enterprise, and government policy is aimed at
encouraging and expanding the private sector,
which accounts for about 80 per cent of
output and around 75 per cent of employment.
Values for some of the main economic
indicators in selected years since 1983 are
shown in Table 11.1. For further information
see the Statistical Annex on pp. 516-17.
Inflation
During most of the 1950s and the 1960s the
inflation rate in Britain rarely rose above
5 per cent. However, in 1971 inflation
reached double figures, climbing to 27 per
cent in 1975. Contributory factors included
oil price rises in 1973 and increases in the
money supply and public spending. Inflation
fell in the early 1980s and stayed low for a
number of years. However, it picked up
towards the end of the decade and the annual
rate rose to 10.9 per cent in September and
October 1990.
Inflation has declined substantially since
this peak. The Retail Prices Index (RPI—
145
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Table 11.1: Economic Indicators
Gross domestic product
Exports a
Imports"
Consumers’ expenditure"
Gross domestic fixed capital formation
Percentage increase in Retail Prices Index
Workforce in employment (000s)
Percentage of workforce unemployed
1983
1988
1993
440,888
96,689
93,954
261,200
71,845
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
537,215
121,197
137,443
334,591
105,164
4.9
26,128
8.0
548,559
140,386
153,402
348,687
96,611
1.6
25,244
10.4
Sources: United Kingdom National Accounts 1994 Edition; Economic Trends; Employment Gazette.
a£ million at 1990 market prices,
n.a. = not available.
often referred to as ‘headline’ inflation
which measures the change in the price of
goods and services purchased by households
in Britain) fell to 2.4 per cent in August
1994, one of the lowest rates for 25 years and
some way below the EU average.
For the RPI excluding mortgage interest
payments (‘underlying’ inflation), the
annual rate was 2.3 per cent in August 1994,
which is the lowest figure since November
1967 and within the bottom half of the
Government’s target range of 1 to 4 per cent
(see p. 149).
Output
Output has been recovering since the second
half of 1992, both for the economy as a whole
and for manufacturing. GDP rose in the
second quarter of 1994, for the ninth
consecutive quarterly period; it increased by
3.8 per cent year-on-year, the strongest
growth rate since the end of 1988, with
production, construction and service sectors
all showing solid growth. Manufacturing
output in the three months to July 1994
increased by 3.9 per cent, compared with the
same period a year earlier. The Government
forecasts that GDP will rise by 2.75 per cent
during 1994 and 1995.
After the oil price rises of 1973-74,
manufacturing output dropped sharply. It
later increased, but, in the wake of another
oil price rise and stagnation in the world
economy, it fell back again in the late 1970s
and early 1980s. A period of steady growth
occurred until 1990, but output fell
significantly during the recent recession.
Table 11.2: Output and Employment (Indices: 1990 - 100)
Output
Index
1992
Index
1993
Employment"
Index
1992
Index
1993
Agriculture, forestry and fishing
Production industries
of which: Electricity, gas and water
Mining and quarrying
Manufacturing
Construction
Services
GDP
Employees in employment
106.8
95.9
105.6
106.5
94.0
88.2
99.0
97.4
103.5
97.9
109.9
115.0
95.3
87.2
101.3
99.4
92.9
88.3
93.0
83.5
88.1
83.8
98.6
95.3
91.8
84.6
87.0
64.6
85.2
76.8
98.1
93.7
Sources: United Kingdom National Accounts 1994 Edition and Employment Gazette , . ■
‘’Employment figures relate to Great Britain and cover employees in employment at June on a seasonally adjusted ba .
146
ECONOMY
Table 11.3: Gross Domestic Product by Industry
1983
1993
£ million
per cent £ million per cent
Agriculture, hunting, forestry and
fishing 5,429
Electricity, gas and water supply 8,682
Mining and quarrying, including
oil and gas extraction 20,234
Manufacturing 64,738
Construction 15,929
Wholesale and retail trade, repairs,
hotels and restaurants 33,491
Transport, storage and
communications 19,727
Financial and business activities,
real estate and renting 49,645
Public administration, defence and
social security 18,599
Education, health and social work 22,997
Other services 13,752
2.1
3.3
7.7
24.8
6.1
12.8
7.6
19.0
7.1
8.8
5.3
10,373
13,994
12,147
118,294
29,221
78,348
46,263
133,956
38,199
54,457
31,292
GDP at factor cost
261,225
100.0
546,120
1.9
2.6
2.2
21.7
5.4
14.3
8.5
24.5
7.0
10.5
5.7
Total 273,223 104.6 569,544 104.3
Adjustment for financial services - 11,893 ^1.6 — 23,741 —4.3
Statistical discrepancy -105 — 317 —
100.0
Source: United Kingdom National Accounts 1994 Edition
‘’Before provision for depreciation but after deducting stock appreciation.
Note: Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
Largely as a result of exploitation of North
Sea oil and gas, energy output in 1986 was
about twice the level of ten years earlier. Oil
output passed its peak of the mid-1980s and
fell back until 1992, when it increased by
about 3 per cent; in 1993 recovery was even
stronger, with a 6 per cent rise.
Recent decades have generally seen the
fastest growth in the services sector. Services
account for around 65 per cent of GDP,
compared with about 50 per cent in 1950.
Manufacturing contributes less than 25 per
cent of GDP, compared with over a third in
1950. Table 11.2 compares output and
employment in 1992 and 1993, and Table 11.3
compares GDP by industry in 1983 and 1993.
Productivity
Growth in manufacturing output per head in
Britain in the 1980s was faster than in all
other leading industrialised countries: between
1980 and 1990 it increased by an average of
4.6 per cent a year. In the three months to
July 1994, it was at a record level, up
4.8 per cent on a year earlier following a
3.8 per cent increase in 1993. Output per
head in the whole economy rose by
3.2 per cent in 1993.
Investment
From 1983 until 1989 fixed investment
increased by about 8 per cent a year on
average, with particularly rapid growth of
over 10 per cent a year between 1986 and
1988. With the recession, investment
declined between 1990 and 1992, but
during 1993 it rose by 0.4 per cent and by
4.5 per cent in the second quarter of 1994,
compared with a year earlier.
Over the decade 1980-90 the private
sector’s share of fixed investment grew from
73 to 84 per cent, due in part to
147
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
privatisation (see pp. 195—6). In the same
period, there was a rise in the share of
investment undertaken by the services sector
and a fall in that carried out by
manufacturing.
An improvement in the quality of
investment contributed to a rise in the late
1980s in the net real rate of return on capital
employed in non-oil industrial and
commercial companies to the highest levels
for 20 years. Profitability declined in 1990
and 1991, but there was a recovery in 1992,
when net profitability amounted to 7 per
cent. Corporate earnings continued to
recover in 1993, when net profitability
reached 8 per cent. Table 11.4 shows
investment by industrial sector.
Employment
The workforce in employment fell by around
2 million in the early 1990s following an
increase of over 3 million between 1983 and
June 1990. With the economic recovery,
there are signs that employment levels have
stabilised at an earlier stage than in
previous cycles.
Unemployment had also increased during
the early 1990s, and it reached nearly
3 million on a seasonally adjusted basis in
late 1992. Since then unemployment has
fallen by 376,000 and in August 1994 it was
2.6 million—9.2 per cent of the workforce—
the lowest for over two years (see p. 176).
Overseas Trade
Britain has an open economy in which
international trade plays a vital part. The
Government welcomed the successful
outcome of the Uruguay round of multilateral
trade negotiations held under the auspices of
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(see p. 170). The share of GDP accounted
for by exports of goods and services has
increased from around 20 per cent in the
early 1960s to 25 per cent. Similar rises have
occurred in most other developed countries,
reflecting the growing importance of
international trade in an increasingly
interdependent world economy.
Britain is a major exporter of aerospace
products, electrical and electronic equipment,
chemicals, oil and many types of machinery.
It is also one of the world’s largest importers
of agricultural products, raw materials and
semi-manufactures. For the last 11 years
Britain has had a deficit on visible trade. In
1993 it stood at more than £13,000 million
on a seasonally adjusted basis, reflecting in
part weakness in Britain’s key overseas
markets. However, non-oil exports are now
showing firm growth: in the three months to
June 1994 they were up by 10 per cent
compared with a year previously.
Substantial net earnings on invisible
transactions kept the current account of the
balance of payments in surplus in most years
up to 1986, but it has been in deficit since
Table 11.4: Gross Domestic Fixed Capital Formation (Investment) by Sector 1993
£ million £ million Index
at market at 1990 at 1990 prices
prices prices (1990 = 100)
Agriculture, hunting, forestry and fishing 1,174
Mining and quarrying, including oil
and gas extraction 5,092
Electricity, gas and water 6,084
Manufacturing 12,165
Construction 812
Services 46,446
Dwellings 19,467
Transfer costs 3,475
Whole economy  94,715
1,142
5,693
6,211
10,989
745
48,809
19,238
3,784
96,611
83.5
121.1
131.0
77.2
77.2
87.3
89.7
88.9
89.8
Source: United Kingdom National Accounts 1994 Edition.
A 48
ECONOMY
then. The contribution made by invisibles to
the current account partly reflects Britain’s
position as a major financial centre. The
surplus on invisibles was £2,800 million in
1993, although this is at a lower level than
in the mid-1980s. In 1993 exports of
services were valued at around 30 per cent
of exports of goods.
Membership of the EU has had a major
impact on Britain’s pattern of trade. Between
1972 and 1993 the share of Britain’s exports
of goods going to other members of the
Union rose from 33 to 53 per cent. Imports
followed a similar trend, growing from 36 to
50 per cent. Trade with the People’s
Republic of China and Japan, as well as with
the newly industrialised countries, including
Singapore, Korea, Taiwan and Malaysia, has
also risen significantly.
Inward Investment
Britain is recognised as an attractive location
for inward direct investment and 13,000
overseas companies are currently operating
in Britain, including more than 3,500 from
the United States, over 1,000 from Germany
and 200 from Japan. This reflects its
membership of the EU and proximity to
other European markets, its stable labour
relations and comparatively low personal and
corporate taxation. Overseas-owned firms
are offered the same incentives as British-
owned ones.
In recent years Britain has attracted the
greatest share of inward investment into the
European Union, including more than
40 per cent of Japanese investment and
almost 40 per cent of US investment.
Furthermore, it is second only to the United
States as a destination for international
direct investment.
Energy
With the exploitation of oil and natural gas
from the Continental Shelf under the
North Sea, Britain is self-sufficient in
energy in net terms and expects to remain
so for some years. In 1993 it was the
world’s tenth largest oil producer and the
extraction of oil and gas accounted for some
4 per cent of GDP, while crude oil and
petroleum products accounted for 7 per cent
of visible exports.
The benefits to the balance of payments
began to appear in the second half of the
1970s and in 1980 Britain had its first surplus
on oil trade. Exports, mainly to other EU
countries, are equivalent to over half of
domestic oil production. They are partly
offset in balance-of-payments terms by
imports of other grades of crude oil from the
Middle East and elsewhere.
ECONOMIC STRATEGY
The Government’s policy is to ensure
sustainable economic growth through low
inflation and sound public finances.
Following the suspension in 1992 of sterling’s
membership of the exchange rate mechanism
(ERM) of the European Monetary System,
the Government set out a new policy
framework for its counter-inflation strategy.
This includes a target of keeping underlying
inflation within a range of 1 to 4 per cent,
bringing it down to the lower part of this
range by the end of the present Parliament.
The Government’s economic policy is set
in the context of a medium-term financial
strategy, which is reviewed each year. Within
this strategy, monetary and fiscal policies are
designed to defeat inflation. Short-term
interest rates remain the essential instrument
of monetary policy. Fiscal policy is set over
a medium-term horizon to support
monetary policy.
Macroeconomic policy is directed towards
keeping down the rate of inflation as the basis
for sustainable growth, while microeconomic
policies seek to improve the working of
markets and encourage enterprise, efficiency
and flexibility through measures such as
privatisation, deregulation and tax reforms
(see below).
Monetary Policy
Monetary policy is aimed at achieving the
Government’s objectives for inflation.
Monetary policy takes time to influence
inflation: hence, interest rate decisions are
based on an assessment of the prospects for
149
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
underlying inflation in 12 to 24 months’ time.
That assessment is based on a range of
monetary indicators and other data. The main
monetary indicators are the growth of
‘narrow money’, as measured by MO, and
‘broad money’, M4.1 Medium-term target
ranges have been set at 0 to 4 per cent for
MO and 3 to 9 per cent for M4.
Movements in the exchange rate and asset
prices, especially house prices, are also
taken into account.
The Government’s view is that re-entry
into the ERM cannot be considered until
there has been greater convergence between
the monetary policy requirements of all EU
economies and the Government is satisfied
that the system will be operated to the
benefit of all its members. It will not
consider rejoining the ERM in the foreseeable
future.
Fiscal Policy
The objectives of the Government’s fiscal
policy are to ensure sound public finances,
return the budget towards balance by the end
of the decade, and reduce the share of public
expenditure in national income. The deficit is
expected to fall as the economy continues to
recover; the tax measures in the March and
November 1993 Budgets, combined with
tight control of public expenditure, will
reinforce this trend.
Within the overall policy of moving
towards a balanced budget over the medium
term, the Government aims to reduce taxes
when possible so as to leave people with more
of their own money. The basic rate of
income tax has been cut from 33 to 25 per
cent, and a new lower rate of income tax of
20 per cent now applies on the first £3,000
of taxable income.
Supply-side Policies
While macroeconomic policy is directed
towards ensuring sustainable growth through
1 MO is notes and cash in circulation with the public and banks’
holdings of cash and their operational balances at the Bank of
England. M4 is notes and cash in circulation with the public
together with all sterling deposits held with banks and building
societies by the rest of the private sector.
low inflation and sound public finances, the
Government has sought to improve the
supply response, and thus the efficiency, of
the economy through microeconomic
policies. Action has been taken to expose
more of the economy to market forces.
Direct controls—for example, on pay, prices,
foreign exchange, dividend payments and
commercial credit—have been abolished and
competition in domestic markets
strengthened.
Steps have been taken to reduce
regulatory burdens on business and to
reduce the number of administrative
obstacles facing small firms and self-
employed people (see p. 196). Where there is
evidence of market failure, particular efforts
have been made to improve the flow of
investment funds to small firms, assist
innovation in industry and attract industry to
the inner cities. Measures have been
implemented to encourage saving and share
ownership.
Two new tax-free investments have
helped to encourage wider share
ownership and saving:
• Personal Equity Plans (PEPs),
which allow investment in shares,
unit trusts and investment trusts.
Up to £9,000 a year can be
invested by each person: £6,000 in
a general PEP and £3,000 in a
single company PEP. Nearly 2.9
million general PEPs have been
opened since the scheme started
in 1987, involving investment of
£9,260 million. In 1992-93, 770,000
general PEPs and 140,000 single
company PEPs were opened.
• TESSAs (Tax Exempt Special
Savings Accounts), which provide
tax relief to encourage small
savers. They allow investment
with a bank or building society
of up to £9,000 over five years.
Nearly 3.9 million TESSAs have
been opened since the
introduction of the scheme in
1991, with a value of over
£13,000 million.
150
ECONOMY
A White Paper issued in May 1994,
designed to improve business competitiveness,
contains over 60 new measures, many
relating to improving education and training
and the performance of small businesses
(see p. 197).
A substantial number of activities have
been transferred from the public sector to the
private sector by privatisation and contracting
out. In addition, the Government is seeking
greater efficiency and value for money in the
public sector through market testing and
competitive tendering, efficiency reviews and
scrutinies, and better financial management.
Labour Market
The Government has sought to improve work
incentives by reducing personal income tax
rates, raising tax thresholds and reforming the
benefits system. It has also, through the tax
system, encouraged the extension of share
ownership among employees. A scheme of
income tax relief has been introduced to
encourage the spread of profit-related pay.
The Government has taken steps to achieve a
more balanced legal framework for industrial
relations. It has expanded training
opportunities and put in place a new training
framework, with a greater role for employers,
so that training better reflects local needs.
Obstacles to the mobility of labour have also
been reduced.
Economic Management
HM Treasury has prime responsibility for the
formulation and conduct of economic policy,
which it carries out in conjunction with the
Bank of England (the central bank) and the
Departments of Trade and Industry,
Employment, the Environment, Transport,
and the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries
and Food. The Bank of England is now
responsible for deciding the precise timing of
interest rate changes following the Governor
of the Bank of England’s monthly meeting
with the Chancellor of the Exchequer, who
continues to make policy decisions about
whether to change rates.
Several other bodies deal with specific
aspects of economic policy and the
regulation of certain sectors of the economy.
These include bodies such as the Office of
Fair Trading and the Monopolies and
Mergers Commission.
On major matters of public policy, such as
the broad economic strategy, and on the
economic problems it faces, the Government
makes known its policies and keeps in touch
with developments throughout the economy
by means of informal and continuous links
with the chief industrial, financial and
other interests. Final responsibility for the
broad lines of economic policy rests with
the Cabinet.
To assist in the process of economic
forecasting, the Government set up a Panel
of Independent Forecasters in 1992. The
Panel publishes a full range of forecasts on
the main economic indicators.
NATIONAL INCOME AND
EXPENDITURE
The value of all goods and services produced
in the economy is measured by GDP. This
may be expressed either in terms of market
prices (the prices people pay for the goods
and services they buy) or at factor cost (the
cost of the goods and services before adding
taxes and subtracting subsidies). It can also
be expressed in current prices or in constant
prices (that is, removing the effects of
inflation to measure the volume of growth in
the economy). In 1993 GDP at current factor
cost totalled £546,120 million. Between 1983
and 1993 the index of GDP at constant factor
cost increased by 24 per cent.
Table 11.5 gives figures for GDP, at both
current market prices and current factor cost.
It also shows the components of two other
main aggregates, gross national product and
national income.
Table 11.6 shows the categories of total
final expenditure in 1993. Consumers’
expenditure accounted for one-half of total
final expenditure, and exports of goods and
services for nearly one-fifth.
Personal Incomes and Expenditure
Personal disposable income consists of
personal incomes after deductions—mainly
151
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Table 11.5: Gross Domestic Product, Gross National Product and National Income
£ million £ million
1983
1993
Total final expenditure 382,775
less imports of goods and services -77,588
GDP at market prices 304,456
plus net property income from abroad 2,830
Gross national product at market prices 307,286
less factor cost adjustment (taxes less subsidies) ^13,231
GDP at factor cost 261,225
Net property income from abroad 2,830
Gross national product at factor cost 264,055
less capital consumption —36,150
National income (net national product at factor cost) 227,905
796,380
-166,266
630,023
3,062
633,085
- 83,903
546,120
3,062
549,182
- 65,023
484,159
Source: United Kingdom National Accounts 1994 Edition
Note: Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
taxation and social security contributions.
This rose fairly steadily from
£205,511 million in 1983 to £462,178 million
at current prices in 1993. Personal
disposable income in 1993 was 5 per cent
higher in real terms than in 1992.
Consumers’ expenditure amounted to
87.8 per cent of post-tax personal income
in 1993, compared with 87.2 per cent in
1992.
Consumers’ expenditure rose by 2.6 per
cent in real terms between 1992 and 1993.
Table 11.7 shows the changing pattern of
consumers’ expenditure between 1983 and
1993. Declining proportions are being spent
on food, tobacco, clothing and footwear,
and fuel and power. Over the longer term,
as incomes rise, people tend to spend
increasing proportions on services.
Spending on leisure pursuits and tourism,
health and financial services have all
shown significant growth in recent years.
Housing, food, alcoholic drink, clothing and
footwear, and fuel and power together
accounted for about 42 per cent of the total
in 1993.
The ratio of savings to personal
disposable income declined substantially
during the 1980s, from a peak of 13.4 per
cent in 1980 to 5.7 per cent in 1988.
However, since then it has more than
doubled to 12.8 per cent in 1992, before
falling to 12.2 per cent in 1993.
Sources of Income
The proportion of total personal pre-tax
income accounted for by income from
employment was 61 per cent in 1993; average
gross weekly earnings in April 1994 in Great
Britain were £362 for full-time male workers
and £262 for full-time female workers. The
three other main sources of personal income
were self-employment (11 per cent), rent,
dividends and interest (12 per cent), and
social security benefits and other current
grants from government (15 per cent).
Public Finance
Public expenditure covers expenditure by
both central and local government. Central
government expenditure includes money
spent on goods and services, and in payments
to people, for example, social security and
pensions.
General government expenditure (see
p. 154) is expected to be over £290,000
million in 1994-95 (see Table 11.8). The
Government’s policy is to maintain tight
control of public spending, so that general
government expenditure as a share of
GDP declines.
The diagram on p. 157 shows the main
categories of expenditure, together with the
main sources of revenue. The government
departments with the largest spending
programmes are:
152
ECONOMY
Table 11.6: Total Final Expenditure in 1993 at Market Prices
£ million
per cent
Consumers’ expenditure
General government final consumption
Gross domestic fixed capital formation
Value of physical increase in stocks and
work in progress
Total domestic expenditure
Exports of goods and services
Total final expenditure
405,639
138,224
94,715
-197
638,381
157,999
796,380
50.9
17.4
11.9
80.2
19.8
100.0
Source: United Kingdom National Accounts 1994 Edition
• the Department of Social Security
(with expenditure of £67,600 million in
1993-94, excluding cyclical social
security);
• the Department of the Environment
(£39,430 million, of which £29,350
million was on local government);
• the Department of Health (£30,120
million); and
• the Ministry of Defence (£23,440
million).
The tough controls on public expenditure
mean that savings are being sought in all
areas. Savings have been made in a number of
areas, such as defence, housing, transport and
social security. Nevertheless, additional
resources are being devoted to priority areas,
including health and education.
Education accounts for about 40 per cent
of local authority spending; law and order,
housing and other environmental services,
personal social services, social security,
and roads and transport take up most of
the remainder.
General government expenditure
(excluding privatisation proceeds), as a
proportion of gross domestic product
(GDP), fell from over 47 per cent in
1982-83 to under 40 per cent in 1989-90.
The recent recession led to a rise in the
Table 11.7: Consumers’ Expenditure in 1983 and 1993 at Market Prices
1983
1993
per cent per cent £ million
Food (household expenditure)
Alcoholic drink
Tobacco
Clothing and footwear
Housing
Fuel and power
Household goods and services
Transport and communications
Recreation, entertainment and education
Other goods and services
Other items'*
Total
15.1
7.1
3.3
6.5
15.1
5.0
6.5
17.5
9.2
13.5
1.0
100.0
11.4
6.0
2.7
5.7
15.4
3.6
6.4
17.2
10.0
19.4
2.2
46,327
24,395
10,829
23,322
62,316
14,618
26,160
69,624
40,537
78,521
8,991
100.0 405,639
Source: United Kingdom National Accounts 1994 Edition
Household expenditure overseas plus final expenditure by private non-profit-making bodies, minus expenditure by foreign
tourists in Britain.
Note: Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
153
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Table 11.8: Public Expenditure Plans
1994—95
£ thousand million
1995-96 1996-97
Central government expenditure
Local authority expenditure
Financing requirements of nationalised industries
Reserve
172.9
71.7
3.2
3.5
179.9
73.7
2.4
7.0
184.4
75.6
1.9
10.5
Control total
251.3
263.0
272.3
Cyclical social security
Central government debt interest
Accounting adjustments 
General government expenditure,
excluding privatisation proceeds
Privatisation proceeds 
14.6
22.4
8.9
297.1
-5.5
15.2
24.5
9.8
312.4
-2.5
16.0
25.5
11.0
325.2
-1.0
General government expenditure
291.6
309.9
324.2
Source: HM Treasury.
“A number of adjustments are needed to relate the Government’s forecast for public expenditure
general government expenditure.
Note: Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
to the broader concepts of
ratio, to 45 per cent in 1993-94, but it is
forecast to decline to 42.5 per cent by
1996-97.
Between 1987-88 and 1990-91 the public
sector was in surplus so that the Government
repaid debt. The Public Sector Borrowing
Requirement (PSBR) rose rapidly during the
early 1990s, largely reflecting the impact of
the recession, and in 1993—94 amounted to
£46,000 million, 7.25 per cent of GDP. The
PSBR is forecast to fall to £36,000 million in
1994—95 (see Table 11.9), 5.25 per cent of
GDP. Tight control over public expenditure
and fiscal measures announced in the March
and November 1993 Budgets are intended to
reinforce the tendency of the PSBR to fall
further as the economy recovers, so that the
PSBR should be close to zero by 1998-99.
Private Finance Initiative
The private finance initiative was launched in
1992. Its aim is to get the public and private
sectors working together more effectively by
mobilising the private sector to become
involved in the provision of capital assets and
the supply of services traditionally regarded
as being exclusively handled by the public
sector. The initiative follows on from
privatisation, market testing and contracting
out. It reflects the shift in the role of the
public sector from a provider to a purchaser
of services. This should lead, the
Government believes, to projects being better
designed and managed. The total estimated
value of projects which the Government
currently expects to proceed under the
initiative is over £6,000 million. Examples
include the Channel Tunnel Rail Link (see
p. 293), the upgrading of the West Coast
main line railway between London and
Glasgow (see p. 291), two new prisons (see
p. 97) and a wide variety of health projects.
The Government has set up the Private
Finance Panel (containing high-level
representatives from the public and private
sectors) to encourage greater participation in
the initiative and seek solutions to any
problems which might arise.
PUBLIC EXPENDITURE TERMS
The three main public expenditure totals are
general government expenditure, the ‘control
total’ and Supply expenditure.
General Government Expenditure
General government expenditure, excluding
privatisation proceeds, is the total spending of
154
ECONOMY
Table 11.9: Projected Public Expenditure, Receipts and Borrowing Requirement
£ thousand million
1993-94
(provisional outturn)
General government expenditure 278.9
of which: public expenditure control total 242.7
1994—95 1995-96
General government receipts
of which: taxes
social security contributions
232.3
175.5
38.8
291.6
251.3
254.3
194.1
42.9
309.9
263.0
280.7
217.7
45.7
Public sector borrowing requirement (PSBR)
46.0
36.1
27.9
PSBR as percentage of GDP
7.25
5.25
Source: Summer Economic Forecast 1994
central and local government, including
central government support for nationalised
industries and other public corporations. It is
the key public spending aggregate and is used
in the medium-term financial strategy (see
p. 156), where public spending is set in the
context of broader economic policy. As it is
usually less affected by institutional
differences, it is considered as the most
appropriate measure for making international
comparisons.
Control Total
The control total is used by the Government
for the purposes of planning and control. The
Government seeks to achieve its wider
medium-term objective—expressed in terms
of general government expenditure
excluding privatisation proceeds—by
controlling spending within this total. The
control total includes:
• expenditure for which central government
is itself responsible;
• the support it provides or approves for
local authority expenditure;
• local authority self-financed expenditure;
• the external financing requirements of
public corporations, including
nationalised industries; and
• a reserve to cover unanticipated
expenditure.
It excludes the items of expenditure most
affected by the economic cycle—debt interest
and cyclical social security. By excluding
these items, the Government is able to set
firm limits on the growth of the control total.
Supply Expenditure
Supply expenditure is financed out of money
voted by Parliament in the Supply Estimates
(see p. 156). About 87 per cent of all Supply
expenditure counts in the control total. The
main element of the control total not funded
through Supply Estimates is expenditure
financed from the National Insurance Fund.
CONTROL OF PUBLIC
EXPENDITURE
The Government’s objective is that public
expenditure (measured by general
government expenditure, excluding
privatisation proceeds) should grow by less
than the economy as a whole over time, while
value for money is constantly improved.
In 1992 it announced a new system of
public expenditure control aimed at reducing
the share of national income taken by public
spending. Annual ceilings are set for the
growth of the control total, in line with the
Government’s medium-term objectives. By
restricting real growth in the control total to
below 1.5 per cent, the Government should
ensure that the ratio of general government
expenditure to national income will fall
over time.
This ‘top-down’ approach separates
decisions on overall public expenditure levels
from the allocation between programmes.
155
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Departmental spending decisions are based
on allocating available resources within
agreed ceilings for aggregate spending;
resources are devoted to priority areas, with
an emphasis on obtaining maximum value for
money. Together with the move to a unified
budget (see below), the new framework
represents an important reform of fiscal
planning procedures.
Fundamental Expenditure Reviews
The Government announced in 1993 that it
would conduct in-depth reviews of all public
expenditure by each government
department. This work goes beyond
traditional Public Expenditure Survey
arrangements. It examines long-term trends in
spending on individual programmes to assess
whether these are sustainable. It seeks out
areas from which the Government might
withdraw or where expenditure should be
targeted more effectively. Early results of the
first four reviews—into social security,
health, education and the Home Office—
helped to inform the decisions taken during
the 1993 Public Expenditure Survey affecting
the departments concerned. The next series
of reviews will cover employment and
transport programmes, the legal departments,
Trade and Industry, Inland Revenue,
Customs and Excise, HM Treasury and
urban expenditure.
Planning Cycle and the Unified Budget
A new planning cycle has taken effect with
the introduction of the unified Budget
arrangements in November 1993, under
which the Government presents taxation and
spending proposals to Parliament at the same
time to allow comparison. The Budget now
covers both the Government’s taxation plans
for the coming financial year and its spending
plans for the next three years. The proposals
are announced to the House of Commons by
the Chancellor of the Exchequer in the
Budget statement and are published in the
Financial Statement and Budget Report. This
report also contains a review of recent
developments in the economy, together with
an economic forecast, and sets out the fiscal
and monetary framework within which
economic policy operates. This is the
medium-term financial strategy.
The Budget statement is followed by the
moving of a set of Budget resolutions in
which the proposals are embodied. These
resolutions are the foundation of the Finance
Bill, published in December. The Provisional
Collection of Taxes Act 1968 allows the tax
authorities to collect taxes provisionally, at
the levels provided by the Budget proposals,
pending enactment of the Finance Bill.
For two taxes—income tax and corporation
tax—annual Ways and Means resolutions
followed by Finance Bill clauses are required
to maintain their existence, since they are
annual rather than permanent taxes. Tax
changes can be made at other times, either by
specific legislation or by the use of the regulator,
which permits limited changes between
Budgets in the rates of VAT (value added
tax—by up to 25 per cent) and of the main
excise duties (by up to 10 per cent).
Estimates
The annual Public Expenditure Survey
conducted by HM Treasury provides the basis
for the Estimates which each government
department submits to the Treasury, giving
details of its cash requirements for the coming
financial year. After Treasury approval, these
Supply Estimates are presented to Parliament.
Parliamentary authorisation is required for the
major part of the new spending plans for the
year ahead announced in the unified Budget.
Parliament approves them as part of the
annual Appropriation Act. Supplementary
Estimates may also be presented to Parliament
during the course of the year. Individual
reports setting out expenditure plans for
government departments are published around
February.
If any Supply Estimate is overspent, the
Committee of Public Accounts (see p. 158)
may investigate before Parliament is asked to
approve any Excess Vote to balance the
account. In each parliamentary session, up to
three ‘Estimates days’ are available for
debates on the Supply Estimates, following
scrutiny by select committees of the House
of Commons.
156
ECONOMY
Cash Limits
The Government sets cash limits on just over
60 per cent of Supply expenditure and is
extending the coverage of limits whenever
possible. The imposition of cash limits indicates
that the Government intends to avoid extra
provision for programmes even in the event of
unexpected increases in costs. They cover the
major part of grants to local authorities, which
are financed out of Supply expenditure. Cash
limits also apply to some expenditure not voted
in the Estimates.
Running cost limits are imposed on the
administrative costs of central government,
which are identified separately in the
Estimates. Any overspending of cash or
running cost limits leads to an investigation
into the causes and, where appropriate, a
reduction in the limits in the following year.
Those Estimates not subject to cash limits
mainly finance demand-led services like
income support from the Department of
Social Security. In such cases, once policy
and rates of payment are determined,
expenditure depends on factors beyond the
direct control of government, such as the
number of eligible recipients.
Examination and Audit of Public
Expenditure
Examination of public expenditure is carried
out by select committees of the House of
Commons. These study in detail the activities
of particular government departments and
require the attendance of ministers and
officials for cross-examination. Audit of the
Government’s spending, which follows up the
control inherent in parliamentary approval of
the Estimates, is exercised through the
functions of the Comptroller and
Auditor General, the head of the National
Audit Office.
Comptroller and Auditor General
The Comptroller and Auditor General, an
officer of the House of Commons appointed
by the Crown, has two distinct functions.
As Comptroller General, he or she is
responsible for ensuring that all revenue and
Government Receipts and Expenditure 1993-94
Sources of revenue
Expenditure
Other
13%
Borrowing
17o/o
Transport
National 4%
insurance
contributions
14%
Law, order
and protective
services
5%
Business rates, VAT
council tax and 14%
community charge
8o/o
Social
security
32o/o
Health
13%
Note: As a result of rounding and omission of minor items, percentages do not add up to 100/
Source: HM Treasury.
157
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
other public money payable to the Consolidated
Fund and the National Loans Fund (see below)
is duly paid and that all payments from these
funds are authorised by statute. As Auditor
General, he or she must certify the accounts of
all government departments and executive
agencies and those of a wide range of other
public sector bodies; scrutinise the economy,
efficiency and effectiveness of their operations;
examine revenue accounts and inventories; and
report the results of these examinations to
Parliament.
Committee of Public Accounts
The Committee of Public Accounts considers
the accounts of government departments,
executive agencies and other public sector
bodies; the Comptroller and Auditor
General’s reports on them; and on
departments’ use of their resources. The
Committee takes evidence from the heads of
departments, agencies and other public sector
bodies and submits reports to Parliament.
The Government’s formal replies to the
reports are presented to Parliament in the
form of Treasury minutes, and the reports
and minutes are usually debated annually in
the Commons.
Central Government Funds
The Government’s sterling expenditure is
largely met out of the Consolidated Fund, an
account at the Bank of England into which
tax receipts and other revenues are paid. Any
excess of expenditure over receipts is met
by the National Loans Fund, which is another
official sterling account at the Bank of
England and is the repository for funds
borrowed by the Government. The National
Insurance Fund, into which contributions
are paid by employers and employed
people, is used mainly to pay for social
security benefits.
MAIN SOURCES OF REVENUE
The main sources of revenue are:
• taxes on income (including profits), which
include personal income tax, corporation
tax and petroleum revenue tax;
• taxes on expenditure, which include
VAT and customs and excise duties; and
• National Insurance contributions, which
give entitlement to a range of benefits.
Other sources are stamp duties;
inheritance tax; capital gains tax; and the
council tax and business rates.
Taxation Policy
The Government’s programme of tax reform
has sought to create a climate in which
business can thrive and individual initiative is
rewarded. Its aims include:
• keeping the overall tax burden as low as
possible through firm control over public
expenditure;
• reducing marginal tax rates of income
and profits to sharpen incentives to work
and create wealth;
• maintaining a broad tax base, which helps
to keep tax rates low and avoids
distorting commercial decisions; and
• shifting the balance of taxation from
taxes on income to taxes on expenditure.
The Government also aims to simplify the
administration of the tax system and
minimise the burdens which compliance
places on the taxpayer, and to close tax
loopholes.
Budget Changes
The November 1993 Budget contained a
number of tax changes designed to broaden
the tax base and increase revenue, while
supporting government policy objectives on
health and the environment. They include:
• a 2.5 per cent tax on most general
insurance premiums paid from 1 October
1994;
• a new duty on air passengers, to take
effect from November 1994, of £5 for
flights to internal and EU destinations
and £10 elsewhere;
• increased road fuel duties, which are to
be raised by at least 5 per cent in real
terms in future Budgets;
158
ECONOMY
• higher tobacco duties, which will grow by
at least 3 per cent in real terms in future
Budgets; and
• a series of measures, estimated to raise
around £2,000 million over three years,
to block tax avoidance schemes.
Collection of Taxes and Duties
The Inland Revenue assesses and collects the
taxes on income, profits and capital, and
stamp duty. HM Customs and Excise
collects the most important taxes on
expenditure (VAT and most duties). Vehicle
excise duty is the responsibility of the
Department of Transport. National Insurance
contributions are the responsibility of the
Department of Social Security, although they
are generally collected by the Inland Revenue.
The council tax and business rates are
collected by local authorities.
Taxes on Income
Income Tax
Taxes on individual incomes are generally
progressive in that larger incomes bear a
proportionately greater amount of tax. Income
tax is imposed for the year of assessment
beginning on 6 April. From April 1994 the
new lower rate of 20 per cent was widened to
the first £3,000 of taxable income. The basic
rate of 25 per cent applies to the next
£20,700 of taxable income. A rate of 40 per
cent is levied on taxable income above
£23,700. These rates apply to total income,
including earned and investment income.
A number of allowances and reliefs reduce
the amount of a person’s taxable income
compared with gross income. All taxpayers,
irrespective of sex or marital status, are
entitled to a personal allowance against
income from all sources. Married women pay
their own tax on the basis of their own
income. In addition, there is a married
couple’s allowance, which may be allocated to
either partner or they may receive half each.
Wives are entitled to claim half of the
allowance as of right. For 1994—95 the values
of the main allowances are £3,445 for the
personal allowance and £1,720 for the
married couple’s allowance. Since April 1994
tax relief for some allowances, including the
married couple’s allowance, has been
restricted to 20 per cent, and this will be
reduced to 15 per cent in 1995-96.
Among the most important of the reliefs is
that for mortgage interest payments on
borrowing for house purchase up to the
statutory limit of £30,000. Since April 1994
relief has been restricted to the lower rate of
20 per cent, and this will be limited to 15 per
cent in 1995-96. It is usually given ‘at source’,
that is, repayments which the borrower makes
to the lender are reduced to take account of
tax at the basic rate and the tax refund is
then passed directly by the tax authorities to
the building society or bank making the loan
rather than to the individual taxpayer.
Employees’ contributions to their pension
schemes also qualify for tax relief within
limits laid down by Parliament.
Most wage and salary earners pay their
income tax under a Pay-As-You-Earn
(PAYE) system whereby tax is deducted and
accounted for to the Inland Revenue by the
employer, in a way which enables employees
to keep as up to date as possible with their
tax payments.
The assessment and collection of
personal taxation will be simplified
from 1996-97. The option of
self-assessment will be extended to
all who fill in tax returns (about
9 million people). The changes will
allow taxpayers to calculate their own
liability to tax, and will introduce a
uniform set of dates for the payment
of income tax and capital gains tax.
They will also replace the ‘preceding
year’ basis of income tax for the self-
employed by a simpler ‘current year’
basis; people becoming self-employed
from April 1994 will be taxed on the
latter basis.
In general, income tax is charged on all
income which originates in Britain—although
some forms of income are exempt, such as
certain social security benefits—and on all
income arising abroad of people resident in
159
mmm
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Britain. Interest on certain British
government securities belonging to people not
ordinarily resident in Britain is exempt.
Britain has entered into agreements with
many countries to provide relief from double
taxation; where such agreements are not in
force unilateral relief is often allowed. British
residents working abroad for the whole year
benefit from 100 per cent tax relief.
Corporation Tax
The rates of company tax in Britain are lower
than in most other industrialised countries.
Companies pay corporation tax on their
income and capital gains after deduction of
certain allowances and reliefs. A company
which distributes profits to its shareholders is
required to pay advance corporation tax
(ACT) to the Inland Revenue. This ACT can
be set against the company’s liability to
corporation tax, subject to a limit. If resident
in Britain, a shareholder receiving dividends
from companies resident in Britain is entitled
to a tax credit. This satisfies some or all of
the shareholder’s liability to income tax on
his or her dividend income, or is paid to
shareholders not liable to tax.
The main rate of corporation tax is 33 per
cent, with a reduced rate of 25 per cent for
small companies (those with profits below
£300,000 in a year). Marginal relief, so that a
company’s overall rate is between the main
rate and the small companies’ rate, is allowed
for companies with profits between £300,000
and £1.5 million. Expenditure on plant and
machinery, on scientific research and on
industrial and agricultural buildings qualifies
for annual allowances.
Petroleum Revenue Tax
Petroleum revenue tax (PRT), deductible in
computing profits for corporation tax, is
charged on profits from the production—as
opposed, for example, to the refining—of oil
and gas in Britain and on its Continental
Shelf under licence from the Department of
Trade and Industry. Each licensee of an
oilfield is charged on the profits from that
field after deduction of certain allowances and
reliefs. New fields given consent for
development on or after 16 March 1993 are
not liable to PRT. The PRT rate for existing
fields was reduced from 75 to 50 per cent
from 1 July 1993.
Inheritance Tax
Inheritance tax is charged on the value of
estates at the time of death and is also
immediately chargeable on certain lifetime
transfers. The majority of business assets are
now exempt from inheritance tax, so that
most family businesses can be passed on
without a tax charge. Tax is charged at a
single rate of 40 per cent above the threshold
for inheritance tax of £150,000.
There are several important exemptions.
Generally, transfers between spouses are
exempt, and gifts and bequests to British
charities, major political parties and heritage
bodies are also normally exempt.
Capital Gains Tax
Capital gains realised on the disposal of assets
are liable to capital gains tax or, in the case of
companies, to corporation tax. For 1994-95,
individuals are exempt from tax in respect of
total net gains of up to £5,800 in any one
year and most trusts on gains of up to
£2,900. Gains are treated as the taxpayer’s
top slice of income, and are therefore charged
at the individual’s highest income tax rate or
the company’s corporation tax rate.
Only gains arising since March 1982 are
subject to tax and the effects of inflation are
allowed for when measuring gains. Some
assets, including the principal private
residence, are normally exempt. Gains on
government securities and certain corporate
bonds are exempt from the tax, as are gains
on shares owned under Personal Equity Plans
(see p. 150). This last exemption is designed
to encourage wider share ownership.
Taxes on Expenditure
Value Added Tax
VAT is a broadly based expenditure tax,
chargeable at 17.5 per cent. It is collected at
each stage in the production and distribution
160
ECONOMY
of goods and services by taxable persons. The
final tax is borne by the consumer. When a
taxable person purchases taxable goods or
services, the supplier charges VAT-—the
taxable person’s input tax. When the taxable
person supplies goods or services, the
customers are then in turn charged VAT,
which is the taxable person’s output tax.
The difference between the output tax and
the input tax is paid to, or repaid by,
Customs and Excise.
The annual level of turnover above which
traders must register for VAT was raised
from £37,600 to £45,000 in December 1993.
Certain goods and services are relieved from
VAT, either by being charged at a zero rate
or by being exempt:
• Under zero rating, a taxable person does
not charge tax to a customer but reclaims
any input tax paid to suppliers. Among
the main categories where zero-rating
applies are goods exported to other
countries, and goods shipped as stores
on ships and aircraft; most food; water
and sewerage; domestic and
international passenger transport;
books, newspapers and periodicals;
construction of new residential buildings;
young children’s clothing and footwear;
drugs and medicines supplied on
prescription; specified aids for
handicapped people; and certain supplies
by or to charities.
• For exempt goods or services, a taxable
person does not charge any output tax
but is not entitled to reclaim the input
tax. The main categories where
exemption applies are many supplies of
land and buildings; insurance; postal
services; betting; gaming (subject to
certain important exceptions); lotteries;
finance; much education and training;
and health and welfare.
VAT was introduced on domestic fuel
and power at 8 per cent from April 1994 and
will be charged at the full standard rate
from April 1995. As well as being a revenue¬
raising measure, this extension of VAT is
expected to encourage energy conservation
and help to contribute to Britain’s
commitments on global warming.
Customs Duties
Customs duties are chargeable on goods from
outside the EU in accordance with its
Common Customs Tariff. The introduction
of the single European market on 1 January
1993 means that goods can move freely across
internal frontiers between different member
states, without making customs entries at
importation or stopping for routine fiscal
checks. For commercial consignments, excise
duty and VAT are charged in the member
state of destination, at the rate in force in
that state.
Excise Duties
Hydrocarbon oils used as road fuel bear
higher rates of duty than those used for other
purposes, although the rate of duty on
unleaded petrol is lower than that on leaded.
Kerosene, most lubricating oils and other oils
used for certain industrial processes are free
of duty. There are duties on spirits, beer,
wine, made-wine (wine with added
constituents, such as fruit juice), cider and
perry, based on alcoholic strength and
volume. Spirits used for scientific, medical,
research and industrial processes are
generally free of duty. Cigarette duty is
charged partly as a cash amount per
cigarette and partly as a percentage of retail
price. Duty on other tobacco products is
based on weight.
Duties are charged on off-course betting,
pool betting, gaming in casinos, bingo and
gaming machines. Rates vary with the
particular form of gambling. Duty is charged
either as a percentage of gross or net stakes
or, in the case of gaming machines, as a fixed
amount per machine according to the cost of
playing it and its prize level. A 12 per cent
duty on gross stakes will be levied on the
new National Lottery due to start in
November 1994 (see p. 493); there will be no
tax on winnings.
Vehicle excise duty (VED) on a
privately-owned motor car, light van or taxi
with fewer than nine seats is £130 a year; for
motor cycles it is £15, £35 or £55 a year,
according to engine capacity. The duty on
goods vehicles is levied on the basis of gross
161
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
weight and, if over 12 tonnes, according to
the number of axles; the duty is designed to
ensure that such vehicles at least cover their
share of the full costs of road use through
the tax paid (VED and fuel duty). Duty on
taxis and buses varies according to seating
capacity.
Stamp Duty
Certain kinds of transfer are subject to stamp
duty. These include purchases of houses, at
1 per cent of the total price if this exceeds
£60,000, and instruments such as
declarations of trust. Transfers by gift and
transfers to charities are exempt.
Taxpayer’s Charter
The Taxpayer’s Charter, relaunched in 1991,
was one of the first separate charters issued
following the publication of the Citizen s
Charter (see p. 67). It sets out the standard
of service that people can expect from the
Inland Revenue and Customs and Excise.
Both departments should be fair, helpful,
courteous, efficient and accountable, and
keep taxpayers’ financial affairs private.
Other Revenue
National Insurance Contributions
There are five classes of National Insurance
contribution:
• Class 1—paid by employees and their
employers;
• Class 1A—paid by employers on the cash
equivalent of the benefit of cars and fuel
provided to their employees for private
use;
• Class 2—paid by the self-employed;
• Class 3—paid voluntarily for pension
purposes; and
• Class 4—paid by self-employed people
on their taxable profits between £6,490
and £22,360 a year (in addition to their
Class 2 contribution).
Details of the rates of contribution are
given in Chapter 25, Social Security, on
p. 399.
Local Authority Revenue
Local authorities in Great Britain have four
sources of income: grants from central
government (which finances about 85 per
cent of spending); non-domestic rates; council
tax; and fees and charges.
Non-domestic rates are a tax on the
occupiers of non-domestic property. The
rateable value of property is assessed by
reference to annual rents and reviewed every
five years. In England and Wales the non¬
domestic rate is set nationally by central
government and collected by local authorities.
It is paid into a national pool and
redistributed to local authorities in proportion
to their population. In Scotland non-domestic
rates are levied by local authorities. In
Northern Ireland rates are not payable on
industrial premises or on commercial
premises in enterprise zones. Certain other
properties in Northern Ireland, such as
freight transport and recreational premises,
are partially derated.
Domestic property is generally subject to
the council tax, which replaced the
community charge in April 1993. Each
dwelling is allocated to one of eight valuation
bands, based on its capital value in April
1991. Capital values are based on the amount
each dwelling might have sold for on the
open market, subject to certain assumptions,
if it had been sold on 1 April 1991.
Discounts are available for dwellings with
fewer than two resident adults. A council tax
payer on a low income may receive a rebate
of up to 100 per cent of his or her tax bill.
A transitional relief scheme aims to limit
increases arising from the switch from the
community charge to the council tax to a
fixed amount for each valuation band.
In Northern Ireland, rates—local domestic
property taxes based on the value of the
property—are collected by local authorities.
PUBLIC SECTOR FINANCIAL
OPERATIONS
The Government funds its borrowing
requirement by selling debt to the private
sector. The major debt instrument is known
as gilt-edged stock as there is no risk of
162
ECONOMY
default. Gilt-edged stock is marketable and is
widely traded. Pension funds and life
insurance companies have the largest holdings.
The Government publishes an annual remit,
setting out how the Bank of England will sell
‘gilts’ on its behalf. Issues are mostly by
auction (broadly monthly) or ad hoc ‘tap’ sales.
Gilts include ‘conventional’, which pay fixed
rates of interest and redemption sums; index-
linked stocks, on which principal and interest
are linked to the movement in the Retail
Prices Index; and floating-rate gilts, with
payments linked to short-term interest rates.
An important additional source of
government finance is the range of National
Savings products (see p. 217), which are
non-marketable and designed to attract
personal savings.
Sterling Treasury bills are sold at a weekly
tender; the majority have a maturity of three
months. These are used to manage the' money
markets, rather than to meet the Government’s
borrowing needs. The Government has also
issued bills denominated and payable in
European Currency Units (ECUs) since 1988
and longer-dated ECU notes since 1992. The
proceeds have been added to the official
foreign exchange reserves rather than being
used to finance public expenditure.
The bulk of public corporations’
borrowing is funded by central government,
although their temporary borrowing needs are
met largely from the market, usually under
Treasury guarantee. That part of local
authority borrowing met by central
government is supplied by authorisation of
Parliament through the Public Works Loan
Board from the National Loans Fund. The
Board remains an independent body even
though it is merged for administrative
purposes with the former National Debt
Office, forming the National Investment and
Loans Office. Local authorities may also
borrow directly from the market, both short¬
term and long-term, through a range of
instruments. Some public corporations and
local authorities borrow on occasion, under
special statutory power and with Treasury
consent, in foreign currencies.
Public Sector Debt
Public sector borrowing, or debt repayment,
each year represents an addition to, or
subtraction from, the net debt of the public
sector. This debt is the consolidated debt of
the public sector less its holdings of liquid
assets. Public sector debt held outside the
public sector amounted to £249,600 million
at the end of March 1993. This represented
40 per cent of GDP in 1992-93, compared
with 50 per cent in 1979.
Further Reading
Financial Statement and Budget Report, annual report, HMSO.
United Kingdom National Accounts, annual report, HMSO.
163
12 Overseas Trade
Visible Trade 164
Invisible Transactions 169
Commercial Policy 169
Controls on Trade
Government Services
Balance of Payments
171
171
173
Overseas trade has been of vital importance to the British economy for
hundreds of years. Although small in area and accounting for only about
1 per cent of the world’s population, Britain is the fifth largest trading nation
in the world. As a member of the European Union (EU), it is part of the
world’s largest established trading group, which grew even bigger when five
other Western European countries joined with the EU in January 1994 to
create the European Economic Area (EEA).
Britain exports more per head than the
United States (US) and Japan; its overseas
sales of goods and services are equivalent to
about a quarter of its gross domestic product
(GDP). Invisible earnings of British
companies place Britain in the top three
countries in the international league table of
overseas invisibles earners. Britain is the
world’s second biggest overseas investor and
the leading destination for inward investment
into the EU.
VISIBLE TRADE
In 1993 Britain’s exports of goods were
valued at about £121,400 million and its
imports of goods at £134,600 million on a
balance-of-payments basis (see Table 12.1).
Between 1992 and 1993 the volume of
exports rose by 3 per cent and their value by
13 per cent. Over the same period imports
grew by 4 per cent by volume and 12 per
cent in terms of value.
Commodity Composition
Britain has traditionally been an exporter of
manufactured goods and an importer of food
and basic materials. In 1970 manufactures
accounted for 85 per cent of its exports; this
fell to around 67 per cent by the mid-1980s
as North Sea oil exports increased their
share. The proportion of manufactures in
exports has since risen, to 82 per cent in
1993. Britain has not, however, had a surplus
on manufactures since 1982. Machinery and
transport equipment account for about 40 per
cent of exports and a similar proportion of
imports. Aerospace, chemicals and electronics
have become increasingly significant export
sectors, while textiles have declined in
relative importance.
Since the mid-1970s North Sea oil has
made a substantial contribution to Britain’s
overseas trade both in terms of exports and
import substitution. In 1993 exports of fuels
in volume terms were about five times their
164
OVERSEAS TRADE
Table 12.1: Overseas Trade 1991-93
1991
1992
1993
Value (£ million)'
Exports
Goods
of which:
Oil
Other goods
Services
Goods and services
Imports
Goods
of which:
Oil
Other goods
Services
Goods and services
103,413
6,757
96,656
30,821
134,234
113,697
5,549
108,148
27,113
140,810
107,343 121,414
6,652 7,981
100,691 113,433
33,134 36,585
140,477 157,999
120,447 134,623
5,104
115,343
29,045
149,492
5,519
129,104
31,643
166,266
Volume indices (1990 = 100)
Exports
Goods
All goods
Non-oil goods
Services
Goods and services
101.2
101.2
93.1
99.3
103.7
103.5
98.1
102.4
106.9
105.8
100.5
105.4
Imports
Goods
All goods
Non-oil goods
Services
Goods and services
94.7
94.3
94.8
94.7
100.9
101.1
99.1
100.6
104.6
104.6
98.2
103.5
Unit value indices (1990 = 100)
Exports
All goods
Non-oil goods
Imports
All goods
Non-oil goods
Terms of trade ^
All goods
Non-oil goods
101.4
102.3
101.2
101.7
100.2
100.6
103.5
105.0
102.1
102.9
101.4
102.0
114.8
116.9
110.5
111.8
103.9
104.6
Source: United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1994 Edition
“Balance-of-payments basis.
^Export unit value index as a percentage of import unit value index.
165
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Table 12.2: Sector Analysis of Visible Trade 1993"
£ million
Exports
Imports
Visible balance
Food, beverages and tobacco 9,136
Basic materials 2,267
Oil 7,981
Other mineral fuels and lubricants 448
Semi-manufactured goods 35,450
Finished manufactured goods 64,464
Commodities and transactions not
classified according to kind 1,668
Total 121,414
13,314
5,046
5,519
1,423
34,558
73,356
1,407
134,623
-1,178
-2,779
2,462
-975
892
-8,892
261
-13,209
Source: United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1994 Edition
“Balance-of-payments basis.
1975 level; imports were around three-
quarters of the 1975 figure. The share of
fuels in exports rose from 4 to 22 per cent in
the mid-1980s, falling back to 7 per cent in
1993. The import share decreased from 18
per cent in 1975 to 13 per cent in the mid-
1980s and to 5 per cent in 1993. North Sea
oil and gas production has now passed its
peak of the mid-1980s, when exports of fuels
accounted for over 20 per cent of total
exports. In 1993 the surplus on trade in oil
amounted to a little under £2,500 million.
Imported manufactures have taken a
greater share of the domestic market in
Geographical Distribution of Trade 1993
□ DEVELOPED I I OIL-EXPORTING
COUNTRIES 1 1 COUNTRIES
OTHER
COUNTRIES
Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
Source: United Kingdom Balance of Payments.
166
OVERSEAS TRADE
Table 12.3: Commodity Composition of Visible Trade 1993“
£ million
Exports
Imports
Food and live animals
Beverages and tobacco
Crude materials
of which: Wood, lumber and cork
Pulp and waste paper
Textile fibres
Metal ores
Fuels
Petroleum and petroleum products
Coal, gas and electricity
Animal and vegetable oils and fats
Chemicals
of which: Organic chemicals
Inorganic chemicals -
Plastics
Manufactures classified chiefly by material
of which: Wood and cork manufactures
Paper and paperboard manufactures
Textile manufactures
Iron and steel
Non-ferrous metals
Metal manufactures
Machinery and transport equipment
Mechanical machinery
Electrical machinery
Road vehicles
Other transport equipment
Miscellaneous manufactures
of which: Clothing and footwear
Scientific and photographic
Other commodities and transactions
Total
5,661
3,270
2,098
22
24
495
611
8,228
7,789
435
118
17,297
4,370
1,216
2,461
17,331
128
1,830
2,585
3,135
1,913
2,278
48,340
15,025
20,672
8,303
4,344
14,812
2,698
4,756
1,594
118,742
11,574
2,117
4,953
1,108
541
481
1,165
7,303
5,749
1,553
477
12,911
3,104
985
3,244
21,733
431
3,721
4,000
2,540
2,908
2,560
53,291
11,822
23,839
14,387
3,235
20,124
5,961
4,682
1,257
135,740
Source: Monthly Digest of Statistics
"On an overseas-trade-statistics basis, seasonally adjusted. This differs from a balance-of-payments basis in that, for imports, it
includes the cost of insurance and freight, and, for both exports and imports, includes returned goods.
recent decades. The share of finished
manufactures in total imports rose from
25 per cent in 1970 to 54 per cent in 1993,
while the share of basic materials fell from 15
to 4 per cent between 1970 and 1993. The
percentage of food, beverages and tobacco in
total imports has been dropping since the
1950s, reaching 10 per cent in 1993, as a
result both of the increasing extent to which
food demand has been met from domestic
agriculture and the decline in the proportion
of total expenditure on food.
Geographical Distribution
Britain’s overseas trade is mainly—and
increasingly—with other developed countries.
In 1970 these accounted for 73 per cent of
167
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Table 12.4: Britain’s Main Markets and Suppliers 1993
Value Share
(£ million) (per cent)
Main markets
Germany 15,979 13.2
United States 15,351 12.7
France 12,076 10.0
Netherlands 8,061 6.7
Belgium/Luxembourg 7,100 5.9
Irish Republic 6,324 5.2
Italy 6,052 5.0
Spain 4,354 3.6
Sweden 2,883 2.4
Japan 2,656 2.2
Main suppliers
Germany 20,163 14.6
United States 16,328 11.8
France 13,604 9.8
Netherlands 9,098 6.6
Japan 8,517 6.2
Belgium/Luxembourg 6,770 4.9
Italy 6,752 4.9
Irish Republic 5,525 4.0
Switzerland 4,738 3.4
Norway  4,159 3-0^
Source: Monthly Digest of Statistics.
"On an overseas-trade-statistics basis, seasonally adjusted.
exports and a similar percentage of imports;
by 1993 the shares were 80 and 82 per cent
respectively. The proportion of Britain’s
trade with non-oil developing nations has
been broadly constant over the last 20
years: in 1993 they accounted for 15 per cent
of its trade.
In 1972, the year before Britain joined the
European Community, around a third of
Britain’s trade was with the other 11 countries
which made up the European Union in 1994.
The proportion rose to around one-half in
1993 (see p. 166). Western Europe as a whole
took three-fifths of British exports in 1993.
EU countries accounted for seven of
Britain’s top 10 export markets and six of the
10 leading suppliers of goods to Britain in
1993 (see Table 12.4). In 1990 Germany
overtook the US to become Britain’s biggest
overseas market; Germany is also Britain’s
largest single supplier. In 1993 it took
13 per cent of Britain’s exports and supplied
15 per cent of its imports.
There have been a number of other
changes in the pattern of Britain’s overseas
trade in recent years. The growth in wealth
of the oil-exporting countries during the
1970s led to a sharp increase in their imports
from all sources, and by the early 1980s they
were taking about 12 per cent of Britain’s
exports. However, by 1993 their share of
British exports and imports had fallen to 5
and 3 per cent respectively.
Exports to Japan, which is presently
Britain’s tenth largest export market, rose by
19 per cent in 1993. Japan has steadily
increased its share of Britain’s imports and
now accounts for around 6 per cent. In
1993 there was also a sizeable increase—
around 30 per cent—in Britain’s exports to
other expanding markets in the Asia-Pacific
Rim. Hong Kong, Malaysia, Singapore,
Korea, Taiwan and Thailand, together with
the People’s Republic of China and the
Philippines, all showed strong growth in
exports from Britain in 1993.
168
OVERSEAS TRADE
INVISIBLE TRANSACTIONS
Transactions in invisible trade fall into three
main groups:
• internationally tradeable services;
• investment income on external assets; and
• non-commercial transfers.
Britain accounts for 6 per cent of the world’s
exports of services and 14 per cent of its
investment income. Its earnings from invisible
trade in 1993 were £116,000 million, with
earnings from services alone of £36,600 million.
Services range from banking, insurance
and stockbroking, tourism, and shipping and
aviation to specialist services such as engineering
consultancy, computer programming and
training. Financial services make a major
contribution to overseas earnings; net overseas
receipts were £15,600 million in 1993.
Britain’s trade in services has been in surplus
for about 200 years, excluding war periods.
Earnings on external assets and liabilities
have rarely been in deficit; transfers,
however, have almost always been in deficit.
For invisible trade as a whole, the deficit of
general government is more than offset by
the substantial surplus of the private sector
(including public corporations), resulting in
an overall surplus. General government
transactions are relatively unimportant in
either the services or the investment income
accounts but they form the greater part of
the transfers account. In 1993 the private
sector had a surplus of £11,500 million on
invisible trade while government had a deficit
of £8,600 million.
Earnings from private sector services rose
in value by 10 per cent in 1993 to £36,200
million; debits, at £29,300 million, were 11
per cent higher than a year previously. The
surplus on private sector investment income
was £4,900 million in 1993. The deficit on
private sector transfers was £270 million,
while that on government transfers was
£4,800 million.
COMMERCIAL POLICY
Britain is an active member of the European
Union. It remains committed to the open
multilateral trading system and to the further
liberalisation of world trade. To this end it
has taken a leading part in the activities of
such organisations as the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD).
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
GATT has provided a framework of rules for
the conduct of international trade since 1947.
Table 12.5: Britain’s Invisible Transactions 1993
Credits
Total invisible transactions
116,000
Debits
113,102
£ million
Balance
Private sector and public corporations 110,828 99,328 11,500
Services 36,151 29,311 6,840
of which: Sea transport 3,843 4,301 -458
Civil aviation 5,075 5,526 -451
Travel 8,951 12,257 3,306
Financial and other services 18,282 7,227 11,055
Investment income 72,627 67,697 4,930
Transfers 2,050 2,320 —270
General government 5,172 13,774 -8,602
Services 434 2,332 —1,898
Investment income 1,413 3,281 -1,868
Transfers 3,325 8,161 ^-,836
2,898
Source: United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1994 Edition.
169
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Around 120 countries already belong and
more are expected to join. The European
Commission acts on behalf of Britain and its
EU partners in GATT negotiations.
The eighth and most recent GATT
round—the Uruguay round—was
launched in 1986 and successfully
concluded in December 1993. It was
the largest-ever international trade
negotiation and will reduce tariffs on
goods and liberalise trade in services
and agriculture. Creation of a World
Trade Organisation will put the new
system on a permanent institutional
footing. An OECD/World Bank report
has estimated that world annual
output will be boosted by more than
US$270,000 million after ten years as a
result of the agreement.
The main features of the new agreement,
which is likely to be brought into force in late
1995, are as follows:
• There will be overall tariff reductions
across all countries of about 40 per cent
(tariff reductions by the EU will average
over 33 per cent) and member states have
undertaken not to raise tariffs again on 95
per cent of world trade.
• With the formation of the General
Agreement on Trade in Services, services
are to be brought within the framework of
GATT multilateral trade rules. Any
remaining restrictions on trade in services
will be made transparent and non-
discriminatory.
• Agriculture will come under the rules of
multilateral trade for the first time; there
will be a 36 per cent reduction in tariffs
as well as substantial cuts in subsidies.
• Agreed multilateral rules will govern
trade-related intellectual property rights,
providing protection for holders of
patents, copyrights and designs.
• Trade in textiles, where restrictions on
imports have been allowed under the
Multi-Fibre Arrangement (MFA—see
p. 171) to balance the interests of
exporters and importers, will be
reintegrated into GATT over ten years.
Single European Market
The single European market ‘opened for
business’ on 1 January 1993, with the
essential legislation in place for the free
movement of goods, services, people and
capital within the EU. Member states are now
concentrating on ensuring that the market
operates efficiently in practice and completing
work in energy and telecommunications
liberalisation. Among the changes from
January 1993 were the following:
• the ending of routine customs clearance
of commercial goods at national frontiers;
• the introduction of the right to trade
financial services throughout the EU on
the basis of a single home authorisation
‘passport’ (see p. 116); and
• deregulation of airlines, with national flag
carriers losing preferential treatment.
On 1 January 1994 the EU
implemented an agreement with five
members of the European Free Trade
Association (EFTA)—Austria, Finland,
Iceland, Norway and Sweden—on the
creation of the European Economic
Area. The EEA forms a free trade
area with 370 million consumers, and
the free movement of goods, services
and capital.
Austria, Finland, Norway and Sweden
have successfully applied to join the Union;
accession is due on 1 January 1995.
Other Agreements
The EU has association and co-operation
agreements with virtually all non-member
countries with a Mediterranean coastline, plus
Jordan; these give preferential access to EU
markets. Non-preferential co-operation
agreements have also been made with
countries in South.Asia and Latin America,
as well as with the People’s Republic of
China, the Association of South East Asian
Nations, the Andean Pact and the Central
American states. Trade relations with the
developing countries of Africa, the Caribbean
and the Pacific are governed by the Lome
170
OVERSEAS TRADE
Convention, which gives these countries
tariff-free access, subject to certain
safeguards, to the EU for industrial goods
and most agricultural products.
Tariff preference is also given to
developing countries under the Generalised
System of Preferences. This applies to most
industrial products and to agricultural produce
and textiles. The scheme concentrates
benefits on poorer producers and countries.
Association agreements are in place
between the EU and Poland, Hungary, the
Czech Republic, Slovakia, Bulgaria and
Romania. They are designed to facilitate
closer political and economic ties and the
eventual creation of a free trade zone with a
view to those countries becoming full
members of the EU. Trade and economic
co-operation agreements have also been
signed with Albania, Slovenia and the Baltic
states. Partnership and co-operation
agreements have been concluded with Russia,
Ukraine and Kazakhstan.
CONTROLS ON TRADE
With the completion of the single European
market, all routine border controls and
requirements for accompanying Customs
documents were removed for trade between
the members of the EU. This has
substantially cut travel times and costs; for
example, journey times from Britain to Italy
have been reduced by up to 24 hours.
Import Controls
Individual national quantitative restrictions
are inconsistent with the single European
market and following the removal of internal
frontiers they will be largely abolished. A
system of Union-wide quotas is under
discussion between the European Commission
and member states. Quantitative restrictions
on textiles stem from the MFA, under which
there is a series of bilateral agreements. A
small number of quantitative restrictions are
also maintained against non-GATT countries.
Imports of certain other goods are
restricted in order to protect human, animal
or plant life or health. These include firearms
and ammunition; nuclear materials; certain
drugs; explosives (including fireworks);
endangered wildlife and certain agricultural,
horticultural and food products.
Export Controls
The great majority of British exports are not
subject to any government control or
direction except for presentation and
declaration to HM Customs and Excise to
enable them to exercise necessary controls
and collect overseas trade statistics. Controls
govern the export of goods associated with
biological, chemical and nuclear weapons and
missiles. There are also controls on the
export of firearms, military equipment and of
dual-use industrial goods—those that can be
used for both civil and military purposes.
Other controls include those for health
certification purposes on certain animals,
meat and fish exported to another EU
member; on endangered animal and plant
species; and on antiques and works of art,
including photographic material, documents,
manuscripts and archaeological items.
The Co-ordinating Committee for
Multilateral Export Controls (COCOM), of
which Britain is a member, has already
agreed on extensive relaxation in East-West
controls because of the political changes in
Eastern Europe. The break-up of the former
Soviet Union is expected to reduce these
controls still further.
Britain is a member of the Australia
Group and of the Missile Technology
Control Regime, international bodies which
aim to prevent the spread of weapons of mass
destruction. Britain has issued a list of
countries of concern, along with lists of
controlled goods and technologies used in the
production, handling or storage of nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons and missile
technology which may not be exported. Also
listed are controlled dual-use items.
GOVERNMENT SERVICES
The Government assists exporters by
creating conditions favourable to the export
trade and by providing practical help,
advice and financial support. This includes a
wide range of services and assistance to meet
171
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the requirements of exporters, especially
small and medium-sized enterprises.
Export Promotion Services
Overseas Trade Services (OTS) comprises the
leading government departments engaged in
export promotion, including the Department
of Trade and Industry (DTI), the Foreign &
Commonwealth Office (FCO), the Industry
Department of the Welsh Office, Scottish
Trade International and the Industrial
Development Board of Northern Ireland.
There are around 2,000 staff worldwide,
based at the DTI in London, in 11 regional
offices around Britain and at 201 diplomatic
posts overseas. In England the development
of local Business Links (see p. 197) will make
OTS more accessible to potential users. In a
White Paper on business competitiveness (see
p. 194), issued in May 1994, the Government
announced that it would increase the number
of Business Links and of private-sector
export consultants (see below).
OTS gathers and disseminates export
intelligence, helps in researching potential
markets and at trade fairs, and supports firms
participating in trade missions. In 1993-94
around £186 million was spent on support
for exporters.
A major reorganisation of the DTFs
export services was announced in 1993.
Its main elements included:
• devising export strategies for Britain’s
top 80 export markets;
• separating export promotion from trade
policy work;
• setting up two export promotion
divisions—one dealing with North and
South America and Western and Eastern
Europe, including the former Soviet
Union, and another covering the Asia
Pacific region, including Japan and
Australasia, South Asia, the Middle East
and Africa.
The new export promotion divisions work
closely with 100 ‘export promoters’ seconded
from private industry, as well as with the
British Overseas Trade Board (BOTB), the
BOTB’s Area Advisory Groups and with
FCO posts abroad. The BOTB’s aims are to:
• help guide the Government’s export
promotion efforts, including the
provision of export services; and
• provide advice on policy issues affecting
international trade and exports.
The BOTB’s Area Advisory Groups,
which are made up of business people with
expert knowledge of trade with particular
world markets, provide advice on the world’s
main trading areas. The Overseas Projects
Board advises on major project business
overseas and the Small Firms Committee on
matters relating to small businesses. Nearly
200 businessmen and women are involved in
the Board’s work.
OTS pays special attention to the
promotion of exports to its top priority areas
in Western Europe, North America, and
Japan and the Asia Pacific Rim. These three
areas contain the world’s largest and richest
markets, and account for around four-fifths
of Britain’s exports. Emerging markets in
other areas are also being targeted.
British Invisibles
British Invisibles is an organisation which
promotes the international activities of
financial institutions and business services. Its
role is to suggest and, where possible,
implement measures for boosting invisible
earnings in Britain and abroad. It also seeks
to increase awareness of London as an
international financial centre and of the role
of the service sector in the British economy.
ECGD
ECGD (Export Credits Guarantee Department)
is a government department, responsible to
the President of the Board of Trade. It helps
exporters overcome many of the risks of
selling and investing overseas. ECGD supports
projects and capital goods and services
exported on medium- and long-term credit by:
• insuring exporters and financing banks
against the risk of non-payment by
overseas buyers;
• giving interest rate support to banks,
allowing exporters access to funds at
fixed, often favourable, rates of interest;
and
172
OVERSEAS TRADE
• providing reinsurance to private-sector
credit insurance covering exports sold on
short-term credit.
In order to encourage investment in
less developed countries, especially in Eastern
Europe, ECGD also insures against the main
political risks, such as war, expropriation and
restrictions on repatriation of profits.
Particular attention is being paid to
increasing cover for rapidly-growing exports
to countries like Hong Kong, China,
Indonesia, South Africa and Malaysia.
ECGD’s Insurance Services Group,
dealing with exports sold on credit terms of
less than two years, was sold to the private
sector in 1991.
BALANCE OF PAYMENTS
The balance-of-payments statistics record
transactions between residents of Britain and
non-residents. The transactions are classified
into two groups: current account, and
transactions in Britain’s external assets and
liabilities, sometimes known as the capital
account. The current account records trade in
goods (visible trade) and services, including
finance, tourism and transport, transactions in
investment income, and transfers (invisible
trade). Capital transactions include inward
and outward investment, overseas transactions
by banks in Britain, external borrowing and
lending by residents in Britain and drawings
on and accruals to the official reserves.
Britain has no exchange controls; residents
are free to acquire foreign currency for any
purpose, including direct and portfolio
investment overseas. There are also no
controls on the lending of sterling abroad
and non-residents may freely acquire
sterling for any purpose. Gold may be
freely bought and sold. Exchange controls
were abolished in 1979, and Britain
meets in full its obligations on capital
movements under an OECD code and under
EC directives.
The current account has been in deficit
since 1986. Since 1983 Britain has had a
deficit on visible trade; however, it has
traditionally run a surplus on trade in
invisibles. At £13,200 million in 1993, the
deficit on visible trade was virtually the same
as in the previous year. The invisibles
surplus fell from £3,300 million to £2,900
million. The surplus on services increased by
£800 million; that on investment income fell
by £1,200 million; and the deficit on
transfers was, at £5,100 million, almost
exactly the same as in 1992.
Inward and Outward Investment
The Government welcomes both outward
and inward investment.1 Outward
investment helps to develop markets for
1 A distinction needs to be made between capital flows and
capital holdings. Flows comprise transactions resulting in a
change of ownership of financial assets and liabilities between
British residents and non-residents, while holdings are measured
by the total values of British external assets and liabilities at the
end of the year. Income earned on external assets and liabilities is
dealt with in the section on invisibles.
Table 12.6: Britain’s Balance of Payments 1989-93
£ million
1989 1990 1991 1992 1993
Current account
Visible trade balance 24,683 -18,809 -10,284 -13,104 -13,209
Invisible transactions balance 2,171 -226 2,108 3,273 2,898
Current balance —22,512 —19,035 -8,176 —9,831 —10,311
Transactions in assets and liabilities
British external assets -90,583 -80,680 -20,717 -82,219 -158,450
British external liabilities 110,219 98,873 29,336 85,588 166,763
Balancing item 2,876 842 -443 6,462 1,998
Source: United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1994 Edition.
Note: Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
173
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
British exports while providing earnings in
the form of investment income. Inward
investment is promoted by DTFs Invest in
Britain Bureau (IBB—see p. 202) as a means
of introducing new technology, products,
management styles and attitudes; creating or
safeguarding employment; and increasing
exports or substituting imports. In recent
years Japanese investment in the automotive
industries has helped transform these
industries in Britain.
The IBB’s annual report for 1993-94
shows 404 inward investment decisions in
that year, projects that will create or
safeguard 96,000 jobs. Inward investment
is playing an increasingly important role
in Britain’s economy, with overseas firms
providing 17 per cent of all manufacturing
jobs, 23 per cent of net output and 33 per
cent of net capital expenditure. At present
Britain has around 40 per cent of US and
Japanese investment in the EU.
Inward direct investment (investment in
branches, subsidiaries and associated
companies) in 1993 was £9,500 million, little
changed from 1992. In 1993 direct investment
overseas by British residents was £17,300
million, compared with £11,100 million in
1992. Outward portfolio investment was
£85,600 million (£27,400 million in 1992).
The inflow of portfolio investment into
Britain amounted to £40,000 million.
External Assets and Liabilities
At the end of 1993 Britain’s identified
external assets exceeded identified external
liabilities by £20,300 million, compared
with £10,600 million a year earlier. Net
assets of the private sector and public
corporations amounted to £40,800 million and
net liabilities of general government to
£20,500 million.
Direct investment assets overseas of
British residents totalled £172,500 million at
the end of 1993 and portfolio investment
£423,200 million. At the end of 1992, 81 per
cent of direct investment was in developed
countries, with 37 per cent in the United
States and 26 per cent in the EU. Direct
investment in Britain by overseas residents
amounted to £130,900 million at the end of
1993 and portfolio investment to £256,600
million. At the end of 1992, investment from
developed countries accounted for 97 per
cent of overseas direct investment in Britain:
40 per cent originated in the United States
and 31 per cent in the EU.
Further Reading
Overseas Trade. Aspects of Britain series, HMSO, 1994.
United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1994 Edition. Central Statistical Office, HMSO.
174
13 Employment
Britain has a higher proportion of the adult population in work—70 per
cent—than any other large European country. The labour market has changed
considerably in recent years, with a growing proportion working in services.
Nearly three-quarters of employees now work in the service sector, compared
with around one-fifth in manufacturing. Other major changes have been the
growing proportion of women in the workforce and the rise in part-time
employment. Industrial relations have been transformed, and the number of
stoppages in 1993 was the lowest on record.
PATTERNS OF EMPLOYMENT
The total workforce in 1994 was around 28
million. The workforce in employment in
June 1994 totalled 25.2 million (see Table
13.1), of whom 21.4 million (10.8 million
men and 10.6 million women) were classed as
employees in employment.
In the early 1990s employment fell as a
result of the recession. With the economic
recovery (see p. 145), this decline ceased in
1993 and, according to the Labour Force
Survey, there was an increase of 80,000 in
the number of people in employment in
Great Britain on a seasonally adjusted basis
between winter 1993-94 and spring 1994.
Women account for a growing proportion
of the workforce in employment and in June
1994 they represented 49.6 per cent of
employees in employment. The proportion of
women in work in Britain is well above the
Table 13.1: Workforce in Employment in Britain
1984 1989
1992
1993
Workforce in employment
24,399 26,926
25,661
Ufl€
1994
Employees in employment 21,229 22,670 21,851 21,493 21,397
Self-employed 2,669 3,486 3,196 3,166 3,266
HM Forces 326 308 290 271 250
Work-related government
training programmes 175 462 325 311 319
25,241 25,232
Source: Employment Gazette
175
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Table 13.2: Employees by Main Sector in Britain (at June)
1989 1992
1993
1994
Thousands
Service industries
Manufacturing industries
Energy and water supply
Other industries
Per cent of employees
Service industries
Manufacturing industries
Energy and water supply
Other industries
15,610
5,208
465
1,388
68.9
23.0
2.1
6.1
15,735
4,521
403
1,191
72.0
20.7
1.8
5.5
15,656
4,369
354
1,113
72.8
20.3
1.6
5.2
15,699
4,330
315
1,053
73.4
20.2
1.5
4.9
Source: Department of Employment.
Note: From September 1991 certain local authority employees were reclassified from services to other industries. Accordingly,
the figures for 1992, 1993 and 1994 are not strictly comparable with those for 1989.
EU average, being exceeded only by
Denmark. Many employers have developed
policies to help women to return to the
labour market. The Government is
encouraging voluntary action by employers
to increase the employment opportunities
for women. It has joined the
‘Opportunity 2000’ campaign and in 1994
launched a new regional initiative in
England, ‘Fair Play for Women’ (see p. 36).
‘Teleworking’—people working from
home using information technology—
is becoming more widespread. About
11 per cent of employers are
employing workers based at home and
more are planning to adopt
teleworking. There are about 60
‘telecottages’ in Britain. These are
rural centres providing a variety of
information technology and
telecommunications facilities for
business and community users. A
report by the Department of
Employment on teleworking found
that managers of telework schemes
expressed a high level of satisfaction
with teleworkers.
Recent trends show a continued fall in
full-time employment and a growth in part-
time employment. Since 1984 part-time
employment in Great Britain has risen by
1.1 million to 6 million in spring 1994, about
24 per cent of those in employment. The
proportion in part-time employment was
46 per cent of women, compared with
7 per cent of men. About 50 per cent of
married women work part-time, compared with
just over 30 per cent of non-married women.
Self-employment is increasing again,
following a decline during the recession.
About 3.2 million people are self-employed
in Great Britain, 22 per cent more than in
1984. The sectors with the highest
concentrations of self-employed people are
agriculture and construction.
Government Policy
The Government has taken a number of
steps to change the labour market, with the
aim of creating an economic climate in which
business can flourish and create more jobs.
These include:
• increasing the flexibility of the labour
market, for example, adopting flexible
working patterns for more employees;
• removing burdens on employers and
workers, including regulatory barriers
which hinder recruitment; and
• encouraging better training, especially by
setting up employer-led Training and
Enterprise Councils and, in Scotland, Local
Enterprise Companies (see pp. 178-9).
The Government supports a social
dimension to the European Union
176
EMPLOYMENT
(see p. 110) which gives priority to the
creation and development of jobs and takes
into account the different employment
patterns and practices in member states.
Employment by Sector
As in other industrialised countries, there has
been a marked shift in jobs from
manufacturing to service industries (see Table
13.2) . Between 1955 and 1994 the proportion
of employees in employment engaged in
service industries more than doubled, to 73
per cent. In June 1994, 15.3 million people
were employed in services in Great Britain,
over 2.1 million more than in 1983 (see Table
13.3) . Financial services, education, medical
services, retail distribution, and hotels and
catering experienced significant increases.
Employment in some services, however,
particularly transport and communications,
has fallen.
Manufacturing industry accounted for
42 per cent of employees in employment in
1955, but by 1994 the proportion had fallen
to 20 per cent. Nearly all manufacturing
industries have experienced a decline in
employment as productivity has increased and
as markets for manufactured goods have
changed. Traditional manufacturing
industries, such as steel and shipbuilding,
have experienced particularly large falls in
employment. In June 1993 employment in
the main manufacturing sectors in Great
Britain included:
• 605,000 in mechanical engineering;
• 601,000 in office machinery, electrical
engineering and instruments;
• 488,000 in food, drink and tobacco;
• 465,000 in timber, wooden furniture,
rubber and plastics;
• 447,000 in paper products, printing and
publishing; and
• 425,000 in textiles, leather, footwear and
clothing.
Occupational Changes
There has been a gradual move away from
manual occupations towards non-manual
occupations, which now account for nearly
three-fifths of jobs. The main growth areas
have been in managers and administrators, in
selling and in the personal and protective
service occupations. Self-employment is
highest in craft and related occupations
Table 13.3: Employees in Employment in Services in Great Britain
Thousands, seasonally adjusted, June
1988
1983
1991
1992
All services
13,130
14,841
15,395 15,343
1993
Wholesale distribution and
repair 1,125 1,169 1,132 1,095 1,082
Retail distribution 1,982 2,159 2,315 2,309 2,255
Hotels and catering'' 911 1,078 1,198 1,176 1,161
Transport 900 870 901 884 867
Postal services and
telecommunications 424 430 428 409 372
Banking, finance, insurance,
business services and leasing" 1,846 2,431 2,628 2,604 2,656
Public administration" 1,861 1,922 1,948 1,793 1,792
Education" 1,526 1,680 1,702 1,832 1,830
Medical and other health
services, veterinary services 1,251 1,389 1,493 1,554 1,544
Other services" ^ 1,302 1,698 1,654 1,694 1,711
15,258
Source: Employment Gazette
"Industries affected by the reclassification of some local authority employees in September 1991. Accordingly, the figures for
June 1992 and 1993 for these services are not strictly comparable with those for earlier years.
177
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
(30 per cent of those in this sector in Great
Britain in spring 1994), followed by managers
and administrators (20 per cent).
Unemployment
Since December 1992 there has been a
recovery in the labour market, and
unemployment in Britain had fallen by
376,000 by August 1994. The fall in
unemployment started at an earlier stage in
the economic cycle, reflecting a number of
factors, including an improvement in the
functioning of the labour market
(following measures such as deregulation),
more young people staying on in education,
and greater efficiency in the placing of
unemployed people into work by the
Employment Service. In August 1994
unemployment totalled 2.6 million, 9.2 per
cent of the workforce. It ranged from 7.1
per cent in East Anglia to 13.0 per cent in
Northern Ireland.
The Government has introduced a wide
range of measures to help combat
unemployment. In 1994—95 about 1.5 million
opportunities on employment and training
schemes are being offered to help
unemployed people. Recently introduced
measures include:
• Community Action, providing 50,000
opportunities for people to do voluntary
work of benefit to the community on a
part-time basis while they actively look
for work; and
• four pilot ‘Workstarf measures, which
are designed to test the effectiveness of
paying recruitment subsidies to
employers to encourage them to recruit
the long-term unemployed.
In addition, a new Jobseeker’s Allowance is
planned (see p. 406), which is intended to
improve the way in which unemployed
people receive help.
TRAINING, EDUCATION AND
ENTERPRISE
Employers in Britain spend over £20,000
million a year on employee training and
development. The Government funds a
number of training, enterprise and vocational
education programmes. Its training strategy is
designed to increase Britain’s prosperity by
stimulating enterprise and developing
excellence in skills. Individuals are being
encouraged to train by means of tax reliefs and
loan schemes. Britain is acknowledged as an
innovative world leader in open and flexible
learning, for example, through the Open
University and the Open College (see p. 428).
In May 1994 the Government
announced a series of measures,
costing about £300 million over the
three years to 1997-98, designed to
boost vocational education and
training. They include:
• new accelerated modern
apprenticeships (see p. 181);
• £63 million to update the
managerial, supervisory and
technical skills of 24,000 key
employees in small firms so that
they can pass on their skills to
others (see p. 180);
• £23 million to provide a week of
work experience for every young
person before they leave education
and to improve links between
schools and business;
• better careers education and
guidance for young people; and
• measures to update and strengthen
vocational qualifications.
Training and Enterprise Councils
There are 82 Training and Enterprise
Councils (TECs) in England and Wales.
They are independent companies run by
local business leaders. They are accountable
to Government through their contracts and
are subject to regular monitoring by
Government Offices for the Regions.
The objective of TECs is to develop the
skilled and enterprising workforce
necessary for sustaining economic growth
and prosperity. Their special focus is to
strengthen the skill base and assist local
enterprise to expand and compete effectively.
178
EMPLOYMENT
As well as running training and enterprise
programmes previously run by the
Government, TECs promote the importance
of training as a business strategy.
For 1994—95, £1,700 million has been
provided to TECs to deliver the range of
Department of Employment programmes
including Training for Work and Youth
Training (see below). They also contract with
the Department of Trade and Industry to
deliver enterprise and business assistance
programmes (see Chapter 14) and can compete
for contracts under the Government’s Single
Regeneration Budget (see p. 355).
Local Enterprise Companies
A separate network of 22 Local Enterprise
Companies (LECs) exists in Scotland. These
have wider-ranging responsibilities than the
TECs, covering economic development and
environmental improvement. LECs operate
the same major training programmes as TECs,
but, unlike them, have no responsibility for
work-related further education. They run
under the supervision of the two enterprise
bodies: Scottish Enterprise and Highlands
and Islands Enterprise (see p. 200).
Industry Training Organisations
Industry Training Organisations (ITOs) act
as the focal point for training matters in
their particular sector of industry, commerce
or public service. Their role is to ensure that
the skills needs of their sectors are being met
and that occupational standards are being
established and maintained for key
occupations. There are over 120 independent
ITOs, covering sectors employing about
85 per cent of the civilian workforce.
The National Council of Industry Training
Organisations, a voluntary body set up to
represent the interests of ITOs, aims to
improve the effectiveness of these bodies, for
example, by encouraging good practice.
National Targets for Education and
Training
The National Targets for Education and
Training were launched by the Confederation
of British Industry in 1991 and were agreed
by over 100 national and local organisations,
including all TECs, LECs and ITOs, and
other major education, training and employer
bodies. The Government supports the targets
and in 1993 established the independent
National Advisory Council for Education and
Training Targets (NACETT); a parallel body
operates in Scotland. The remit of NACETT
is to monitor progress towards the targets,
advise the Government on performance and
policies which influence progress towards
them, and promote appropriate investment
by employers.
The targets, currently under review, cover
both young people and the workforce as a
whole. Among the ‘foundation targets’ are:
• that by 1997 at least 80 per cent of all
young people attain NVQ/SVQ_ Level 2
(see p. 425) or its academic equivalent in
their foundation education and training;
and
• that by 2000, 50 per cent of young
people should attain NVQ/SVQ_Level 3
or its academic equivalent, as a basis for
further progression.
Training for Work
The Training for Work programme has the
objective of helping long-term unemployed
people to find jobs and to improve their
work-related skills through the provision of
relevant training and structured work activity
based on a careful assessment of individual
needs. Training is carried out by training
providers under contract with the local TEC
or LEC. Each new participant receives an
individually adapted package of training
and/or structured work activities. The
programme focuses more closely on the long¬
term unemployed than its predecessors.
About 114,000 places for Training for Work
are available in Great Britain in 1994—95,
when the programme is expected to help up
to 272,000 people.
Investors in People
The Investors in People initiative aims to
encourage employers to develop the
179
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
potential of all employees in line with
business goals. It is based on a rigorous
national standard. TECs and LECs provide
advice and information to help organisations
to work towards the standard. By August
1994 about 1,000 employers had achieved the
Investors in People standard, and over 9,700
had made a formal commitment to work
towards it.
Improving the Training Market
The Improving the Training Market
programme is aimed at bringing about
change and improvements in the operation
of the vocational education and training
systems. Priority has been given to
encouraging investment in skills, helping
people to improve their employment
prospects and supporting the implementation
of new qualifications.
National Training Awards
The National Training Awards aim to
complement TEC and EEC activities and the
competition is designed to promote good
training practice by example, rewarding
companies which have carried out exceptionally
effective training. Around 80 corporate
awards and approximately 20 individual
awards are presented to national winners,
who are selected from 200 regional winners.
Skill Choice
The Skill Choice initiative was introduced in
1993 and is intended to persuade
individuals of the benefits of training and to
encourage them to take greater responsibility
for their own career development.
Individuals are offered credits which they can
use to buy guidance and assessment services;
part of the cost is being met by the
Government. In the initial stage a number of
TECs and LECs are involved, providing
credits to 250,000 people in the two years
1993-94 and 1994-95.
Career Development Loans
People who live in, or intend to undertake
vocational training in, Great Britain can
apply to one of three major banks for a
Career Development Loan. Deferred
repayment loans of £200 to £8,000 can help to
pay for vocational courses lasting up to two
years, or two years of a longer course. More
than 50,000 people have borrowed over
£138 million through the programme to pay
for training. A substantial expansion of the
programme is in progress.
Small Firms Training Loans
The Small Firms Training Loans scheme
was introduced in June 1994. Firms with 50
or fewer employees may apply to one of
three major banks for a loan. Loans of
between £500 and £125,000 are available to
pay for a wide range of training and training-
related expenses. Repayments are deferred for
up to 13 months. In 1994-95 up to 3,000
loans are available.
Training for Young People
The Government guarantees the offer of a
suitable training place to all 16- and
17-year-olds who want one and are not
going into full-time education or a job.
Currently the main work-based training
provision is Youth Training (YT). Young
people receive careers guidance in the form
of training appropriate to their needs and
draw up an individual training plan in
conjunction with the Careers Service. The
delivery of training is arranged through
TECs and LECs. YT provides the
opportunity to acquire a broad-based
vocational education and to achieve a
vocational qualification at NVQ_ Level 2
(see p. 425) or a credit towards one.
Youth Credits
Youth Credits, which operate within the
broad framework of YT, are intended to
offer young people more individual choice
and a greater sense of personal responsibility
when buying training. Each credit has a
financial value and can be presented to an
employer or training provider in exchange for
training. Youth Credits have been extended
180
EMPLOYMENT
since their introduction on a pilot basis.
During 1995 they will become available from
TECs throughout England and Wales, and
the equivalent scheme, Skillseekers,
will become available throughout Scotland
from LECs. Credits are the mechanism
by which 16- and 17-year-old school and
college leavers have access to the new
apprenticeships (see below).
Modern Apprenticeships
In November 1993 the Government
announced its intention to bring in ‘Modern
Apprenticeships’ from 1995; the first
prototype schemes were launched in
September 1994. They are designed to build
on the best features of existing apprenticeships
and to increase significantly the number of
young people trained to technician,
supervisory and equivalent levels. When
Modern Apprenticeships are fully available,
about 150,000 young people in England are
expected to be in training. The aim is for
over 40,000 young people in England to
achieve qualifications at NVQ_ Level 3 or
above each year through work-based training.
Accelerated Modern Apprenticeships
Accelerated Modern Apprenticeships, which
were announced in May 1994 and will be
developed alongside Modern Apprenticeships,
will provide high-level training for those aged
18 and 19. By 2000 this is expected to produce
an extra 30,000 skilled and qualified technicians,
supervisors and craftspeople each year.
Education Initiatives
A major government objective is to raise the
motivation and attainment of young people to
achieve their full potential and develop the
skills needed by the economy. This requires
close working relationships between
industry and education. A number of
education initiatives are being implemented,
including the Technical and Vocational
Education Initiative, Education Business
Partnerships, Compacts and the National
Record of Achievement. Details are given
in Chapter 26.
Vocational Qualifications
The proportion of the workforce with
qualifications, gained either in school or
further education, is growing. Between
1984 and 1993 it rose from 63 per cent to
79 per cent.
The National Council for Vocational
Qualifications (NCVQ), established in 1986,
has been charged with reforming and
rationalising vocational qualifications. New
National Vocational Qualifications (NVQs)
have been established in England, Wales and
Northern Ireland (see p. 425). In Scotland
the Scottish Vocational Education Council
(SCOTVEC) has established parallel Scottish
Vocational Qualifications (SVQs).
NVQs and SVQs are designed mainly for
people in the workplace, although they can
also be studied full-time. They are job-
specific, based on national standards of
competence set by industry and are assessed
in the workplace. There are five levels within
the NVQ^and SVQ framework (see p. 425).
NVQs and SVQs at levels 1 to 5 to cover
90 per cent of the employed workforce are
expected to be in place by the end of 1995.
The 1994 White Paper on competitiveness
(see p. 194) announced a review of the top
100 NVQs/SVQs bv the end of 1995 and of
all NVQs/SVQs by'the end of 1997-98.
Northern Ireland
The Training and Employment Agency, an
executive agency within the Department of
Economic Development, has primary
responsibility for training and employment
services. Its overall aim is to assist economic
growth by ensuring the provision and
operation of training and employment
services that contribute to Northern Ireland
companies becoming more competitive and
individuals obtaining the skills and
competences needed to secure employment.
The Agency works closely with employers
and is encouraging each main sector of
industry to form a sectoral representative
body to represent the opinions of employers
and others on training needs. It has also
established sectoral working groups to
develop training strategies.
181
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Northern Ireland has its own range of
training and employment programmes. These
include:
• the Action for Community Employment
programme, which provides temporary
jobs with a training input for long-term
unemployed people;
• the Job Training programme, a
programme devised to help unemployed
adults compete for available jobs; and
• the Youth Training programme, an
integrated training programme for those
aged 16 and 17 which aims to develop
the occupational competence of young
people entering the labour market.
RECRUITMENT AND JOB-FINDING
There are a variety of ways in which people
can find jobs. In winter 1993-94, according
to the Labour Force Survey, the main
methods used by people who had found
their current job in the previous three
months were:
• hearing from someone else who worked
there (31 per cent);
• replying to advertisements (25 per cent);
• direct approaches to employers
(16 per cent); and
• visiting a Jobcentre (9 per cent).
Government Employment Services
The Government provides a range of services
to jobseekers through the Employment
Service, an executive agency within the
Department of Employment. These include:
• a network of local offices, at which
people can find details of job
opportunities;
• advice and guidance so that people can
find the best route back into
employment, for example, by training;
and
• a range of special programmes.
The Employment Service has over 1,200
Jobcentres and unemployment benefit
offices, and employs about 47,000 staff.
Jobcentres are now being integrated with the
benefit offices to provide a comprehensive
service to unemployed people. By mid-1994
over 900 integrated offices had been
established. In 1993-94 the Employment
Service placed 1.64 million unemployed
people into jobs and conducted over 7 million
advisory interviews to help people find
appropriate work or places on employment
and training programmes.
The Jobseeker’s Charter contains a
number of provisions governing the standard
of service to users. These include provisions
on the speed of service, and ensuring that
vacancies on display boards at offices are up
to date and are available, and that those
entitled to benefit receive the correct
payments promptly.
Advisory Services
Help for unemployed people is provided
through the main jobcentre services, which
provide access to vacancies, employment
advice and training opportunities. Advisers
provide unemployed people with information
on employment and training opportunities
available locally. New Client Advisers
interview newly unemployed people to check
their eligibility for benefit. Together with the
unemployed person, they agree a ‘Back to
Work Plan’, which shows them the best
course of action. These plans are reviewed at
every advisory interview.
Under the Restart programme, everyone
who has been unemployed for six months
or longer is asked to attend a Restart
interview with a claimant adviser. The
adviser and unemployed person discuss that
person’s circumstances, with the aim of
helping him or her back into work as soon
as possible.
The Service has a number of programmes,
some of which are designed to help the
long-term unemployed. These include:
• Jobclubs, where participants are given
training and advice in job-hunting skills
and have access to facilities to help an
intensive job search;
• Restart courses, designed to rebuild self-
confidence and motivation, and including
help with job-hunting skills; and
182
EMPLOYMENT
• Jobplan workshops, which are designed
to enable those unemployed for a year to
assess their skills, qualities and training
needs, and to act as an introduction to
future job and training options.
Help for People with Disabilities
All of the Employment Service’s programmes
make provision for people with disabilities.
Services for people with disabilities are now
being delivered through local integrated
specialist teams—Placing Assessment and
Counselling Teams. They are supported by
nine regional Ability Development Centres,
which carry out training and development
work, and provide special advice for
employers who may be considering
employing people with disabilities. A wide
range of programmes, such as one offering
sheltered employment opportunities, is
available for people with disabilities who need
specialist help.
Employment Agencies
There are many private employment
agencies, including several large firms with
many branches. The total value of the
market has been estimated at about £8,000
million a year.
The main trade body for the employment
agency industry is the Federation of
Recruitment and Employment Services,
which regulates the activities of its
members by means of a Code of Good
Recruitment Practice and by specialist section
codes of practice.
The law governing employment agencies
is less restrictive than that of most other EU
countries. Agencies must be licensed by the
Secretary of State, and abide by specified
standards of good conduct. They are
generally prohibited from charging fees to
people for finding or seeking to find jobs,
although there are conditional exceptions for
entertainment and modelling agencies. There
were over 14,800 licence holders at the end
of March 1994.
The Deregulation and Contracting Out
Bill (see p. 197) proposes the abolition of
licensing requirements, but there would be
powers to prohibit people from operating
agencies when necessary. Agencies would still
have to comply with statutory standards of
conduct, including the general prohibition on
charging fees to jobseekers.
TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF
EMPLOYMENT
Employment Rights
Employment protection legislation provides a
number of safeguards for employees. For
example, most employees have a right to a
written statement setting out details of the
main conditions, including pay, hours of
work and holidays.
Employees with the necessary period of
continuous employment with their employer
(normally two years) are entitled to lump¬
sum redundancy payments if their jobs cease
to exist (for example, because of technological
improvements or a fall in demand) and their
employers cannot offer suitable alternative
work. Where employers are insolvent,
redundancy payments are met directly from
the National Insurance fund.
New7 maternity rights were
established by the Trade Union
Reform and Employment Rights Act
1993 and apply to pregnant employees
whose babies arrive on or after 16
October 1994. They implement an EC
directive and coincide with new
legislation on maternity pay (see
p. 402). All pregnant employees,
regardless of length of service, have
the right to 14 weeks’ statutory
maternity leave with all their
non-wage contractual benefits
maintained, and protection against
dismissal because of pregnancy.
Existing rights are preserved.
Minimum periods of notice when
employment is to be terminated are laid
down for both employers and employees.
Most employees who believe they have been
unfairly dismissed have the right to complain
to an industrial tribunal, provided they have
183
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the necessary qualifying period of
employment. If the complaint is upheld, the
tribunal may make an order for re¬
employment or award compensation.
Legislation forbids any employment of
children under 13 years of age, and
employment in any industrial undertaking of
children who have not reached the statutory
minimum school-leaving age, with some
exceptions for family undertakings.
Equal Opportunities
The Race Relations Act 1976 makes it
generally unlawful to discriminate on
grounds of colour, race, nationality
(including citizenship) or ethnic or national
origin, in employment, training and related
matters. The Department of Employment
operates a nationwide Race Relations
Employment Advisory Service. Its
objective is to promote the Government’s
policies aimed at combating racial
discrimination in employment and
promoting fair treatment and equality of
opportunity in employment. Advisers
provide employers with advice and practical
help in developing and implementing
effective equal opportunity strategies.
The Sex Discrimination Act 1975, as
amended, makes it generally unlawful in
Great Britain to discriminate on grounds of
sex or marital status when recruiting,
training, promoting, dismissing or retiring
staff. The Equal Pay Act 1970 makes it
generally unlawful to discriminate between
men and women in pay and other terms and
conditions of employment. The Act was
significantly extended in 1984 to meet EU
requirements by providing for equal pay for
work of equal value.
Practical advice to employers and others
on the best arrangements for implementing
equal opportunities policies in Great Britain _
is given in codes of practice from the
Commission for Racial Equality and from
the Equal Opportunities Commission (see
p. 36), while the Department of
Employment has also published practical
guidance to employers on how to make
equal opportunities an integral part of
management practice.
184
Northern Ireland
Similar legislation to that in Great Britain
on equal pay and sex discrimination applies
in Northern Ireland; there is at present no
legislation on race relations, but this is
under review. Discrimination, both direct
and indirect, in employment on grounds of
religious belief or political opinion is
unlawful. The Fair Employment
Commission has the task of promoting
equality of opportunity and investigating
employment practices, with powers to issue
legally enforceable directions. The Fair
Employment Tribunal adjudicates on
individual complaints of religious or
political discrimination and enforces the
Commission’s directions. All but the
smallest employers are required to monitor
the religious composition of their workforces
and periodically to review their employment
practices. Where fair participation is not
being enjoyed by both Protestants and
Roman Catholics, the introduction of
‘affirmative action’ measures must be
considered.
Earnings
According to the Department of
Employment’s New Earnings Survey, the
average weekly earnings, unaffected by
absence and including overtime payments,
in April 1994 of full-time employees on
adult rates were £326. Earnings were
higher for non-manual employees (£360)
than for manual employees (£263).
Managerial and professional groups are the
highest paid. The industries with the
highest average weekly earnings were energy
and water supply (£427) and banking,
finance, insurance, business services and
leasing (£381).
Overtime and other additional payments
are particularly important for manual
employees, for whom such additional
payments represented over one-fifth of
earnings. About 49 per cent of manual
employees and 19 per cent of non-manual
employees received overtime payments.
The rate of increase in earnings has
recently been running at a relatively low
EMPLOYMENT
level. In the year to July 1994 the underlying
average increase for the economy as a whole
was about 3.75 per cent.
Fringe Benefits
A variety of fringe benefits are used by
employers to provide additional rewards to
their employees, including schemes to
encourage employee financial participation in
their companies, pension schemes, private
medical insurance, subsidised meals, company
cars and childcare schemes.
Many employees are covered by pension
schemes provided by their employers. Such
benefits are more usual among clerical and
professional employees than among manual
workers. Nearly 11 million people in Britain
are members of occupational schemes.
Company cars are provided for employees
in a wide variety of circumstances. It is
estimated that around 1.8 million people have
a company car and around half of these
receive fuel for private motoring in their cars.
The Government has introduced tax reliefs
to encourage employers to set up financial
participation schemes, and give employees a
direct financial stake in the business they
work for.
Profit-related pay (PRP) schemes link part
of pay to changes in a business’s profits. PRP
schemes have increased considerably and by
the end of March 1994 over 7,000 schemes
were registered with the Inland Revenue.
They covered nearly 1.8 million people, 54
per cent more than in March 1993. Employee
share schemes allow employees to receive
low-cost or free shares from their employer
without paying income tax. By the end of
March 1993 about 3.1 million employees
had benefited from all-employee profit
sharing and Save-As-You-Earn (SAYE) share
option schemes.
Hours of Work
Most full-time employees have a basic
working week of between 34 and 40 hours,
and work a five-day week. When overtime is
taken into account, average weekly hours
worked in Great Britain in April 1994 were
41.6 for men and 37.6 for women. Average
hours worked by full-time and part-time
employees and the self-employed were 39.7
for men and 26.5 for women in spring 1994.
Hours worked tended to be longest in
agriculture, transport and communications,
and construction, and shortest in most service
industries. More men than women work
overtime, and those in manual occupations
generally work more overtime than employees
in non-manual jobs.
In general, there are no limits on hours
worked by adults except in a few occupations
(such as for drivers of goods and public
service vehicles).
The Government is challenging in the
European Court a draft EC directive which
includes proposals for a maximum 48-hour
working week.
Holidays with Pay
There are no general statutory entitlements to
holidays, and holiday entitlements are
frequently determined by negotiation. Recent
decades have seen a considerable increase in
holiday entitlements. In 1961, 97 per cent of
full-time manual employees were entitled to
two weeks a year. Nowadays, holiday
entitlements (excluding public holidays)
generally provide for at least four weeks’ paid
holiday a year. Over three-quarters of manual
employees covered by nationally negotiated
agreements have basic holiday entitlements of
21 to 24 days, with a significant number
having five weeks or more. Non-manual
workers tend to have longer holidays than
manual workers. Holiday entitlements may
also be dependent upon length of service.
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS
The structure of industrial relations in
Britain has been established mainly on a
voluntary basis. The system is based chiefly
on the organisation of employees and
employers into trade unions and employers’
associations, and on freely conducted
negotiations at all levels.
Trends in Bargaining and Pay
There has been a considerable reduction in
185
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the proportion of employees and workplaces
where pay is determined by collective
bargaining. The proportion of employees
covered by major collective agreements
declined from about 55 per cent in the
mid-1970s to 31 per cent in 1993. Private
sector employees are much less likely to be
covered by collective bargaining than are
public sector employees. National agreements
covering over 1.2 million employees have
ended since 1986 in sectors such as
engineering, banking, the multiple food trade,
electricity supply and water supply.
Where agreements in the private sector are
industry-wide, they are often supplemented
by local agreements in companies or factories
(plant bargaining). These company or plant
agreements frequently produce pay rates
which are higher than the minima set by
national agreements, as well as other
detailed terms and conditions of
employment. Where there is no collective
bargaining, pay is usually determined by
management at local level.
Another trend has been the growth in
systems linking pay to performance. A
substantial majority of medium and large
employers make some use of performance-
related pay systems such as merit pay,
financial participation (see p. 185) and
individual payment by results. Private
sector organisations are more likely to
use performance-related pay than public
sector bodies.
The Government is committed to the
further development of performance-related
pay in the public sector as part of its wider
objectives for improving the quality of the
public services as set out in the Citizen’s
Charter (see p. 67). Performance-related pay
is being extended in areas such as the Civil
Service and education. Greater pay flexibilitv
is also being encouraged in other ways, such
as the delegation of pay determination to
many departments and agencies in central
government, to self-governing trusts in the
National Health Service and to grant-
maintained schools.
‘New-style’ agreements, often associated
with overseas-owned companies, have
become more widespread. Features normally
include flexibility in working practices,
recognition of a single union for all of a
company’s employees and ‘single status’,
involving the elimination of the traditional
distinction between managers, supervisors
and other employees.
Employee Involvement
Employers practise a wide variety of
methods of informing and consulting their
employees, not only through committees
but also through direct communication
between management and employees. These
methods include:
• employee bulletins and reports;
• briefing systems;
• quality circles;
• financial participation schemes; and
• attitude surveys.
The Government is, however, opposed to
the EU’s proposals for statutory requirements
on some multinational employers to inform
and consult their employees, and for worker
participation in decision-making through
works councils. It believes that companies
should be free to develop employee
involvement arrangements which are
appropriate to their own circumstances and
the needs of their employees.
Trade Unions
Trade unions have members in nearly all
occupations. They are widely recognised by
employers in the public sector and in large
firms and establishments. As well as
negotiating pay and other terms and
conditions of employment with employers,
they provide benefits and services such as
educational facilities, financial services,
legal advice and aid in work-related cases.
In recent years many unions have
extended considerably the range of services
for members.
There has been a decline in trade union
membership, and by the end of 1992 total
union membership was 9 million, about 3 3
per cent of employees. The decline reflects
the moves away from manufacturing and
public services, both of which have a
186
EMPLOYMENT
relatively high level of membership, and the
growth in part-time employment. Union
membership is higher among male employees
(38 per cent) than among female employees
(31 per cent) and in large workplaces.
Mergers have resulted in a fall in the number
of unions, and several unions are discussing
possible mergers.
UNISON, with about 1.5 million
members, is the biggest union in Britain. It
was formed in 1993 from a merger of three
unions: the Confederation of Health Service
Employees, the National Union of Public
Employees and the National and Local
Government Officers’ Association. Other
unions with over 500,000 members are:
• the Transport and General Workers
Union (with 1 million members);
• the Amalgamated Engineering and
Electrical Union (884,000);
• GMB (799,000)—a general union with
members in a range of public and private
sector industries; and
• Manufacturing Science Finance
(552,000).
At the end of 1993 there were 287 trade
unions on the list maintained by the
Certification Officer, who, among other
duties, is responsible for certifying the
independence of trade unions. To be eligible
for entry on the list a trade union must
show that it consists wholly or mainly of
workers and that its principal purposes
include the regulation of relations between
workers and employers or between workers
and employers’ associations.
Trade union organisation varies widely,
but there is usually a national executive
council or committee. Many unions also
have regional and district organisations,
while local branches cover one or more
workplaces. Elected workplace representatives
are often called ‘shop stewards’. Where
tw'o or more unions have members in the
same workplace, shop stewards’ committees
may be formed to discuss matters of
common concern.
Trades Union Congress
In Britain the national body of the trade
union movement is the Trades Union
Congress (TUC), founded in 1868. Its
affiliated membership comprises 69 trade
unions, which together represent some
7.3 million people, or about 80 per cent of all
trade unionists in Britain.
The TUC’s objectives are to promote the
interests of its affiliated organisations and to
improve the economic and social conditions
of working people. It deals with all general
questions which concern trade unions, both
nationally and internationally, and provides a
forum in which affiliated unions can
collectively determine policy. There are six
TUC regional councils for England and a
Wales Trades Union Council. The annual
Congress meets in September to discuss
matters of concern to trade unionists. A
General Council represents the TUC
between annual meetings.
In March 1994 the TUC launched a
programme of change designed to
promote trade unionism and increase
its influence on the nation’s affairs.
The TUC’s immediate priorities
include:
• campaigning for full employment
and job security;
• developing links with government
and other bodies;
• developing union services in areas
such as education, health and
safety, pensions and training; and
• strengthening work on Europe, for
example, on workers’ rights.
The TUC plays an active part in
international trade union activity, through
its affiliation to the International
Confederation of Free Trade Unions and
the European Trade Union Confederation.
It also nominates the British workers’
delegation to the annual International
Labour Conference.
Scotland and Northern Ireland
Trade unions in Scotland also have their own
national central body, the Scottish Trades
Union Congress, which in many respects is
187
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
similar in constitution and function to the
TUC. Trade unions in Northern Ireland are
represented by the Northern Ireland
Committee of the Irish Congress of Trade
Unions (ICTU). Most trade unionists in
Northern Ireland are members of
organisations affiliated to the IC1U,
while the majority also belong to unions
based in Great Britain which are affiliated
to the TUC. The Northern Ireland
Committee of the ICTU enjoys a high degree
of autonomy.
Legal Framework
The Government’s reforms of industrial
relations and trade union law have helped to
change the balance of power between trade
unions and employers, and between trade
unions and their own members. For example,
since 1980 employers have been free to
decide whether or not to bargain with a trade
union or continue to do so. Legislation is
consolidated in the Trade Union and Labour
Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992, as
amended by the most recent Act, the Trade
Union Reform and Employment Rights
Act 1993.
There were 649,000 working days lost in
211 stoppages of work as a result of
industrial action in 1993 (see Table 13.4),
the lowest number of stoppages since records
began in 1891.
Union Membership and Non-membership Rights
All individuals have the right under the law
not to be dismissed or refused employment
(or the services of an employment agency)
because of membership or otherwise of a
trade union. Individuals who believe that they
have been dismissed or refused employment
on such grounds may complain to an
industrial tribunal. All employees who are
union members also have the right not to
have union membership subscriptions
deducted from their pay unless they have
authorised this, and renew this at least every
three years.
The Conduct of Union Affairs
The law requires a trade union to elect every
member of its governing body, its general
secretary and its president. Elections must be
held at least every five years and be carried
out by a secret postal ballot under
independent scrutiny. Any union member
who believes that the union has not complied
with the statutory requirements may complain
to the courts or to the Certification Officer.
A trade union may establish a political
fund if it wishes to use its money for what
the law defines as ‘political objects’. If a
union wishes to set up a political fund, its
members must first agree in a secret ballot a
resolution adopting those political objectives
as an aim of the union. The union must also
ballot its members every ten years to
maintain the fund. Union members have a
statutory right to opt out of contributing to a
political fund.
The law also gives all union members a
statutory remedy if unjustifiably disciplined
by their union, for example, for refusing to
come out on strike or for crossing a picket
Table 13.4: Industrial Disputes 1983-1993
Working days
lost
(thousands)
1983
1988
1991
1992
1993
3,754
3,702
761
528
649
Working days
lost per 1,000
employees'
Workers
involved
(thousands)
178
166
34
24
30
574
790
176
148
385
Number of
stoppages
1,364
781
369
253
211
Source: Department of Employment
“Based on the mid-year (June) estimates of employees in employment.
188
EMPLOYMENT
line. Members also have the right to inspect
their union’s accounting records and obtain
an annual statement from the union about its
financial affairs.
Industrial Action
For most of the 20th century trade unions
enjoyed wide immunity protecting them from
legal proceedings for organising industrial
action, so that the organisation of almost any
industrial action was protected. Legislative
reforms have restricted the scope of these
immunities. To have the benefit of statutory
immunity (that is, to be ‘lawful’), the
organisation of industrial action must now be
wholly or mainly in contemplation or
furtherance of a trade dispute between workers
and their own employer, and must not:
• involve workers who have no dispute
with their own employer (so-called
‘secondary’ action);
• involve unlawful forms of picketing;
• be to establish or maintain a union-only
labour agreement (the ‘closed shop’); or
• be in support of any employee dismissed
while taking unofficial industrial action.
Before calling for industrial action, a trade
union must first obtain the support of its
members in a secret postal ballot and must
notify employers of its intention to conduct
such a ballot. The union must also provide
employers, in writing, with at least seven
days’ notice of official industrial action
following a ballot, and with details of the
ballot result.
Any trade union member has the right
to restrain the union from calling on him or
her, and other members, to take action
unless a properly conducted secret ballot has
supported the action. Anyone deprived of
goods or services because of unlawful
organisation of industrial action has
the right to obtain a court order to stop
this happening.
Employers’ Organisations
Many employers in Britain are members of
employers’ organisations, some of which are
wholly concerned with labour matters,
although others are also trade associations
concerned with commercial matters in
general. With the move away from national
pay bargaining, many employers’
associations have looked at their functions
and have moved towards concentrating on
areas such as supplying information for
bargaining purposes and dealing with
specialist questions.
Employers’ organisations are usually
established on an industry basis rather than a
product basis, for example, the Engineering
Employers’ Federation. A few are purely
local in character or deal w ith a section of an
industry or, for example, with small
businesses; most are national and are
concerned with the whole of an industry. In
some of the main industries there are local or
regional organisations combined into national
federations. At the end of 1993, 123 listed
and 130 unlisted employers’ associations were
known to the Certification Officer.
Most national organisations belong to
the Confederation of British Industry (see
p. 193), which represents directly or
indirectly some 250,000 businesses.
Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration
Service
The Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration
Service (ACAS) is an independent statutory
body which has a general duty of promoting
the improvement of industrial relations.
ACAS seeks to discharge its responsibilities
through the voluntary co-operation of
employers, employees and, where
appropriate, their representatives. Its main
functions are collective conciliation,
provision of arbitration and mediation
facilities, advisory mediation services for
preventing disputes and improving
industrial relations through the joint
involvement of employers and employees,
and providing an information service. ACAS
also conciliates in disputes on individual
employment rights.
In 1993 ACAS:
• received 1,211 requests for collective
conciliation, with a further 163 requests
referred to arbitration or mediation;
189
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
• dealt with nearly 69,600 individual
conciliation cases;
• made nearly 4,000 advisory visits;
• assisted with 529 joint working exercises;
and
• dealt with almost 481,400 enquiries
through its public enquiry points.
In Northern Ireland the Labour Relations
Agency, an independent statutory body,
provides services similar to those provided by
ACAS in Great Britain.
HEALTH AND SAFETY AT WORK
Health and safety standards in Britain are
among the best in the world. Recent statistics
indicate a reduction in the rate of major and
other reported injuries to employees. In
1992-93 the number of deaths from accidents
at work fell to 430, the lowest figure
recorded. The decline reflects improvements
in safety, together with a change in industrial
structure away from old heavy industries
which tend to have higher risks. About 18
million working days a year are lost as a
result of work-related injuries.
The Health and Safety Commission
has conducted a review of all health
and safety legislation to assess its
relevance. The review, published in
May 1994, looked at the impact on
business, and whether repeal or
simplification would be possible
without endangering health and safety
standards. As a result, it is
recommending a substantial
simplification of legislation, including
the removal of nearly 100 regulations
identified as no longer necessary.
The principal legislation is the Health and
Safety at Work etc. Act 1974. It imposes
general duties on everyone concerned with
work activities, including employers, the self-
employed, employees, and manufacturers and
suppliers of materials for use at work.
Associated Acts and regulations deal with
particular hazards and types of work.
Employers with five or more staff must
prepare a written statement of their health
and safety policy and bring it to the
attention of their staff.
The Control of Substances Hazardous to
Health Regulations 1988 constitute one of the
most important sets of regulations made
under the 1974 Act. They replaced a range of
outdated legislation by a comprehensive and
systematic approach to the control of
exposure to virtually all substances hazardous
to health. These include chemicals, fumes,
dust and micro-organisms.
Six new sets of health and safety
regulations came into force at the beginning
of 1993, giving effect in Britain to various EC
directives. Most of the requirements in the
regulations clarify existing health and safety
law and make it more explicit. The
regulations cover:
• the management of health and safety;
• the provision and use of work equipment;
• personal protective equipment;
• manual handling;
• display screen equipment; and
• general health, safety and welfare in the
workplace.
Health and Safety Commission
The Health and Safety Commission (HSC)
has responsibility for developing policy on
health and safety at work, including
proposals for new or revised regulations and
approved codes of practice. The HSC has
an obligation to consult those who would be
affected by such proposals and makes
recommendations to the appropriate Secretary
of State.
The HSC has a number of advisory
committees covering subjects such as toxic
substances, genetic modification and the
safety of nuclear installations. There are also
several industry advisory committees, each of
which deals with a specific sector of industry.
Health and Safety Executive
The Health and Safety Executive (HSE) is
the primary instrument for carrying out the
HSC’s policies and has day-to-day
190
EMPLOYMENT
responsibility for enforcing health and safety
law, except where other bodies, such as local
authorities, are responsible. Its field
services and inspections over the country as
a whole are carried out by the Field
Operations Division. This incorporates the
Factory, Agricultural and Quarries
inspectorates, together with the regional staff
of the Employment Medical Advisory
Service (which provides advice on medical
aspects of employment problems), and the
Field Consulting Groups, which provide
technical support to the inspectorates. The
HSE also includes:
• the policy divisions covering health,
safety and strategic considerations;
• the Technology and Health Services
Division, which provides technical advice
on industrial health and safety matters; and
• the Health and Safety Laboratory, which
provides scientific and medical support
and testing services, and carries out
research.
In premises such as offices, shops,
warehouses, restaurants and hotels, health
and safety legislation is enforced by
inspectors appointed by local authorities,
working under guidance from the HSE.
Some other official bodies work under agency
agreement with the HSE.
Northern Ireland
The general requirements of the Northern
Ireland health and safety legislation are
broadly similar to those for Great Britain.
They are enforced mainly by the Department
of Economic Development and the
Department of Agriculture through their
health and safety inspectorates, although the
district councils have an enforcement role
similar to that of local authorities in Great
Britain. There is a Health and Safety
Agency, roughly corresponding to the
HSC but without its policy-making
powers, and an Employment Medical
Advisory Service.
Further Reading
Employment. Aspects of Britain series, HMSO, 1994.
Employment Gazette. Department of Employment. Monthly. Harrington Kilbride pic.
Essentials of Health and Safety at Work. HSE Books, 1994.
Labour Force Survey Quarterly Bulletin. Department of Employment.
191
14 Industry and
Government
Structure and Organisation 192
Industrial Associations 193
Government Relations with
Industry 194
Regional Industrial
Development 198
Inward Investment 201
Regulation of Markets 202
Management Initiatives 206
Quality and Standards 206
Innovation 208
Private enterprises are responsible for over three-quarters of total economic
activity. Since 1979 the Government has privatised nearly 50 major businesses
and reduced the state-owned sector of industry by about two-thirds. The
Government is taking measures to cut unnecessary regulations imposed on
business, and operates schemes which provide direct assistance or advice
mainly to small and medium-sized businesses.
STRUCTURE AND ORGANISATION
In some sectors a small number of large
companies and their subsidiaries are
responsible for a substantial proportion of
total production, notably in the vehicle,
aerospace and transport equipment
industries. Private enterprises account for by
far the greater part of activity in the
agricultural, manufacturing, construction,
distributive, financial and miscellaneous
service sectors. The private sector
contributed 76 per cent of total domestic
expenditure in 1993, general government
23 per cent and public corporations
1 per cent.
About 250 British industrial
companies each have an annual turnover of
over £500 million. The annual turnover of
the biggest company, British Petroleum (BP),
makes it the 11th largest industrial group in
the world and the second largest in Europe.
Five British firms are among the top 20
European Union (EU) companies in terms of
capital employed.
Industrial Financing
Over half of companies’ funds for investment
and other purposes are generated internally.
Banks are the chief external source of finance,
but companies have increasingly turned to
equity finance. The main forms of short-term
finance in the private sector are bank
overdrafts, trade credit and factoring (making
cash available to a company in exchange for
debts owing to it).
Types of medium- and long-term finance
include bank loans, mortgaging of property
and the issue of shares and other securities to
the public through the London Stock
Exchange. The leasing of equipment may also
be regarded as a form of finance. Other
sources of finance for industry include the
Government, the EU and specialist financial
institutions, like financing and leasing,
factoring and venture capital companies.
Venture Capital
Venture capital, or private equity capital, is a
192
INDUSTRY AND GOVERNMENT
major source of funding for the start-up,
expansion or the management buy-out or buy-
in (see below) of a company. Venture capital is
provided by major institutions and is managed
by independent fund and investment managers
and wholly owned subsidiaries or divisions of
large financial institutions such as banks. The
British Venture Capital Association (BVCA)
has 115 full members.
Over £10,000 million has been invested
by venture capital companies in 11,700
businesses since 1983, with £1,400 million
being invested in 1,200 businesses in 1993.
Buy-ins and Buy-outs
In the late 1980s there was a rise in the
number of buy-outs, in which the staff or
management of a company raise the finance to
purchase it, and buy-ins, whereby the staff or
management of one firm purchase another.
Buy-outs and buy-ins accounted for 63 per
cent of venture capital investments by BVCA
members in Britain in 1993.
Taxation
Rates of corporate taxation have been
progressively reduced in recent years. The main
rate of corporation tax is 33 per cent, with a
reduced rate of 25 per cent for small firms (see
p. 197—those with annual profits of less than
£300,000). For companies with profits of
between £300,000 and £1.5 million, the overall
corporation tax rate is between the main rate
and the rate for small firms. Expenditure on
business plant and machinery, industrial
building, and scientific research qualifies for
annual allowances against profit for tax purposes.
A new Enterprise Investment Scheme, which
succeeds the Business Expansion Scheme, is
designed to encourage equity investment in
unquoted trading companies—usually small
concerns. It provides relief on investments at a
rate of 20 per cent as well as income or capital
gains tax relief on losses. The Government has
also proposed a new venture capital trust scheme.
This would permit pool savings and capital
gains from investment in unquoted trading
companies; investors would receive dividends
and capital gains free of tax.
INDUSTRIAL ASSOCIATIONS
Confederation of British Industry
The Confederation of British Industry (CBI) is
the largest employers’ organisation in Britain,
representing about 250,000 companies from all
sectors, which together employ over 60 per
cent of Britain’s workforce. Membership ranges
from the smallest to the largest companies in
manufacturing, agriculture, construction,
distribution, mining, finance, retailing,
insurance, and other sectors. Most national
employers’ organisations, trade associations,
and some chambers of commerce are members.
The CBI aims primarily to ensure that the
Government, national and international
institutions and the public understand the
needs, intentions and problems of business, so
as to create a climate of opinion in which
business can operate efficiently and profitably.
It campaigns to lessen the burdens on business,
tackle handicaps on competition, and help
improve the performance of companies. It
offers members a forum, a lobby and a range
of advisory services. The CBI also conducts
surveys of activity in manufacturing, distribution,
financial services, the regions, innovation, and
pay and productivity. It has 12 regional offices
and an office in Brussels. The CBI is the
British member of the Union of Industrial and
Employers’ Confederations of Europe.
British Chambers of Commerce
The British Chambers of Commerce (BCC)
represents business views to the Government
at national and local levels. It promotes local
economic development—for example, through
regeneration projects, tourism, inward
investment promotion and business services,
including overseas trade missions, exhibitions
and training conferences. It also provides
member firms with information about
overseas buyers and product sourcing. The
BCC represents over 214,000 businesses in
over 230 chambers of commerce and trade
throughout Britain.
Institute of Directors
The Institute of Directors (IOD) has more
193
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
than 48,600 members worldwide, including
31,200 members in Britain, many of whom
are in the small business sector. The IOD
provides business advisory services on a range
of matters affecting company directors, such
as corporate management, insolvency and
career counselling, and represents the
interests of members to authorities in Britain
and the EU. It also offers a full training
programme of courses and lectures.
Trade and Employers’ Organisations
Trade associations consist of companies
producing or selling a particular product or
group of products. They exist to supply
common services, regulate trading practices
and represent their members to
government departments.
Employers’ organisations are usually
concerned with the negotiation of wages and
conditions of work in a particular industry,
although an institution may combine this
function with that of a trade association.
GOVERNMENT RELATIONS WITH
INDUSTRY
The Government believes that economic
decisions are best taken by those competing
in the market place, and that government
should encourage enterprise and create the
right climate for markets to work better.
The Department of Trade and Industry
(DTI) is the department mainly responsible
for the Government’s relations with industry
and commerce. Specific responsibilities
include technology and innovation, overseas
trade and export promotion (outlined in
Chapter 12), competition policy and
consumer affairs, regional industrial
development, small firms, company legislation
and patents. Through the Invest in Britain
Bureau (see p. 202), it gives advice and
assistance to overseas companies on locating
in Britain. The Scottish, Welsh and Northern
Ireland Offices are responsible for industrial
policies in their areas.
The Government has reorganised the DTI
so that it relates more closely to individual
sectors of business. In 1992 the DTI specified
its objectives as:
• identifying business needs through close
contact with individual sectors;
• ensuring these needs are taken into
account by Government and the EU;
• identifying influences on competitiveness
at home and abroad;
• working for global trade liberalisation
worldwide and helping businesses take
advantage of market opportunities at
home and abroad;
• widening choice and stimulating
enterprise by promoting competition and
privatisation;
• maintaining confidence in markets and
protecting consumers by fair regulation;
• reducing unnecessary regulatory and
administrative burdens on business;
• promoting innovation and best practice in
quality, design and management;
• fostering the creation and development of
small and medium-sized businesses;
• responding to the needs of different regions
and areas with special difficulties; and
• taking account of environmental issues
when developing government policies and
stimulating an effective business response
to environmental developments.
Competitiveness White Paper
A White Paper, issued in May 1994, contains
a programme of new measures to help British
business compete effectively in world
markets. They are devoted to improving
education and training, helping small firms to
be more innovative and to increase exports,
boosting regional economies and attracting
more inward investment. Some of the more
important measures are covered in this
chapter, and also in Chapter 13.
Education and Training
A well-educated and well-trained workforce is
considered essential for economic growth,
particularly at a time of intense international
competition and rapid technological advance.
The Government takes measures to see that
education and training are broadly based and
194
OVERSEAS TRADE
The Dome of the Rock in
Jerusalem, recently restored by
Mivan, an international
construction company based in
Antrim, Northern Ireland.
Special automated machinery was
designed to tackle the complex
work, and over $1 million worth
of gold was applied to the
1,500 sq m surface of the dome.
Pharmacist James Lofthouse
invented Fisherman’s Friend
lozenges in 1865 to relieve the
bronchial ailments suffered by
trawlermen in the fishing port of
Fleetwood, Lancashire. Now 85
per cent of production is exported,
and the company has won a
Queen’s Award for Export three
times in the past ten years.
THE CHANNEL TUNNEL
1994 marked the start of services
through the Channel Tunnel.
Some idea of the scale of
the project can be gained
from this view of the
approach road to the
Coquelles terminal
near Calais, France.
Signs direct drivers into
the correct lanes.
Vehicles are carried between the
two terminals on purpose-built
shuttle trains. The layout of the
terminal allows cars to be driven
straight onto the train.
The Eurostar trains have been
specially designed to provide services
between London, Paris and Brussels.
Much longer than other passenger
trains in Britain, they are capable of
running using different systems of
overhead and third-rail electrification.
The official inauguration of the tunnel
took place on 6 May 1994. The
ceremony, which included a journey
through the tunnel, was performed by
Her Majesty The Queen and
President Mitterand of France.
The Channel Tunnel has
been commemorated in
these special postage
stamps symbolising the
joining of the two
countries, designed
jointly by the Royal Mail
and La Poste, the French
post office.
WORLD WAR II REMEMBERED
VE Day, London 1945.
Veterans gather on the
beach at Arromanches
in Normandy, France,
for a service to
commemorate the D-Day
landings.
/
INDUSTRY AND GOVERNMENT
that people of all ages can acquire relevant
knowledge and skills. Education-business
co-operation is constantly being improved
(see p. 422).
New initiatives on education and
training outlined in the competitiveness
White Paper include:
• improved careers guidance for secondary
level students;
• a strengthening of academic and
vocational qualifications;
• extra funding to support work experience
for school students;
• new accelerated apprenticeships; and
• funding for small firms to train people as
trainers.
Training and Enterprise Councils and Local
Enterprise Companies
The Government has set up a network of 82
business-led Training and Enterprise Councils
(TECs) in England and Wales and 22 Local
Enterprise Companies (LECs) in Scotland.
TECs and LECs are independent companies
run by boards of directors, the majority of
whom are drawn from private sector business.
Grants are made available to TECs to enable
them to provide a range of training, vocational
education and enterprise programmes on
behalf of the Government. LECs encourage
investment in the development of skills
throughout the workforce and invest directly
in training, particularly for school-leavers and
the long-term unemployed. In addition, they
offer a range of advisory and training services
to businesses, including schemes to enhance
the expertise of managers.
Single European Market
The Government believes that the completion
of the single European market, which was
achieved by the end of 1992 (see p. 117), will
benefit the economy of each member state,
and that the removal of trade barriers should
lead to a reduction in business costs as well
as increasing competition and stimulating
efficiency, benefiting consumers and
encouraging the creation of jobs and wealth.
Ratification of the European Economic
Area (EEA) has extended the single
market to Austria, Finland, Iceland,
Norway and Sweden; the EEA has around
370 million consumers.
Specific benefits of the single market
include:
• increased consumer choice;
• removal of barriers to trade through
mutual recognition of standards and
harmonisation where appropriate;
• liberalisation of public procurement;
• the right to trade financial services
throughout the EEA on the basis of a
single authorisation ‘passport’
(see p. 170);
• mutual recognition of professional and
vocational qualifications; and
• a reduction in export bureaucracy.
Privatisation
The Government believes that the best way
to improve the performance of public sector
companies and nationalised industries is to
expose them to market forces, through
privatisation and the promotion of
competition. Privatisation has also provided
an opportunity for the Government to
widen and deepen share ownership by
encouraging both employees and the
general public to take a direct stake in
industry. In major flotations, employees in
privatised companies are normally given a
preferential right to buy shares in the new
privatised companies.
Since 1979 the Government has privatised
almost 50 major businesses, with net proceeds
to the end of 1993-94 of about £55,000
million. Recent privatisations include the
electricity industry in Northern Ireland and
the Government’s residual shareholding in
BT (British Telecom). British Coal is being
privatised and legislation is being introduced
to enable the private sector to operate rail
services. In addition, the ten companies
operating London’s buses are being sold to
the private sector. Privatisation is also being
extended to non-core government activities
and other public sector areas.
195
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Table 14.1: Major Government Sales
Net equity
Year of proceeds
sale (£ million)
BAA 1987 1,182
BT 1984—93 13,900
British Aerospace 1981-85 390
British Airways 1987 853
British Gas 1986-90 5,293
British Petroleum 1979-87 6,084
British Steel 1988 2,425
Britoil 1982-85 962
Cable and Wireless 1981-85 1,021
Rolls-Royce 1987 1,031
Water companies (England and Wales) 1989 3,454
Regional electricity companies (England and Wales) 1990 j ^
Electricity generating companies (England and Wales) 1991 1
Scottish electricity companies 1991 2,828
BT secondary share sale 1991 5,128
Northern Ireland Electricity 1992-93 704“
BT secondary share sale 1993 5,335“
Source: HM Treasury
“Gross proceeds
Benefits
The economy has benefited through higher
returns on capital in the privatised industries,
which can no longer pre-empt or command
resources from elsewhere in the economy but
must compete for funds in the open capital
markets. Privatised companies have welcomed
the freedom to raise finance in private sector
capital markets.
The consumer has benefited from downward
pressure on prices and from rising standards of
service. The Government has established a
system of independent regulation for the
privatised utilities. For each of the privatised
utility sectors, such as telecommunications or
gas, there is a regulatory body which has a wide
range of powers and duties to promote
competition and the interests of consumers.
These include considering all complaints and
representations about the company’s services.
Each privatised utility has a pricing policy
which usually limits annual price increases to no
more than the rate of inflation.
are British Rail, the Post Office, London
Transport and Nuclear Electric. Their
managing boards are appointed by ministers
who have power to give general directions
but are not involved in day-to-day
management. Managing boards and staffs of
nationalised industries are not civil servants.
The Government considers that nationalised
industries should act as commercial enterprises
and has set policies with which they are
expected to conform. These involve:
• clear government objectives;
• regular corporate plans and performance
reviews;
• agreed principles relating to investment
appraisal and pricing;
• financial targets and performance aims;
• external financing limits; and
• systematic monitoring.
Deregulation
The Government’s aim is to reduce or
simplify administrative and legislative burdens
on business, particularly small businesses,
Nationalised Industries
The remaining major nationalised industries
196
INDUSTRY AND GOVERNMENT
where the burden of compliance is most
demanding. A small firms ‘litmus test’ has
been introduced to help ensure that
compliance costs for new regulations are not
unduly high. Deregulation helps businesses to
contain costs, operate more efficiently and
trade more competitively.
Under a Deregulation Initiative, the
Government is reducing burdens on business by:
• achieving better regulation, and cutting
unnecessary regulation and the cost of
compliance with essential regulation;
• ensuring that the views of business, and
potential costs of compliance, are taken
into account in framing new regulations
and in negotiating EU proposals;
• improving official awareness of the needs
of business through training and better
consultation and communication; and
• improving the quality of service to
business generally, whether provided by
central or local government.
Proposed regulations, including EC
directives, must take account of the costs they
would impose on business. The existing 3,500
regulations affecting companies are being
reviewed by government departments with the
help of business people. The Deregulation and
Contracting Out Bill enables the Government
to amend or repeal primary legislation
imposing unnecessary burdens on business.
Small Firms
Small businesses make a major contribution to
the economy. Firms with fewer than 100
employees account for 50 per cent of the
private sector workforce and 27 per cent of
turnover. More than 96 per cent of the
2.7 million firms in Britain employ fewer than
20 people, representing over 30 per cent of the
workforce. Industries with the fastest growth
rates between 1979 and 1992 were in the
services sector, particularly finance, property,
and professional and business services.
The Government runs schemes giving
either direct assistance or guidance on
business problems affecting small firms. In
addition to DTI schemes such as those
available under the Enterprise Initiative, TECs
offer small and medium-sized enterprises a
comprehensive package of business and
training support, including business
information and advice services, business
counselling for new and existing companies,
and business skills training programmes.
The White Paper on business
competitiveness contains a package of measures
to help small businesses. A network of private-
sector export consultants will be expanded to
70. Innovation and technology counsellors are
to be recruited by Business Links (see below),
who will be able to offer Innovation Credits
worth up to £1,000 a year to buy in services
for improving innovation. In addition, a series
of measures will be implemented to help tackle
the problem of late payment.
Business Links
The Business Link concept was launched by
the DTI in 1992. The Department is setting
up a network of around 200 business advice
centres—Business Links—to bring together in
a single point of access organisations
supporting enterprise, such as local companies,
TECs, chambers of commerce, local authorities
and enterprise agencies. They offer a full range
of business advisory services to established
medium-sized and small firms. Services
include development of business skills, business
‘health checks’ and advice and information on
exporting, technology transfer, innovation and
design. They are envisaged not as a
government scheme but as a network of local
partnerships, in which larger firms can make
contacts and expertise available to smaller
firms. By the end of 1995 it is expected that
every company in England will have easy
access to a Business Link.
The Government is to contract out all
consultancy services (see below) at present run
by the DTI to Business Links.
In Scotland arrangements for providing
integrated business advice are slightly different.
LECs play a significant role, individually and
in their partnerships with other agencies, and
several local Business Information Centres have
been opened.
Enterprise Initiative
The Enterprise Initiative brings together a
197
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
wide range of the services that the DTI
provides for industry and commerce. The
consultancy scheme encourages small and
medium-sized businesses to use outside
consultancy services as a regular part of their
management strategy and offers short-term
consultancy support in design, marketing,
manufacturing and services systems, quality,
business planning, and financial and
management information systems. About
10,400 consultancy projects were completed in
1993-94, bringing the total number of
completions to over 65,000.
In Scotland and Wales the consultancy
scheme is delivered by Enterprise Services
Scotland (a subsidiary of Scottish Enterprise
—see p. 200) and the Welsh Development
Agency (see p. 200).
Consultancy is available to most
manufacturing and service businesses with
fewer than 500 employees. In the Assisted
Areas (see below) and Urban Programme
Areas, half of the costs of a project are met;
elsewhere the rate is one-third. The Enterprise
Initiative scheme will be phased out by
1995-96 and a new flexible consultancy and
diagnostic service is to be established
nationwide. This will help businesses to
analyse their strengths and weaknesses and the
options open to them as well as identifying
available support. Additionally, a trial
consultancy brokerage service is being set up,
using data and experience gathered under the
Enterprise Initiative scheme.
Small Firms Schemes
The Support for Products Under Research
scheme (SPUR) offers grants to businesses
with up to 250 employees for new product and
process development demonstrating a
significant technological advance. In 1993-94 a
total of £12 million was awarded to 139
projects. The Small Firms Merit Award for
Research and Technology (SMART) is an
annual competition providing grants to
individuals and businesses with fewer than
50 employees in support of innovative
technological projects with commercial
potential. In 1993-94 grants were made to
180 new projects.
Other government help to small firms includes:
• the Small Firms Loan Guarantee Scheme,
which helps businesses with viable
proposals to obtain finance
where conventional loans are
unavailable as a result of a lack of
financial security or previous performance;
the scheme provides banks and other
financial institutions with a government
guarantee on a certain percentage (70 or
85 per cent) of the loan in return for a
premium payment; (since 1981, 37,000
loans valued at £1,200 million have been
guaranteed);
• an initiative to encourage informal
investment for small firms from a wider
range of sources. The Government is
providing support to TECs and other
organisations to bring together investors
and small firms; and
• the Business Start-Up scheme, enabling
unemployed people to claim an allowance
while establishing a new business.
REGIONAL INDUSTRIAL
DEVELOPMENT
Industrial policy is designed to encourage
enterprise and economic growth in all areas of
Britain. However, where additional help is
needed, it is provided under the Enterprise
Initiative. Help is focused on the Assisted
Areas (Development Areas and Intermediate
Areas), which cover around 34 per cent of
Britain’s working population. The promotion
of inward investment is a key element in the
Government’s regional policy.
Following a review of the Assisted Areas,
in 1993 the Government announced a number
of changes. The review took into account a
wide range of factors, including levels of
unemployment and the nature of the problems
faced in each area. Some regions, such as
Wales, which have experienced a relative
improvement in unemployment levels, now
have less of their area covered by Assisted
Areas. Areas which have become eligible for
regional aid include parts of the South East,
such as inner areas of London and some
coastal towns affected by high unemployment;
and areas in the East Midlands and Yorkshire
affected by coal mine closures (see p. 256).
198
Glasgow
r Newcastle^
upon Tyne,
Belfast
Manchester;
Nottingham
Birmingham
Cambridge
London
Bristol
Cardiff
The Assisted Areas
Orkney
Islands
Shetland
Islands
Isles of Scill
(Development Area)
0 20 40 60 80100120 km
i i i i i i—i
80 miles
Development Areas
Split Development/
^ Intermediate Areas
Intermediate Areas
Split Intermediate Areas/
Non-Assisted Areas
Northern Ireland
(full range of incentives
under separate legislation)
Main offices
of Industry Departments
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The main regional policy instruments are:
• Regional Selective Assistance, available
throughout the Assisted Areas, for
investment projects undertaken by firms
in manufacturing and services sectors that
will create or safeguard employment;
• Regional Investment Grants, available to
firms with fewer than 25 employees in
Development Areas;
• Regional Innovation Grants, made to
firms employing fewer than 50 people in
Development, Intermediate, Task Force
and City Challenge areas (see p. 335), as
well as some other areas covered by EU
schemes; they are also available in certain
Scottish urban areas.
Regional Investment and Innovation
Grants, formerly available through DTI
regions, have been incorporated within the
Single Regeneration Budget and are
administered by the Government Offices for
the Regions in England, The Scottish Office
Industry Department and the Welsh Office
Industry Department (see p. 335).
England
English Partnerships makes available
industrial and commercial premises in
certain parts of the Assisted Areas where
private sector provision is insufficient
(see p. 336). The Rural Development
Commission advises the Government on
issues affecting rural England and promotes
its economic and social development. The
Commission’s resources are concentrated in
areas of greatest need, known as priority areas
(see p. 338).
Scotland
Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and
Islands Enterprise provide and manage
government and EU support to industry and
commerce, in lowland and highland Scotland
respectively, operating mainly through the
network of LECs (see p. 195).
Set up in 1991, Scottish Enterprise and
Highlands and Islands Enterprise have a
broad range of powers, including powers:
• to attract inward investment;
• to give financial and management support
to new businesses and to assist existing
ones to expand;
• to improve the environment by
reclaiming derelict and contaminated
land; and
• to increase job opportunities and skills.
Under the Urban Programme (see p. 340),
The Scottish Office Industry Department
supplied £38 million for urban regeneration
in 1993-94, supporting over 1,200 projects
during the year. The Department also helps
exporters and small firms through the SPUR
and SMART programmes (see p. 198).
Wales
The Welsh Development Agency (WDA)
promotes industrial efficiency and
international competitiveness and aims to
improve the environment in Wales.
Through Welsh Development International,
it seeks to attract high-quality investment
into Wales and co-ordinates the approach
for responding to the needs of investors.
The WDA provides a range of support
services, particularly for small and
medium-sized enterprises.
The Business Services programme helps
companies plan strategically for long-term
competitiveness, growth and improved
profitability, and for meeting customer
requirements, and understanding and
implementing best practice. The programme
also includes technology exploitation, skills
development, financial advice and help, and a
comprehensive European programme.
The WDA aims to ensure that an
adequate supply of industrial and commercial
property is available in Wales. Its direct
building programme focuses on areas where
private sector provision is not adequate;
increasingly the Agency operates through
land assembly and servicing of sites, and by
encouraging participation from the private
sector, for example, through joint ventures.
Development projects, such as a major
programme of land reclamation and
environmental improvement and an urban
200
INDUSTRY AND GOVERNMENT
development programme, aim to regenerate
selected areas by opening up development
opportunities for private enterprise.
The Rural Prosperity Programme
includes comprehensive action plans to
develop specific rural areas. There are also
initiatives and schemes to stimulate new rural
enterprise and business growth. The
Development Board for Rural Wales
supplies factories, housing and advice for
small businesses.
Northern Ireland
Development policy in Northern Ireland is
the responsibility of the Department of
Economic Development and is delivered
through various agencies, including:
• the Industrial Development Board, which
deals with overseas companies
considering Northern Ireland as an
investment location, as well as the
development of local companies with
more than 50 employees;
• the Local Enterprise Development Unit,
which promotes enterprise and the
development of small businesses;
• the Industrial Research and Technology
Unit, providing advice and assistance on
research and development, innovation
and technology transfer; and
• the Training and Employment Agency,
which helps with in-company training
and management development.
A variety of schemes are available to help
companies with marketing, exporting,
product development and design,
improved productivity and quality, training,
and research and development. The full
range of assistance is made available to
those companies which are able to
demonstrate development potential and a
prospect of long-term competitive growth.
Where appropriate, this assistance includes
capital grants, loans and share capital
investment. The Industrial Development
Board also offers stocks of land and industrial
premises for purchase or lease. There is
exemption from local property taxes for
manufacturing premises.
European Union Regional Policy and Aid
The EU seeks to reduce disparities between
regions. The principal responsibility for
helping poorer areas remains with national
authorities, but the EU complements schemes
by providing grants and loans from a number
of sources, including the European Regional
Development Fund.
The European Investment Bank (see
p. 119) offers loans for public and private
capital investment schemes. Assisted projects
typically include improvements to and
building of roads of regional and national
importance; construction of trans-European
transport links (like the Channel "Funnel);
and factory construction.
EU Structural Funds, especially the
European Regional Development
Fund (ERDF), play an important role
in regional development. Three
areas—Northern Ireland, the
Highlands and Islands, and
Merseyside—are eligible for
assistance to regions whose
development is lagging behind; they
will receive around £2,000 million of
EU funding over the period 1994—99.
The ERDF also provides finance for
areas of industrial decline and for
rural development. Structural Funds
are being made available to areas
suffering from a decline in the coal,
shipbuilding, steel, textile and
defence industries.
INWARD INVESTMENT
The Government encourages overseas
investment in Britain, recognising the many
benefits it brings to the industrial base and
the economy as a whole. Some of Britain’s
new manufacturing techniques and
management attitudes were introduced by
inward investors, which also create new
employment and help boost Britain’s balance
of payments through increased exports and
lower imports. Many overseas firms, such as
Ford, Vauxhall and Black & Decker, are now
household names in Britain. Overseas
201
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
companies are responsible for 17 per cent of
British manufacturing employment, 23 per
cent of net output and 33 per cent of net
capital expenditure.
Overall policy and the co-ordination of
overseas promotion of inward investment are
the responsibility of the Department of Trade
and Industry’s Invest in Britain Bureau
(IBB), which represents Britain as a whole.
It is supported in Britain by several
territorial and regional bodies and overseas it
operates through British Embassies, High
Commissions and Consulates-general.
Inward investment has long been
successful for foreign-owned companies
operating in Britain and for Britain itself. The
year 1993-94 saw a consolidation of Britain’s
position as the preferred location in Europe
for internationally-mobile investment, with
the IBB recording announcements of over 400
new projects and around 100,000 associated
jobs during that period.
According to the latest official figures,
Britain’s share of US investment into
Europe for the period 1951-93 stood at
43 per cent and its share of Japanese
investment into Europe for the same period
at 41 per cent. German government figures
reveal German investment into Britain of
12 per cent, second only to investment into
the United States.
A growing proportion of inward
investment has been through expansion or
reinvestment by existing investors. This trend
is likely to continue as firms restructure or
rationalise their European operations. The
IBB and its regional partners give high
priority to ‘caring for’ existing foreign
investors, to ensure that they are aware of
the advantages of remaining and expanding
in Britain.
Similar advice and assistance to that
provided in England is available through:
• Locate in Scotland, operated jointly by
The Scottish Office Industry Department
and Scottish Enterprise;
• Welsh Development International, the
investment arm of the Welsh
Development Agency; and
• the Industrial Development Board in
Northern Ireland.
REGULATION OF MARKETS
While preferring to let markets operate as
freely as possible, the Government
recognises that intervention may
sometimes be needed to ensure that markets
are open and fair. The Government
therefore seeks to control restrictive or
anti-competitive practices.
Government policy provides for the
regulation of monopolies, mergers, anti¬
competitive practices and restrictive trade
practices. The Office of Fair Trading,
headed by its Director General, administers
the legislation on competition, consumer
protection including consumer credit, fair
trading and resale price maintenance. Among
other things, it takes action against
monopolies, cartels, anti-competitive
practices and unfair trading; examines
company mergers for adverse effects on
competition; and scrutinises rules and
practices of regulatory bodies in sectors such
as financial services.
The Government has taken measures to
increase competition in professional services
by tackling restrictive practices. The
opticians’ monopoly on the dispensing of
spectacles and the solicitors’ monopoly on
conveyancing have been ended. Certain
professional groups (for example,
accountants, solicitors, veterinary surgeons,
stockbrokers, doctors, dentists and
surveyors) have eased restrictions on
advertising by their members, and rules on
fee scales have been made more liberal in a
number of areas. Legislation has also
provided for greater competition in the
provision of legal services. Building
societies are now allowed to offer a greater
range of services. Legislation exists to offer
greater protection to investors. The
Securities and Investments Board
(see p. 212) is empowered to set out general
principles governing the conduct of
investment business.
European Community rules provide for
free and fair competition in trade between
member states. Enforcement of these rules is
primarily the responsibility of the European
Commission, which has powers to
investigate and terminate alleged
202
INDUSTRY AND GOVERNMENT
infringements and to impose fines. The
competition authorities in Britain liaise
closely with the Commission.
The Government announced in 1993 that
it proposed to strengthen the law against
anti-competitive practices, including
increasing the investigative powers of the
Director General of Fair Trading. The
Government also remains committed to
reforming the law on restrictive agreements.
Monopolies
The Director General of Fair Trading and
the President of the Board of Trade can refer
monopolies for investigation by the
Monopolies and Mergers Commission, an
independent body. Its members are drawn
from a variety of backgrounds and include
industrialists, lawyers, economists and trade
unionists. The governing legislation defines
a monopoly situation as one in which at least
a quarter of the market for a particular
product or service in Britain, or part of it, is
supplied or consumed by a single person,
company or a group of connected
companies, or by two or more people
acting in a way which prevents, restricts, or
distorts competition.
If the Commission finds that a
monopoly situation operates, or could be
expected to operate, against the public
interest, the President of the Board of Trade
has powers to take action to remedy the
adverse effects. Alternatively the Director
General may be asked to negotiate
undertakings. In 1993 the Commission
reported on ten monopoly references; four
further monopoly references were under
investigation at the end of 1993.
Mergers
In most cases judgment of the advantages
and disadvantages of mergers is left to the
parties involved, with the market
determining the outcome. The great
majority of mergers are not considered to
pose a threat to competition and are
allowed to take place. However, under the
Fair Trading Act 1973, the President of
the Board of Trade can refer mergers for
investigation by the Monopolies and
Mergers Commission if they could lead to a
significant reduction in competition or
otherwise raise matters of public concern.
A merger is defined as occurring when
two or more enterprises come under
common ownership or control. It qualifies
for investigation by the Commission where:
• a market share of 25 per cent or more
in Britain or a substantial part of it is
created; or
• the total value of gross assets to be
taken over exceeds £70 million.
After considering advice from the
Director General of Fair Trading, the
President of the Board of Trade may refer a
merger or proposed merger to the
Commission. The primary criterion of the
Government’s referral policy is the possible
effects on competition in Britain, taking into
account the international dimension of
competition. If the Commission finds that a
merger or proposed merger may be
expeeted to operate against the public
interest, the President of the Board of Trade
can prohibit it or allow it subject to certain
conditions being met. Alternatively, the
Director General may be asked to obtain
suitable undertakings from the companies
involved to remedy the adverse effects
identified. If the merger has already taken
place, the President of the Board of Trade
can take action to reverse it. There are
special provisions for newspaper and water
company mergers.
The Companies Act 1989 made changes
to merger control procedures. These
provided for:
• a voluntary procedure for pre¬
notification of proposed mergers which
offers prompt clearance of
straightforward cases; and
• acceptance of enforceable undertakings
by the parties concerned to divest assets
in order to obviate the need for a full
investigation by the Commission.
Large mergers with an EU dimension,
assessed by reference to turnover, come
under the exclusive jurisdiction of the
European Commission, with provision for
203
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
referral back to national authorities in certain
difficult circumstances. The Commission
can ban them if it concludes that they create
or strengthen a dominant position which
would significantly impede effective
competition within the EU or a substantial
part of it.
Anti-competitive Practices
The Director General of Fair Trading can
investigate any course of conduct by a
business which appears to be anti¬
competitive. He or she must publish a
report on the investigation and, if it
concludes that a practice is anti-competitive,
undertakings may be offered by the
business responsible for the conduct. If a
suitable undertaking is not given, the matter
may be referred to the Monopolies and
Mergers Commission to establish whether the
course of conduct is an anti-competitive
practice and if so whether it operates against
the public interest. In the case of an adverse
finding by the Commission, the President of
the Board of Trade has powers to take
remedial action. Firms with a turnover of
less than £10 million, or which have a
market share of less than 25 per cent, are
exempted from investigation under the
Competition Act.
Restrictive Trade Practices
Most commercial agreements containing
restrictions on matters such as prices and
other conditions of sale and parties or areas to
be dealt with have to be notified to the
Director General of Fair Trading for
registration. Failure to register an agreement
within the required period means that the
restrictions are void and unenforceable and
the parties may be liable to legal proceedings.
Legal proceedings are normally initiated by
the Director General against blatantly anti¬
competitive agreements which have not been
notified as required by law.
Once an agreement has been registered,
the Director General is under a general
duty to refer it to the Restrictive Practices
Court. If an agreement goes to the Court, it
must declare the restrictions contrary to the
public interest unless the parties can satisfy
it that the agreement is in the public
interest, using set criteria (‘gateways’).
Restrictions declared contrary to the public
interest by the Court are void, and the Court
has the power to order the parties not to
implement them.
In practice, however, the great majority of
agreements never reach the Court because the
parties elect to give up the restrictions
because they are not significant enough to
warrant referral to the Court.
Resale Price Maintenance
With two exceptions—books and certain
pharmaceuticals—it is unlawful for suppliers
to notify dealers of a minimum resale price
for their goods or to make it a condition of
supply that their goods be sold at a specified
price. Similarly, it is also unlawful for
suppliers to seek to impose minimum resale
prices by withholding supplies of goods or by
discriminating against price-cutting dealers in
other ways. The Director General of Fair
Trading, or anyone affected, can take
proceedings in the civil courts.
Consumer Protection
Consumer protection is an integral element in
the fair operation of markets. The
Government believes that consumers’
interests are best served by open and
competitive markets offering the widest
choice of goods and services. There are,
however, laws to ensure that consumers are
adequately protected.
Legislation covers the sale of goods, the
supply of goods and services, and the way
that goods and services are described. The
marking and accuracy of quantities are
regulated by weights and measures legislation.
The Food Safety Act 1990 and, for Northern
Ireland, the Food Safety (NI) Order 1991
contain measures to improve food safety and
to protect consumers. Another law provides
for the control of medical products, and
certain other substances and articles, through
a system of licences and certificates. Under
EC legislation, it is a criminal offence to
supply unsafe consumer products. A range of
204
INDUSTRY AND GOVERNMENT
public safety information for consumers has
been made available by the DTI.
The Director General of Fair Trading
promotes good trading practices and acts
against malpractices. Under the Fair Trading
Act 1973, the Director General makes
recommendations for legislative or other
changes to stop practices adversely
affecting consumers’ economic welfare,
encourages trade associations to adopt
codes of practice promoting consumers’
interests, takes action against traders who
persistently breach the law to the
detriment of consumers, and disseminates
consumer information and guidance.
Under the Consumer Credit Act 1974,
those engaging in consumer credit or hire
businesses, or ancillary businesses such as
credit broking, debt collection, debt
counselling and credit reference agencies,
require licences. The Director General is
responsible for administering the licensing
system, including revoking the licences of
those unfit to hold them. He or she also
has powers to ban people from engaging in
estate agency, and to take court action to
prevent the publication of misleading
advertisements.
The EU’s consumer programme covers
activities such as health and safety, protection
of the consumer’s economic interests,
promotion of consumer education and
strengthening the representation of
consumers. The views of British consumer
organisations on EU matters are represented
by the Consumers in Europe Group (UK).
British consumer bodies are also
represented on the European consumer
‘watchdog’ body, the Bureau Europeen des
Unions de Consommateurs.
Consumer Advice and Information
Advice and information on consumer matters
are given by Citizens Advice Bureaux, trading
standards or consumer protection
departments of local authorities (in Northern
Ireland the Department of Economic
Development), and, in some areas, by
specialist consumer advice centres.
The independent, non-statutory National
Consumer Council (and associated councils
for Scotland and Wales), which receives
government finance, presents the consumer’s
view to government, industry and others.
The General Consumer Council for Northern
Ireland has wide-ranging duties in consumer
affairs in general.
Consumer bodies for the rail industry and
for some privatised utilities investigate
questions of concern to the consumer. Some
trade associations in industry and commerce
have established codes of practice. In
addition, several private organisations work to
further consumer interests. The largest is the
Consumers’ Association, funded by the
subscriptions of its 800,000 members.
Company Law
All British companies are registered with the
Registrar of Companies in Cardiff, Edinburgh
or Belfast, depending on whether a
company’s registered office is in England or
Wales, Scotland or Northern Ireland.
Legislation deals with capital structure,
rights and duties of directors and members,
and the preparation and filing of accounts.
Most corporate businesses are ‘limited
liability’ companies. The liability of members
of a limited company is restricted to
contributing an amount related to their
shareholding or to their guarantee where
companies are limited by guarantee. In the
case of unincorporated businesses, such as
sole proprietorships or partnerships,
individuals are personally liable for any
business debts, except where a member of a
partnership is a limited liability company or a
limited member of a limited partnership.
Companies may be either public or
private. A company must satisfy certain
conditions before it can become a public
limited company (pic). It must:
• be limited by shares or guarantee and
have a share capital;
• state in its memorandum of association
that it is to be a public limited company;
• meet specified minimum capital
requirements; and
• have as the suffix to its name the words
‘public limited company’ or ‘pic’.
205
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
All other British companies are private
companies and are generally prohibited from
offering their shares to the public.
Companies with a place of business or
branch in Britain, but which are
incorporated overseas, are also required
to register.
Laws relating to companies are designed
to meet the need for proper regulation of
business, secure open markets and create
safeguards for those wishing to invest in
companies or do business with them.
They take account of EC directives on
company law, and company and group
accounts and their auditing.
The Government’s aim is to achieve
these objectives while imposing as small a
burden as possible on business. Hence, it
has removed from certain types of small
firms the statutory obligation to have their
accounts audited and it intends to
introduce a simple procedure for
dissolving private companies that are no
longer operational.
The 1992 Cadbury Committee Report on
the management of companies contains a
Code of Best Practice for company boards,
underpinned by a Stock Exchange
requirement for firms to state whether they
are complying with the Code and giving
reasons for areas of non-compliance. The
Report is based on the need for effective
management and for checks and balances to
prevent abuses of power.
Insider dealing in shares is a criminal
offence. Inspectors may be appointed to
investigate possible insider dealing.
Throughout Britain there is a licensing
procedure to ensure the professional
competence, integrity and independence of
people acting as trustees of bankrupt
individuals, or as liquidators, receivers or
administrators of insolvent companies.
MANAGEMENT INITIATIVES
The DTI works with other government
departments and with industry to improve
management education and to spread
awareness about best management practices
through schemes such as the Enterprise
Initiative (see p. 197).
Another programme, ‘Managing in the
90s’, offers advice to managers in small and
medium-sized businesses on design, quality,
production and purchasing, and materials
management. It focuses on innovation and
management practices in manufacturing.
Management Development and
Industrial Training
Management education is on offer at many
universities and colleges of higher and
further education. Some regional
management centres have been established in
England and Wales by associations of these
colleges, and there are several similar
organisations in Scotland. Universities run
full-time postgraduate programmes at
business schools such as those of London,
Manchester, Durham, Warwick and
Strathclyde universities.
The British Institute of Management
encourages excellence in management. Other
bodies are concerned with standards and
training in specialised branches of
management. The employer-led
Management Charter Initiative (MCI) is the
operating arm of the National Forum for
Management Education and Development
and the leading industrial body for
management standards. More than 1,800
employers, representing a quarter of the
total workforce, are members of the MCI,
which has 90 local networks working with
local employers.
Placement Schemes
The Teaching Company Scheme (TCS)
provides industrially relevant training for
young graduates over a two-year period while
they undertake key technology transfer
projects in companies under the joint
supervision of academic and company staff.
There are over 500 TCS partnerships in
progress at any one time. The Senior
Academics in Industry Scheme supports
the placement of senior academic staff into
firms for six months, where they work
directly on projects which will benefit from
their research experience; smaller firms are
given preference.
206
INDUSTRY AND GOVERNMENT
QUALITY AND STANDARDS
The Government is urging business to
consider quality at all stages of design,
production, marketing and delivery to
customers.
Through its support for consultancy
projects, the Government helps small and
medium-sized firms to learn about and apply
quality management techniques based on a
national standard—BS EN ISO 9000—
meeting international requirements. In
order to increase customer confidence,
companies are encouraged to obtain
assessment and registration to this standard.
The competence and performance of
organisations undertaking such certification
are officially accredited by the President of
the Board of Trade through the National
Accreditation Council for Certification
Bodies. Companies certified by accredited
bodies are permitted to use the national
‘crown and tick’ accreditation mark. The
DTFs Register of Quality Assessed
Companies lists accredited certification
bodies and companies assessed by them.
British Standards Institution
The British Standards Institution (BSI),
incorporated by Royal Charter, is the British
member of the European and international
standards organisations. It works with
industry and government to produce
standards of the required quality, relevant to
the needs of the market, internationally
respected, and suitable for public purchasing
and regulatory purposes.
Government support for the BSI is
directed particularly towards European and
international standards work. Common
standards contribute to the aim of removing
technical barriers to trade in the EU. About
5,000 of the 13,000 British Standards are
now identical with European or international
standards. The Kitemark is the BSEs
registered certification trade mark.
Measurement Standards
The DTI is responsible for policy relating to
the National Measurement System. Through
its contractors, it provides many of the
physical measurement standards and
associated calibration facilities necessary so
that measurements in Britain are made on a
common basis and to the required accuracy.
Contractors include three DTI executive
agencies: the National Physical Laboratory,
the Laboratory of the Government Chemist,
and the National Weights and Measures
Laboratory. Links with laboratories in other
countries ensure international compatibility
in standards and measurement, essential for
overseas trade and technological co¬
operation. The National Measurement
Accreditation Service (NAMAS) is the
national accreditation service for calibration
and testing laboratories. For example,
NAMAS-accredited calibration laboratories
offer calibration of scientific instruments
and supply official certificates in,
primarily, the physical, chemical and
engineering fields.
Design
Design is a key commercial tool for
companies to become more profitable
through the design of products and
services which add value and improve
performance. The British design consultancy
industry has an annual estimated turnover of
£1,000 million and employs around 18,000
people, mainly in small consultancies of up
to six designers.
The DTPs design policy and promotion
unit encourages firms to invest in design
which can contribute to international
competitiveness. The Design Consultancy
Scheme, part of the Enterprise Initiative,
helps smaller companies to use a design
consultant. Between 1988 and 1993 about
5,300 design projects were commissioned, of
which 4,900 have been completed.
The DTI also supports the benefits of
good design through the Design Council, an
independent body governed by Royal
Charter. In 1993 the Government
announced that the Council would be
reorganised into a smaller body acting
primarily as a provider of analysis and
advice on design policy to government,
business and others. Design services for
207
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
industry in England will in future be supplied
through Business Links (in Scotland, through
Scottish Design), with financial support from
the DTI.
Awards to Industry and Commerce
The Queen’s Awards for Export and
Technological Achievement recognise
outstanding performance in their respective
fields. Awarded annually, they are valid for
five years and are granted by the Queen on
the advice of the Prime Minister, who is
assisted by an Advisory Committee
consisting of senior representatives from
industry, commerce, the trade unions and
government departments. Any self-
contained ‘industrial unit’ in Britain is
eligible to apply, regardless of size, provided it
meets the scheme’s criteria. The Queen’s
Award for Environmental Achievement was
launched in 1993.
Other awards include the Export Award
for Smaller Businesses (for firms employing
fewer than 200 people) and the MacRobert
Award for engineering in Britain made by the
Fellowship of Engineering for successful
technological innovation.
INNOVATION
Innovation—the successful exploitation of
new ideas—is vital in maintaining an
economy based on competitive wealth
creation. Through its Innovation Unit, which
includes 20 seconded industrialists, the DTI
seeks to influence the thinking of business,
education, the media and Government, as
well as the general public, by:
• strengthening the partnership between
Government and industry;
• improving commercial exploitation of
Britain’s science and technology base;
• facilitating exchange of technology
between business sectors;
• improving management of innovation in
business by spreading best practice;
• improving communications between
investors and business regarding
innovation;
• increasing appreciation of the
importance of innovation within
education at all levels;
• encouraging a more positive attitude to
innovation, as well as to science and
technology;
• informing the public of the importance
of innovation in wealth creation;
• developing better access to technical
help, especially for small and medium¬
sized companies; and
• ensuring consistency and co-operation
in the delivery of innovation schemes
and services provided by the DTI and
other government departments.
The Government’s Technology
Foresight Programme will help focus the
attention of business and Government on
commercially viable R & D (see p. 310).
Networks of local (Nearnet) and national
(Supernet) centres of innovation support
are being set up through Business Links.
The Government is also strengthening
industry and university partnerships
through increased funding for joint
research. At present about 70 universities
and 700 firms are engaged in collaborative
research.
In Northern Ireland the Industrial
Research and Technology Unit has a similar
role to that of the DTI’s Innovation Unit.
It seeks to improve the competitiveness of
industry by encouraging innovation,
industrially relevant R & D and technology
transfer. It does this through the provision
of scientific services and the delivery of
research and development support
programmes, such as its Compete
Development Programme and Science and
Technology Programme.
Industrial and Intellectual Property
The Government supports innovation by
protecting the rights of the originators of
inventions, industrial designs, trade marks
and copyright in literary, artistic and
musical works. These matters are the
responsibility of the Patent Office, which
includes the Design Registry and the
208
INDUSTRY AND GOVERNMENT
Trade Marks Registry. The Patent Office is
an executive agency of the DTI. Patent
protection is also available under the
European Patent Convention and the
Patent Co-operation Treaty. Benefits may
be claimed in other countries by virtue of
separate conventions on industrial
property, literary and artistic works, and
music and broadcasting. Recent
measures include:
• the adoption of EC directives on
copyright which harmonise rental and
lending rights, the rights of performers,
record producers and broadcasters, and
legal protection of computer programs.
The directive on computer programs has
been implemented into British law.
• a regulation on patents to create a
supplementary protection certificate for
medicinal products.
Further Reading
Competitiveness: Helping Business to Win. Cm 2563, HMSO 1994.
Government and Industry. Aspects of Britain series, HMSO, 1995.
Small Firms in Britain 1994. Department of Trade and Industry, HMSO, 1994.
209
15 Finance and Other
Service Industries
Financial Services 211
Development of Financial
Services 211
Supervision 211
Bank of England 212
Banks and Building Societies 214
Insurance 217
Investment 219
Special Financing Institutions 220
Financial Markets 220
Other Services 223
Distribution and Sales 223
Hotels, Public Houses and
Catering 226
Tourism and Travel
Business Services 228
The service industries, which include finance, retailing, tourism and business
services, contribute about 65 per cent of gross domestic product and over
70 per cent of employment. Britain is responsible for about 10 per cent of the
world’s exports of services: overseas earnings from services in Britain
amounted to around 30 per cent of the value of exports of manufactures in
1993. The number of employees in services rose from over 13 million in 1982
to 15.7 million by 1994, much of the rise being accounted for by growth in
part-time (principally female) employment.
Average real disposable income per head
increased by more than three-quarters
between 1971 and 1993 and this was reflected
in a rise in consumer spending on financial,
personal and leisure services and on the
maintenance and repair of consumer durables.
Demand for British travel, hotel and catering
services rose as real incomes in Britain and
other countries increased. The spread of
home ownership, particularly during the
1980s, increased demand for legal and estate
agency services.
Britain is a major financial centre, housing
some of the world’s leading banking,
insurance, securities, shipping, commodities,
futures, and other financial services and
markets. Financial services are an important
source of employment and overseas earnings.
Business services include advertising, market
research, management consultancy, exhibition
and conference facilities and computing.
By the year 2000, tourism is expected to
be the world’s biggest industry, and Britain is
one of the world’s leading tourist
destinations. The industry is Britain’s
second largest, employing about 7 per cent
of the workforce. Retailing is also a major
employer and Britain has an advanced
distribution network. An important trend in
retailing has been the growth of out-of-town
shopping centres.
Banking, finance, insurance, business
services and leasing accounted for
around one-fifth of Britain’s total
output in 1993, a share which has risen
substantially over the last decade.
A notable trend in the services sector is
the growth of franchising, an operation in
which a company owning the rights to a
particular form of trading licenses them to
210
FINANCE AND OTHER SERVICE INDUSTRIES
franchisees, usually by means of an initial
payment with continuing royalties. The main
areas include cleaning services, film
processing, print shops, hairdressing and
cosmetics, fitness centres, courier delivery, car
rental, engine tuning and servicing, and fast
food retailing.
Financial Services
Historically the financial services industry in
Britain has been located in the famous
‘Square Mile’ in the City of London. This
remains broadly the case, even though the
markets for financial and related services
have grown and diversified greatly.
Manchester, Cardiff, Liverpool, Leeds,
Edinburgh and Glasgow are also financial
centres. ‘The City’, the collection of markets
and institutions in and around the Square
Mile, is noted for having:
• the greatest concentration of foreign
banks in the world;
• a banking sector that accounts for about a
fifth of total international bank lending;
• one of the world’s largest international
insurance markets;
• the largest centre in the world for trading
overseas equities;
• the world’s largest foreign exchange
market;
• one of the world’s largest financial
derivatives markets;
• the greatest concentration of international
bond dealers;
• important markets for transactions in
commodities; and
• a full range of ancillary and support
services—legal, accountancy and
management consultancy—which
contribute to London’s strength as a
financial centre.
Banking, finance and insurance accounted
for 13 per cent of all employment in Great
Britain in 1994. British financial institutions’
net overseas earnings amounted to £ 15,600
million in 1993.
DEVELOPMENT OF FINANCIAL
SERVICES
The growth in international movements of
capital in the 1960s and 1970s mainly took
the form of increased bank lending and
foreign exchange trading. London became the
international centre of this activity, particularly
in the eurocurrency markets (see p. 222), and
the number of overseas banks represented in
London is larger than in any other financial
centre. During the 1980s, with increasing
international competition in financial services
and developments in technology, London’s
securities markets grew rapidly. Edinburgh also
developed as a centre for fund management.
Some traditional distinctions between
financial institutions have been eroded, so
that single firms supply a broader range of
services, both in domestic and international
markets. Major landmarks in the deregulation
of Britain’s financial services in recent
years include:
• the abolition of exchange controls in
1979;
• the ending in 1980 of the supplementary
special deposits scheme, which was
designed to curb bank lending;
• the abolition in 1981 of the Reserve
Asset Ratio requirement, under which
banks had to hold 12.5 per cent of their
deposits as liquid assets with the Bank
of England;
• the abolition of hire purchase restrictions
in 1982;
• the Building Societies Act 1986
(see p. 216); and
• ‘Big Bang’, also in 1986 (see p. 221).
There has since been further deregulation
affecting, for instance, building societies
(see p. 215) and friendly societies (see p. 216).
SUPERVISION
HM Treasury is the government department
with responsibility for financial services. In
particular, it is responsible for legislation
covering the supervision of banks, building
societies, friendly societies and investment
businesses, which are subject to the
211
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
regulatory system established under the
Banking Act 1987 (see p. 213), the Building
Societies Act 1986 (see p. 216) and the
Financial Services Act 1986 (see below). The
Treasury also oversees the Securities and
Investments Board (SIB—see below).
The Department of Trade and Industry
(DTI) is responsible for company law and
insolvency matters, and for investigations and
prosecutions under the Financial Services,
Insolvency and Companies Acts. Investigations
are carried out with the Serious Fraud Office
(see p. 510). DTFs responsibilities also
include prudential supervision of insurance
undertakings, European Community (EC)
insurance directives, insurance interests in the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD) and the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT),
and general questions affecting the insurance
industry. It also has powers to investigate
‘insider dealing’—securities trading carried
out on the basis of privileged access to
relevant information.
The Treasury negotiates and implements
EC directives relating to financial services and
is responsible for arrangements with overseas
regulators for exchanging information.
Various EC directives give or will give
banking, insurance and investment services
firms the freedom to operate throughout the
European Union (EU) on the basis of their
home state authorisation. The European
Economic Area (EEA) agreement extends the
principles of the single market to Austria,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden.
The Treasury is also charged with
encouraging international liberalisation in
financial services both bilaterally and through
GATT and the OECD. Following the
successful conclusion of the Uruguay round
of GATT talks in 1993, financial and other
services will be subject to the principles of
multilateral trade rules.
International supervisory forums include
the Basle Committee on Banking
Supervision and the International
Organisation of Securities Commissions
(IOSCO). IOSCO is the primary international
meeting place for regulatory authorities. Its
1992 conference, held in London, approved a
set of principles for the supervision of
financial conglomerates and released
guidelines for clearing and settlement systems
in energy markets.
The main provisions of the Financial
Services Act came into force in 1988; and
most of the Act’s powers are delegated to the
SIB. Under the Act, investment businesses
(those dealing in, arranging, managing or
giving advice on investments or operating
collective investment schemes) require
authorisation and are subject to rules on the
conduct of business and other rules made
under the legislation. The SIB has recognised
a number of self-regulating organisations
(SROs) and recognised professional bodies
(RPBs). It has a duty to assist SROs and
RPBs to fulfil their regulatory functions.
Most investment businesses are authorised
under the Act by virtue of membership of
one of these. The SROs are:
• the Investment Management Regulatory
Organisation (IMRO), whose members
include merchant banks and pension fund
managers with mainly corporate clients;
• the Securities and Futures Authority
(SFA), whose members include member
firms of the London Stock Exchange, as
well as futures brokers and dealers, and
eurobond dealers; and
• the Personal Investment Authority (PIA),
which came into operation in July 1994,
is the main single regulator for retail
investment services covering the
marketing and provision of advice on
products like life assurance, pension
funds, unit trusts and investment trusts.
All retail firms are encouraged to join the
PIA, which is expected to deliver
improved standards of investor
protection; however, there remains the
option of direct regulation by the SIB.
Other information relating to supervision
and regulation is contained in the following
section and in the sections dealing with
the various types of financial institutions
and markets.
BANK OF ENGLAND
The Bank of England was established in 1694
by Act of Parliament and Royal Charter as a
212
FINANCE AND OTHER SERVICE INDUSTRIES
corporate body. Its entire capital stock was
acquired by the Government in 1946. The
Bank acts as banker to the Government,
holding its main accounts, managing Britain’s
reserves of gold and foreign exchange,
arranging new government borrowing and
managing the stock of its existing debt. The
Bank’s main objectives are to:
• ensure the soundness of the financial
system through the direct supervision of
banks and specialised City institutions;
• promote the efficiency and
competitiveness of the financial system,
especially in domestic and international
payment and settlement systems; and
• provide advice on and implement the
Government’s monetary policy.
The Banking Act 1987 assigns the Bank of
England the overriding objective of
protecting depositors. To this end institutions
intending to take deposits from the public
must gain authorisation from the Bank and
submit to its continued supervision. Under
the Financial Services Act 1986, the Bank is
also responsible for overseeing money-market
institutions (see p. 221). The Bank’s
supervision is ‘prudential’—it sets minimum
standards for authorised institutions but
offers no guarantee that those institutions will
not fail or that investors or depositors will be
compensated in full. The Banking Act
established the Deposit Protection Fund,
financed by contributions levied on the
banking system; this entitles depositors to
limited compensation if an authorised bank
fails. In order to be and remain authorised, an
institution has to satisfy the Bank that it has:
• adequate capital and liquidity;
• a realistic business plan;
• adequate systems and controls;
• adequate provision for bad and doubtful
debts; and
• that its business is carried out with
integrity and skill, and in a prudent
manner.
The Bank is the Government’s agent for
selling marketable debt. It maintains the
register of holdings of government securities
on behalf of the Treasury, and manages the
Exchange Equalisation Account holding the
Government’s official reserves of gold,
foreign exchange, Special Drawing Rights
(SDRs—claims on the International Monetary
Fund) and European Currency Units (ECUs).
The reserves are used to check undue
fluctuations in the exchange value of sterling
and to enable government departments to
meet their foreign currency needs.
The Bank is able to influence money-
market conditions through its dealings with
the discount houses (see p. 217), which
developed in the 19th century as bill brokers
for industrialists. Discount houses hold
mainly Treasury, local authority and
commercial bills, and negotiable certificates of
deposit financed by short-term loans from the
banks. If on a particular day there is a
shortage of cash in the banking system as a
result, for example, of large tax payments, the
Bank relieves the shortage either by buying
bills from the discount houses or by lending
directly to them. This permits banks to
replenish their cash balances at the Bank by
recalling some of their short-term loans to
the discount houses. The Bank’s dealings
with the discount houses give it powerful
influence over short-term interest rates.
The Bank of England has the sole right in
England and Wales to issue banknotes. The
note issue is no longer backed by gold but by
government and other securities. Three
Scottish and four Northern Ireland banks also
issue notes. These issues, apart from a small
amount specified by legislation for each bank,
must be fully covered by holdings of Bank of
England notes and coinage. Responsibility for
the provision of coin lies with the Royal
Mint, a government trading fund which
became an executive agency in 1990.
The Bank of England seeks to ensure
that Britain’s financial markets are efficient
and competitive. To this end it runs two
securities settlement systems with in-built
payment arrangements—the Central Gilts
Office and the Central Moneymarket
Office. A permanent body of market and
legal practitioners—the Financial Law
Panel—has been established by the Bank
to help find practical solutions to problems
of legal uncertainty in the wholesale
financial markets.
213
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
BANKS AND BUILDING SOCIETIES
In addition to banks, the chief institutions
offering banking services are the building
societies and the National Savings Bank. The
‘single passport’ system created by the European
Community Second Banking Directive allows
‘credit institutions’ (banks and building
societies) to operate throughout the EEA on
the basis of their home-state authorisation.
A useful distinction can be made between
‘retail’ and ‘wholesale’ banking. Retail
banking is primarily for personal customers
and small businesses. Its main services are
cash deposit and withdrawal facilities, and
money transmission systems. Competition
between the banks and the building societies
in providing money transmission services to
individuals has increased during the last two
decades and is expected to intensify further
(see p. 216). Building societies can also offer
money transmission services to companies.
Wholesale business involves taking large
deposits at higher rates of interest, deploying
funds in money-market instruments
(see p. 221) and making large loans and
investments. Nearly all banks in Britain engage
in some wholesale activities and some, such as
the merchant and overseas banks, centre their
business on them. Many such wholesale
dealings are conducted on the inter-bank
market, that is, between banks themselves.
In 1994 there were 389 institutions
authorised under the Banking Act 1987,
including clearing banks, investment banks,
branches of overseas banks from outside the
EEA, discount houses and banking
subsidiaries of both banking and non-banking
institutions from Britain and overseas.
Additionally, there were 97 branches of banks
from EEA countries entitled to take deposits
in Britain; such ‘European authorised
institutions’ are authorised by the relevant
authority in their home country. Of this total
of 486 banks, around 320 were members of
the British Bankers’ Association, the main
representative body for British banks.
Retail Banks
The major retail banks have a significant
branch network, offering a full range of
financial services to both individuals and
companies. Among services generally available
are interest-bearing current accounts; deposit
accounts; and various kinds of loan
arrangements. In addition, there is a full
range of money transmission facilities that
increasingly feature plastic card technology.
The major banks in England and Wales
are Barclays, Lloyds, Midland, National
Westminster, the TSB Group and Abbey
National; and in Scotland the Bank of
Scotland and the Royal Bank of Scotland.
Other important retail banks are the
Clydesdale Bank, the Co-operative Bank, the
Yorkshire Bank and Alliance & Leicester Giro
(formerly Girobank). Northern Ireland is
served by branch networks of four major
banking groups.
With the growth of financial services and a
relaxation of restrictions on competition
among financial institutions, the major banks
have diversified their services. They are
lending more money for house purchases, and
most now own finance houses, leasing and
factoring companies, merchant banks,
securities dealers, insurance companies and
unit trust companies.
The banks offer loan facilities to
companies; since the 1970s they have
provided more medium- and long-term loans
than they did formerly. They have become
important suppliers of finance for small
firms. A loan guarantee scheme is supported
by the banks, under which 70 per cent
(85 per cent in certain cases) of the value of
bank loans to small companies is guaranteed
by the Government. Some banks have set up
special subsidiaries to provide venture capital
for companies (see p. 220). Most retail banks
maintain overseas subsidiaries, which may
account for a substantial proportion of their
business, and are active in eurocurrency
markets (see p. 221).
The total liabilities/assets of the retail
banks amounted to over £540,000 million in
1994. Liabilities are made up of sterling
deposits, foreign currency deposits, items in
suspense or transmission, and capital and
other funds. The banks’ main liquid assets
consist of money at call (mainly short-term
loans to discount houses), their holdings of
Treasury and other bills, short-dated British
214
FINANCE AND OTHER SERVICE INDUSTRIES
government securities and balances at the
Bank of England. They also hold a
proportion of their assets as portfolio
investments (mainly longer-dated British
government securities) or trade investments.
The main retail banks operate through
over 12,100 branches and sub-branches in
Britain. National Westminster has the largest
number, with 2,545 branches, followed by
Barclays (2,119), Lloyds (1,860), Midland
(1,713), TSB (1,321), the Royal Bank of
Scotland (752), Abbey National (686), Bank
of Scotland (455), Clydesdale Bank (314),
Yorkshire Bank (270) and the Co-operative
Bank (109). Around three-quarters of adults
in Britain have a current account and over
one-third a deposit account.
Payment Systems
Apart from credit and debit card
arrangements, the main payment systems are
run by three separate companies operating
under an umbrella organisation, the
Association for Payment Clearing Services
(APACS), of which 23 banks and building
societies are members. One covers bulk paper
clearings—cheques and credit transfers. A
second deals with high-value clearings for
same-day settlement, namely the nationwide
electronic transfer service Clearing House
Automated Payment System (CHAPS) and
the cheque-based Town Clearing (which
operates only in the City of London). A third
covers bulk electronic clearing for standing
orders and direct debits. Membership of each
of these clearing companies is open to any
bank, building society or other financial
institution meeting the criteria for appropriate
supervision and volume of transactions.
Plastic Card Technology
All the major retail banks and building societies
have substantial networks of automated teller
machines, which give customers access to
cash and other services for up to 24 hours a
day. Almost 18,500 machines were in
operation at the end of 1993.
The banks and major building societies
also offer their customers cheque guarantee
cards—typically for amounts up to £100. The
cards entitle holders to cheque-cashing
facilities in participating institutions and
guarantee retailers that transactions up to the
specified guarantee limit will be honoured.
Uniform eurocheques supported by a
eurocheque card are available from all major
banks. These standard-format cheques may
be used to obtain cash or make payments in
Britain, elsewhere in Europe and in a few
other overseas countries. The cheques are
made out in the currency of the country in
which they are being used, with a guarantee
limit of the equivalent of £100 per cheque.
Credit cards issued by major retail banks
and building societies are a popular means of
payment and are widely accepted throughout
Britain and overseas. Most cards are affiliated
to one of the two major international credit
card organisations, Visa and MasterCard.
Some of the major retail stores issue their
own cards, which operate like credit cards. A
charge card, like a credit card, enables the
holder to make retail payments, but there is
either no credit limit or a very high limit,
and the balance must be settled in full on
receipt of a monthly statement.
As well as the traditional paper-based
systems for making retail payments by credit
or charge cards, an increasing number of
stores and garages now provide EFTPOS
(see p. 226) facilities. Using debit cards,
payments can be deducted directly from the
purchaser’s bank account. Most cards are
affiliated either to Visa or to the Switch
organisation, which is based in Britain.
Home Banking
A growing number of banks and building
societies offer home banking services whereby
customers use a telephone or personal
computer to obtain account information,
make transfers and pay bills. Midland’s First
Direct is one such service.
Building Societies
Building societies are mutual institutions,
owned by their savers and borrowers. They
raise short-term deposits from savers, who
are generally able to withdraw their money
on demand or at short notice. The societies
215
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
make long-term loans, mostly at variable
rates of interest, against the security of
property—usually private dwellings
purchased for owner-occupation. They are
the major lenders for house purchase in
Britain and are the main repository for the
personal sector’s liquid assets. Around 60 per
cent of adults have building society savings
accounts.
Competition between the building
societies and other financial institutions has
increased in the last decade. A variety of
savings schemes have been established, and a
growing number of societies provide current
account facilities such as cheque books and
automated teller machines.
There are 84 registered societies, of which
83 are members of the Building Societies’
Association. Building societies’ assets totalled
£281,000 million at the end of 1993; about
£33,000 million was advanced in new
mortgages in the course of the year. The
three largest—the Halifax, Nationwide and
Woolwich—account for about one-half of the
total assets of all societies.
The Building Societies Act 1986 enabled
societies to diversify into banking and other
services. Up to 25 per cent of a society’s
commercial assets may be used for purposes
other than loans on first mortgage of
owner-occupied houses, including as much
as 15 per cent in other types of asset such
as unsecured loans. Directly or through
subsidiaries, societies may offer services
within the general areas of banking,
investment, insurance, trusteeship,
executorship and estate agency. The
Government has decided to allow societies to
raise up to 50 per cent (up from 40 per cent)
of their funds on the wholesale market; set
up subsidiaries to make loans to businesses
not secured on land; and wholly own a
general insurance firm offering buildings and
contents insurance as well as mortgage
payments protection policies. However, their
main business will continue to be financial
and housing-related services.
The 1986 Act established the Building
Societies Commission to carry out the
prudential supervision of building societies.
It also made provision for a society to seek
the approval of its members to convert into a
public limited company. In this event the
society becomes an authorised institution
under the Banking Act 1987 (see p. 214)
and is then supervised by the Bank of
England. Abbey National pursued this
course and no longer contributes to building
society statistics.
The Council of Mortgage Lenders is a
trade body established in 1989 for all
mortgage lending institutions, including
building societies, insurance companies,
finance houses and banks.
Friendly Societies
Friendly societies have traditionally been
unincorporated societies of individuals,
offering their members a limited range of
financial services, particularly provision for
retirement and against loss of income
through sickness or unemployment. The
Friendly Societies Act 1992 enabled friendly
societies to incorporate, take on new powers
and offer a broad range of financial services
through subsidiaries.
Merchant Banks
Merchant banks have traditionally been
concerned primarily with accepting, or
guaranteeing, commercial bills and with
sponsoring capital issues on behalf of their
customers. Today they undertake a
diversified range of activities. After the ’Big
Bang’ some merchant banks acquired
securities trading operations. Merchant banks
have important roles in equity and debt
markets and the provision of advice and
financial services to industrial companies,
especially where mergers, takeovers and other
forms of corporate reorganisation are
involved. Management of investment
holdings, including trusts, pensions and other
funds, is also an important function of
merchant banks. The sector is split between
independent houses and those which are part
of larger banking groups.
Overseas Banks
A total of 286 banks incorporated overseas
are represented in Britain. Of these, 24 are
216
FINANCE AND OTHER SERVICE INDUSTRIES
from the United States and 28 from Japan. A
total of 78 institutions incorporated in
Britain are subsidiaries of overseas companies.
They offer a comprehensive banking service
in many parts of the world and engage in
the financing of trade not only between
Britain and other countries but also between
third-party countries.
British-based Overseas Banks
A small number of banks have their head
offices in Britain, but operate mainly abroad,
often specialising in particular regions.
Standard Chartered, which is represented in
Asia, Africa and the Middle East, is the
major example of this type of bank.
Discount Houses
There are seven discount houses authorised
under the Banking Act 1987. These are
specialised institutions unique in their
function and central position in the British
monetary system. They act as financial
intermediaries between the Bank of England
and the rest of the banking sector,
promoting an orderly flow of short-term
funds. They guarantee to tender for the
whole of the weekly offer of the
Government’s Treasury bills, which are
instruments to raise funds over a period of
up to six months. In return for acting as
intermediaries, the discount houses have
secured borrowing facilities at the Bank of
England, acting as ‘lender of last resort’..
Assets of the discount houses consist
mainly of Treasury and commercial bills,
negotiable certificates of deposit and
short-term loans. Their liabilities are for
the most part short-term deposits.
National Savings Bank
The National Savings Bank is run by the
Department for National Savings, a
government department. It contributes to
government borrowing and aims to
encourage saving by offering personal
savers a range of investments, designed to
meet various requirements. Important
products include:
• Savings Certificates, which either pay a
fixed rate of interest alone or a lower
fixed rate of interest combined with
index-linking;
• Premium Bonds, where interest is paid in
the form of prizes chosen by lottery;
• Income and Capital Bonds;
• Children’s Bonus Bonds, which are
designed to accumulate capital sums for
those under 21;
• Ordinary and Investment Accounts,
where deposits and withdrawals can be
made at post offices throughout Britain;
• FIRST Option Bonds, launched in 1992,
which offer a guaranteed rate of interest
that is fixed for one year; and
• Pensioners’ Guaranteed Income Bonds,
where interest is paid monthly and rates
are fixed for five years at a time.
With the exception of FIRST Option
Bonds, interest on National Savings
products is paid without deduction of tax at
source. Certain National Savings products
offer tax exempt returns. In some cases the
best returns are paid to those who leave
their savings untouched for several years.
In August 1994 the total amount of
money invested in National Savings was over
£50,000 million.
INSURANCE
London is the world’s leading centre for
insurance and for placing international
reinsurance; it handles an estimated 20 per cent
of the general insurance business placed on
the international market. There are two broad
categories of insurance: long-term life
insurance, where contracts may be for periods
of many years; and general insurance, including
accident and short-term life insurance, where
contracts are for a year or less. Authorised
insurance companies are supervised by the
Department of Trade and Industry under the
Insurance Companies Act 1982.
In addition to the British companies and
Lloyd’s (see p. 218), a large number of
overseas companies are represented, with
217
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
which many British companies have formed
close relationships. Some British companies
confine their activities to domestic business
but most large companies undertaking general
business transact a substantial amount
overseas through branches and agencies or
affiliated local companies.
Over 820 companies are authorised to
carry on one or more classes of insurance
business in Britain. About 450 companies
belong to the Association of British Insurers
(ABI). Some companies are mutual
institutions, owned by their policy holders.
Insurance is also available from certain
friendly societies (see p. 216).
EC directives introducing the ‘single-
licence’ system in insurance came into force
in July 1994. Life and non-life insurers may
operate throughout the EEA on the basis of
authorisation in their home state. Separate
directives cover reinsurance, motor insurance
and co-insurance.
Long-term Insurance
As well as providing life cover, life insurance is
a vehicle for saving and investment because
premiums are invested in securities and other
assets. About 30 per cent of adults have life
assurance policies. The net long-term
insurance premium income of companies
representing about 99 per cent of the British
market in 1993 was over £56,000 million
from their worldwide operations. Long-term
insurance is handled by 194 companies.
General Insurance
General insurance business is undertaken by
insurance companies and by underwriters at
Lloyd’s. It includes fire, accident, general
liability, short-term life, motor, marine,
aviation and transport risks. Total ABI
member company premium income
worldwide in 1993 was £34,000 million, of
which £21,000 million was earned in Britain.
Lloyd’s
Lloyd’s, the origins of which go back to the
17th century, is an incorporated society of
private insurers in London. Although its
activities were originally confined to marine
insurance, a considerable worldwide market
for the transaction of other classes of
insurance business, such as aviation and
motor insurance, has been built up.
Lloyd’s is not a company but a
market for insurance administered by
the Council of Lloyd’s and Lloyd’s
Regulatory and Market Boards.
Business is carried out for individual
elected underwriting members, or
‘names’, trading with unlimited
liability in competition with each
other and with insurance companies.
From January 1994 corporate
members with limited liability have
been trading alongside individual
members. Both are required to
satisfy certain financial
requirements and maintain set
levels of deposits at Lloyd’s.
For the 1994 year of account, there was
total market capacity of £10,900 million
provided by 18,022 members grouped into 179
syndicates. Each syndicate is managed by an
underwriting agent responsible for appointing
a professional underwriter to accept insurance
risks and settle claims on the syndicate
members’ behalf. With the exception of motor
insurance business, insurance may only be
placed through accredited Lloyd’s brokers,
who negotiate with Lloyd’s syndicates on
behalf of the insured. Reinsurance constitutes
a large part of Lloyd’s business.
Lloyd’s net premium income in 1991, the
most recent year for which figures are
available, was £6,000 million.
Lloyd’s has suffered severe losses in
recent years, partly as a result of a series of
natural disasters, including the storms in
Britain in October 1987, the Exxon Valdez
oil tanker disaster off the coast of Alaska in
1989, and Hurricane Andrew, which struck
Florida and Louisiana in 1992; the recent
recession has also adversely affected trading.
Institute of London Underwriters
The Institute of London Underwriters was
formed in 1884, originally as a trade
218
FINANCE AND OTHER SERVICE INDUSTRIES
association for marine underwriters. It now
provides a market where member insurance
companies transact marine, energy,
commercial transport and aviation business.
The Institute issues combined policies in its
own name on risks which are underwritten by
member companies. The gross premium
income processed by the Institute’s member
companies in 1993 was £2,460 million. About
half of the 80 member companies are branches
or subsidiaries of overseas companies.
Insurance Brokers
Insurance brokers acting on behalf of the
insured are a valuable part of the company
market and play an essential role in the
Lloyd’s market. Smaller brokers mainly deal
with the general public or specialise in a
particular type of commercial insurance.
Medium to large brokers almost exclusively
handle commercial insurance, with the largest
dealing with risks worldwide. Some brokers
specialise in reinsurance business, serving as
intermediaries in the exchange of contracts
between companies, both British and
overseas, and often acting as London
representatives of the latter.
The Insurance Brokers (Registration) Act
1977 makes provision for the voluntary
registration and regulation of insurance
brokers by the Insurance Brokers Registration
Council. Only those registered with the
Council can use the title ‘insurance broker’.
In 1994 15,340 individuals were registered
with the Council, through 2,100
partnerships or sole traderships and 2,600
limited companies.
Insurance may be broked without
registration with the Council so long as the
title ‘insurance broker’ is not used. There are
about 7,000 non-registered intermediaries
operating under the Association of British
Insurers’ code of practice.
INVESTMENT
Investment Funds
Britain has a great deal of expertise in
fund management, which involves managing
funds on the investor’s behalf, or advising
investors on how to invest their funds. The
main types of investment fund include
pension schemes, life assurance, investment
trusts and unit trusts.
Pension Funds
All occupational pension schemes are
established under trust law to protect the
interests of members and most pay
benefits related to final salary. Benefits are
funded in advance by employer (and
wholly employee) contributions, which are
held and invested by trustees on behalf of
beneficiaries. Pension funds are major
investors in securities markets. Total
British pension fund net assets were worth in
the region of £460,000 million at the end of
1993; pension funds hold around 30 per cent
of securities listed on the London Stock
Exchange. Since 1986, members of
occupational pension schemes have been able
to opt out and set up a personal pension
scheme. Over 13 million people belong to
occupational pension schemes and more than
5 million to personal pension schemes.
Investment and Unit Trusts
Investment trust companies, which offer the
opportunity to diversify risk even on a
relatively small investment, are listed on the
London Stock Exchange and their shares are
traded in the usual way. They must invest
mostly in securities, and the trusts
themselves are exempt from capital
gains tax. Assets are purchased mainly
out of shareholders’ funds, although
investment trusts are also allowed to
borrow money for investment. There were
292 members of the Association of
Investment Trust Companies in August
1994, with £38,000 million worth of assets
under management.
Authorised unit trusts are open-ended
mutual or pooled investment vehicles which
place funds in a wide range of securities
markets all over the world. As with
investment trusts, investors with relatively
small amounts to invest are able to benefit
from diversified and expertly managed
portfolios. The industry has grown rapidly
219
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
during the last decade, and in 1993 there
were over 1,500 authorised unit trusts. By
May 1994 total assets were £95,000 million.
Unit trust management groups are represented
by the Association of Unit Trusts and
Investment Funds and regulated by IMRO. The
trusts themselves are authorised by the SIB.
Personal Equity Plans
Personal equity plans (PEPs) were introduced
to encourage shareholding by individuals.
Dividends and capital gains on shares held in
a PEP are exempted from income tax and
capital gains tax, and withdrawals from plans
are normally tax free (see p. 158).
SPECIAL FINANCING INSTITUTIONS
Several specialised institutions offer finance
and support to personal and corporate sector
borrowers. These borrowers are found in
both the public and the private sectors.
Among public sector agencies are Scottish
Enterprise, Highlands and Islands
Enterprise, the Welsh Development Agency,
the Industrial Development Board for
Northern Ireland and ECGD (Export
Credits Guarantee Department—Britain’s
official export credit insurer). The part of
ECGD that handled the export of capital
goods sold on short-term credit was
privatised in 1991 and is now dealt with by
NCM Credit Insurance.
Some private sector institutions were set
up with government support and with
financing from banks and other financial
institutions. They may offer loan finance or
equity capital. The main private sector
institutions are described below.
Finance and Leasing Companies
In 1992 the Finance Houses Association and
the Equipment Leasing Association formed a
single new representative body, the Finance
and Leasing Association (FLA). This
represents the interests of companies offering
motor finance, consumer credit, and business
finance and leasing. The FLA’s 108 members
undertook new business worth £13,455
million in 1993.
Factoring Companies
Factoring comprises a range of financial
services which provide growing companies
with a flexible source of finance in exchange
for the outstanding invoices due to them.
Factoring has developed as a major financial
service since the early 1960s, covering
international activities as well as domestic
trade. Member companies of the Association
of British Factors and Discounters handled
business worth £19,700 million in 1993.
Venture Capital Companies
Venture capital companies offer medium- and
long-term equity financing for new and
developing businesses when such funds are
not easily or directly available from
traditional sources, such as the stock market
or banks. The British Venture Capital
Association has 115 full members and makes
up virtually all the industry. Many venture
capital companies are subsidiaries of other
financial institutions, including banks,
insurance companies and pension funds.
The largest of Britain’s venture capital
companies is 3z.
FINANCIAL MARKETS
The City of London has a variety of financial
markets. They include the London Stock
Exchange, the foreign exchange market, the
financial futures and options market,
eurobond and eurocurrency markets, Lloyd’s
insurance market (see p. 218), and bullion
and commodity markets. The securities
markets are supervised jointly by the
Treasury, the Bank of England, SIB and the
London Stock Exchange, among others.
London Stock Exchange
The London Stock Exchange has its main
administrative centre in London, as well as
centres in Belfast, Birmingham, Leeds,
Glasgow and Manchester. As a result of a set
of reforms implemented in 1986 and known
popularly as ‘Big Bang’, the Exchange has
changed radically in recent years. The main
reforms were as follows:
220
FINANCE AND OTHER SERVICE INDUSTRIES
• the Exchange’s rules on membership
were altered to allow corporate ownership
of member firms;
• the system under which dealers charged
fixed minimum scales of commission to
investors was abolished in favour of
negotiated commissions;
• dealers were permitted to trade in
securities both on their own behalf, as
principals, and on behalf of clients, as
agents, these two roles formerly having
been kept distinct; and
• a screen-based price quotation system
was introduced and led to the closing of
the trading floor.
The London Stock Exchange is one of the
largest in the world in terms of the number
and variety of securities listed. It accounts for
10 per cent of equity trading worldwide.
More than 8,000 securities are listed; in 1993
these had a market value of almost
£3,300,000 million. About 2,400 company
securities are listed, including those of a
growing number of leading overseas
companies, with a value of around £2,800,000
million. The remainder is made up of British
and overseas government and corporate
stocks as well as eurobonds (see p. 221).
Throughout the 1980s a trend towards the
‘securitisation of debt’ developed, with
major borrowers increasingly raising funds by
issuing securities rather than by seeking
out bank loans. In recent years the largest
market for new issues has been that for
companies’ securities, including issues of
shares resulting from the Government’s
privatisation programme.
The gilt-edged market allows the
Government to borrow money by issuing
loan stock through the Bank of England. The
Stock Exchange offers a secondary market
where investors can buy and sell gilts.
European Community Directives
The London Stock Exchange altered its rules
in 1990 to conform to EC directives on
listing particulars, prospectuses and mutual
recognition. The major effect of the EC
directive on Mutual Recognition of Listing
Particulars is that, subject to certain
limitations, each member state is required to
recognise listing particulars accepted in
another member state. In order to put British
companies on an equal footing with those in
other EU countries, the Exchange reduced
the minimum trading record requirement for
full listing from five years to three.
Money Markets
The London money markets comprise the
interbank deposit markets plus a range of other
instruments, usually short-term in maturity.
They are wholesale in the sense that the
participants are professional operators dealing
in substantial amounts of money.
Banks are the major participants in these
markets, and are supervised by the Bank of
England. The Bank also supervises other
institutions which operate in the foreign
exchange and other wholesale money markets.
In close consultation with market
participants, the Bank has issued the London
Code of Conduct, which defines the
instruments that comprise the wholesale
money markets and the standards and dealing
procedures which participants should follow.
Since 1986, large companies have been
permitted to issue sterling commercial paper
(SCP), which takes the form of negotiable
bearer debt securities with a maturity of up
to one year. The range of qualifying issuers
of SCP has broadened since 1986 to include,
for example, banks, building societies and
overseas public authorities.
Euromarkets
These are markets in currencies lent or
invested outside their domestic marketplace,
particularly as a means of financing
international trade and investment.
Transactions can thus be carried out in
eurodollars, eurodeutschemarks, euroyen and
so on. London is at the heart of the
euromarkets and houses most of the major
international banks and securities firms.
The euromarkets developed in the late
1950s following the restoration of
convertibility between the major currencies,
partly to avoid incurring the costs of
exchange control and other regulations. In
221
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
recent years distinctions between markets
have been breaking down and the
euromarkets form a major part of the wider
international money and capital markets.
Participants in the markets include
multinational trading corporations, financial
companies, governments and international
organisations like the World Bank and the
European Investment Bank.
The euro-securities markets have grown
considerably in recent years because the
instruments traded on them, including
eurobonds, euro-medium-term notes (EMTNs)
and euro-commercial paper, are seen as flexible
alternatives to bank loans. EMTN programmes
were introduced in 1986, and EMTN issues
rose sevenfold between 1990 and 1993. British
building societies are prominent among
EMTN issuers. There is a growing private
sector market in ECU-denominated deposits,
securities and eurobonds.
Foreign Exchange Market
London is the world’s biggest centre for
foreign exchange trading, with an average
daily turnover of about US $300,000 million.
In terms of currencies traded, it has the most
diversified exchange market in the world.
The foreign exchange market consists of
telephone and electronic links between the
participants, which include banks, other
financial institutions and several foreign
exchange broking firms acting as intermediaries
between the banks. It provides those engaged
in international trade and investment with
foreign currencies for their transactions. The
banks are in close contact with financial
centres abroad and are able to quote buying
and selling rates for both immediate (‘spot’)
and forward transactions in a range of
currencies and maturities. The forward market
enables traders and dealers who, at a given
date in the future, wish to receive or make a
specific foreign currency payment, to contract
in advance to sell or buy the foreign currency
involved for sterling at a fixed exchange rate.
Derivatives
Financial derivatives are contracts to buy or
sell, at a future date, financial instruments
such as equities, bonds or money-market
instruments. They offer a means of hedging
against changes in prices, exchange rates
and interest rates. Derivatives include
futures (agreements to buy or sell financial
instruments or physical commodities at a
future date), options (the right to buy or
sell financial instruments or physical
commodities for a stated period at a
predetermined price) and ‘over-the-counter’
products, including swaps. A foreign
exchange swap can convert a money-market
instrument in one currency into a money-
market instrument in another—a dollar
deposit into a sterling deposit, for example.
The use of derivatives has grown rapidly
and instruments have become more
complex, especially as advances have been
made in information technology and links
between markets and institutions
strengthened. Between 1992 and 1993 the
turnover on London’s futures and options
exchanges grew by 38 per cent to reach 155
million contracts. LIFFE (see below)
accounted for almost two-thirds of the
contracts traded in 1993 and the London
Metal Exchange (see p. 223) accounted for
about a fifth.
Financial Futures and Options
Banks, other financial institutions, brokers
and individual traders are members of the
London International Financial Futures and
Options Exchange (LIFFE), which trades at
the Cannon Bridge development. Futures
contracts cover the purchase or sale of a
fixed amount of a commodity at a given
date in the future at a price agreed at the
time of trade. There is also dealing in
options on the equity of prominent British
companies and in stock index options.
LIFFE has the most internationally diverse
range of financial futures and options
products of any exchange in the world.
London Bullion Market
Around 60 banks and other financial
trading companies comprise the London
gold and silver markets, which, like the
foreign exchange market, trade by telephone
222
FINANCE AND OTHER SERVICE INDUSTRIES
or other electronic means. Five of the
members of the London Bullion Market
Association meet twice daily to establish a
London fixing price for gold—a reference
point for worldwide dealings. The silver
fixing is held once a day. Although much
interest centres upon the fixings, active
dealing takes place throughout the day.
London and Zurich are the main world
centres for gold dealings.
Commodity, Shipping and Freight
Markets
Britain is a major international centre for
commodities trading and the home of many
of the related international trade
organisations. At the London Commodities
Exchange, futures in grains and potatoes are
traded, as are futures and options on ‘soft’
commodities (cocoa and coffee). White sugar,
raw sugar and dry freight index futures
contracts are also traded. The London Metal
Exchange is the primary base metals market
in the world, trading both spot and forward
contracts in aluminium, aluminium alloy,
copper, lead, nickel, tin and zinc. The
International Petroleum Exchange is
Europe’s only energy futures exchange. The
Baltic Exchange, which finds ships for
cargoes and cargoes for ships throughout the
world, is the world’s leading international
shipping market.
Other Services
DISTRIBUTION AND SALES
Distribution
Distributing goods to their point of sale by
road, rail, air and sea is a major economic
activity, accounting for about a sixth of
national income. In 1993 there were 3.3
million employees in the distributive and
allied trades in Great Britain. The large
retailers and wholesalers of food, drink and
clothing operate, either directly or through
contractors, extensive distribution networks.
Wholesaling
There were 127,000 businesses, with a
turnover valued at £224,000 million (see
Table 15.1), engaged in wholesaling and
dealing in Great Britain in 1992.
In the food and drink trade almost all
large retailers have their own buying and
central distribution operations. Elsewhere in
the trade, voluntary ‘symbol’ groups (for
example, Spa and VG) have been formed by
wholesalers and small independent retailers.
This has helped many smaller retail outlets,
including traditional ‘corner shops’ and
village stores, to stay in business as it has
given them the advantages of bulk buying
and co-ordinated distribution.
Table 15.1: Wholesale Trade in Great Britain 1992
Number of Turnover''
businesses (£ million)
Food and drink 15,971 48,070
Petroleum products 968 19,805
Clothing, furs, textiles and footwear 10,440 10,148
Coal and oil merchants 2,976 3,225
Builders’ merchants 4,197 8,160
Agricultural supplies and livestock dealing 2,889 7,471
Industrial materials 6,129 23,791
Scrap and waste products 3,470 2,233
Industrial and agricultural machinery 9,211 17,726
Operational leasing 2,468 1,831
Other goods 68,008 81,318
Total wholesaling and dealing 126,729 223,777
Excludes value added tax.
223
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
London’s wholesale markets play a
significant part in the distribution of
foodstuffs. New Covent Garden is the main
market for fruit and vegetables, Smithfield for
meat and Billingsgate for fish.
The Co-operative Movement has its own
distribution organisation, the Co-operative
Wholesale Society (CWS). Retail
co-operative societies buy from the CWS,
which is their main supplier. The CWS
is also a major retailer in Scotland, Northern
Ireland, the Midlands and south-east, and
northern England.
Retailing
The retail market in Britain is highly
competitive. In 1991 there were 232,000 retail
businesses, with 342,000 outlets, in Great
Britain (see Table 15.2). During recent years
the large multiple retailers have grown
considerably in Britain, reducing numbers of
stores but increasing outlet size and
diversifying their product ranges. Some, like
Marks and Spencer and the supermarket
groups J. Sainsbury and Tesco (see below),
have opened branches or made franchise
arrangements abroad, especially on the
European continent. Decline has been
particularly evident among small independent
businesses and retail co-operative societies
(see above). Of the 25 largest retailers
in Western Europe, more than one-third
are British.
The biggest multiple retailers in the
grocery market are J. Sainsbury, Tesco,
Argyll (which includes Safeway) and Asda.
These four groups had a market share of 38
per cent in 1992-93. Other important groups
are Waitrose and Morrisons. Kwik Save is
the leading discount food retailer. Since
1991 several overseas discount food retailers,
such as Aldi and Netto, have entered the
British market.
Retail co-operative societies are voluntary
organisations controlled by their members,
membership being open to anyone paying a
small deposit on a minimum share. There are
4,600 retail co-operative outlets, over half of
which sell food and groceries.
Alcoholic drinks are sold mainly in
specialist ‘off licences’ and supermarkets, the
former accounting for 51 per cent of sales
and the latter 49 per cent. The selling of
alcohol is closely controlled by law and only
permitted between certain hours. The
principal off licence chains are Cellar Five,
Oddbins, Threshers and Victoria Wine.
Table 15.2: Retail Trade in Great Britain 1991
Number of Number
businesses of outlets
Number of
people
engaged
(’000s)
rr-\ Cl
Iurnover
million)
Single-outlet retailers
Small multiple retailers
Large multiple retailers
205,641
25,510
894
205,641
65,574
71,107
759
305
1,303
35,560
16,233
87,797
Food retailers
Drink, confectionery and
tobacco retailers
Clothing, footwear and
leather goods retailers
Household goods retailers
Other non-food retailers
Mixed retail businesses
Hire and repair businesses
62,009
49,109
27.321
49,248
38.322
4,163
1,873
82,572
61,528
56,571
67,987
54,033
13,145
6,485
813
274
289
322
261
376
33
51,485
13,664
13,134
21,718
12,919
25,348
1,323
Total retail trade
232,045
342,321
2,367
139,590
Source: Business Monitor SDA25. Retailing, 1991.
"includes value added tax.
224
FINANCE AND OTHER SERVICE INDUSTRIES
The leading mixed retail businesses
include Marks and Spencer, Boots,
Kingfisher (which includes Woolworth),
Storehouse, W. H. Smith, Argos, Littlewoods,
Savacentre (j. Sainsbury), John Menzies,
Sears, Burton Group and House of Fraser.
About 18 million people regularly buy all
kinds of goods and services through mail
order catalogues like Freemans, Great
Universal Stores, Empire and Littlewoods. In
1993 sales by general mail order totalled
£4,200 million, 3 per cent of all retail sales.
The largest selling items are clothing,
footwear, furniture, household textiles and
domestic electrical appliances.
Shopping Facilities
Britain has a wide range of complementary
shopping facilities inside and outside town
and city centres. One of the most
significant trends in retailing has been the
spread of superstores (of which there are
around 900). While the 100 largest retailers
account for 62 per cent of retail sales, there
continues to be a demand for the products and
services provided by small, specialised shops.
The main multiple grocery companies
have experienced strong competitive
pressures and have turned their attention to
town centres with smaller outlets aimed at
the convenience market. Examples include
Tesco’s ‘Metro’ format and J. Sainsbury’s
‘Capital’ stores. Also, retailers of non-food
goods, such as DIY products, toys,
furniture and electrical appliances, sportswear,
and office and computer products, have built
outlets away from town and city centres,
particularly to attract shoppers with cars.
There is also a strong trend towards grouping
retail warehouses into retail parks, often with
food and other facilities.
Regional out-of-town shopping centres
have been established on sites offering
good access and parking facilities. One of the
first was the Metro Centre at Gateshead,
which is the largest of its kind in Europe.
Other centres include Meadowhall in
Sheffield and the Lakeside Centre at
Thurrock in Essex, both opened in 1990.
About one-half of total food sales are
accounted for by superstores away from
town centres, compared with a fifth at the
beginning of the 1980s.
Warehouse clubs, an idea recently
introduced from the United States, offer cut
priced branded products by selling a limited
range in bulk quantities, typically from
spartan, hangar-like, outlets. So far, however,
they have had a limited impact.
All new retail development requires
planning permission from the local
government planning authority. These
authorities must consult the appropriate
central government department before
granting permission for developments of
20,000 sq m (215,000 sq ft) or more. The
Government’s policy is to encourage the
provision of a broad range of shopping
facilities to the public, while ensuring that
the effects of major new retail development
do not undermine the viability and vitality of
existing town centres.
Rental Services
A broad range of rental services, many
franchised, are on offer in towns and cities
throughout Britain. These include hire of
cars and other vehicles, televisions and video
cassette recorders, household appliances such
as washing machines and tumble dryers, tools
and heavy decorating equipment (ladders,
floor sanders and so on) and video films and
computer games. Retailing of many types of
service is dominated by chains, though there
are still independent operators in most fields.
Auction Houses
Britain attracts buyers and sellers from
around the world and has a long tradition of
expertise and innovation in auctioneering. Its
chief auction houses are active in the
international auction markets for works of
art, trading on their acknowledged
expertise. The two largest houses,
Sotheby’s and Christie’s, are established
worldwide. In 1994 Sotheby’s celebrated its
250th anniversary. Sotheby’s handled sales
valued at £885 million in 1993, while
Christie’s sales were valued at £728 million.
Phillips and Bonhams are also prominent
auctioneers.
225
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Other Trends
Many of the large multiple groups sell a
much greater number of goods and services
than previously. However, in some cases
extensive diversification has proved
unprofitable and, for example, large food
retailers are increasing their range of foods
instead. More emphasis is also being placed
on selling own-label goods (which now
account for up to one-half of total sales) and
environmentally friendly products, including
organic produce. Most superstores and
supermarkets offer fresh food, such as meat,
fish, vegetables and, in many cases, bread
baked on the premises, as well as packaged
foods. The major supermarket chains also
have their own petrol stations at some of their
bigger outlets.
‘Stores within stores’ are becoming more
common; for example, sportswear and sports
goods retailers are to be found in many of the
big mixed retail stores, while Laura Ashley,
the furnishings and fabrics retailer, has
opened facilities in Homebase.
Several large retailers have issued their
own credit cards for regular customers in an
attempt to encourage sales, particularly of
high-value goods. Marks and Spencer also
offers financial services.
Information Technology
Information technology has become
increasingly central to distribution and
retailing. Computers are used to monitor
stock levels and record sales figures through
developments such as electronic point-of-sale
(EPOS) systems. EPOS systems read a
bar-code, printed on the retail product, that
holds price and product information and can
be used to generate orders for stock
replenishment as well as totalling up bills and
providing a receipt for customers.
Techniques such as ‘just-in-time’
ordering, in which produce arrives at the
store at the last possible moment before sale,
have become widespread as a result. Most
large retailers have set up electronic data
interchange (EDI) systems; these enable
their computers to communicate with those
of their suppliers, and transmit orders
and invoices electronically, so reducing
errors and saving time.
EFTPOS (electronic funds transfer at
point of sale) systems enable customers to
pay for purchases using debit cards which
automatically transfer funds from their bank
account. Several major EFTPOS schemes are
well established and the number of terminals,
which currently stands at about 275,000, is
growing rapidly.
Vehicle, Vehicle Parts and Petrol Retailing
In Great Britain in 1994 there were 275,300
people employed in retailing motor vehicles
and parts, and in petrol stations. Many
businesses selling new vehicles are franchised
by the motor manufacturers. Drive-in fitting
centres sell tyres, exhaust systems, batteries,
clutches and other vehicle parts; the largest
chains include Kwik-Fit and Associated Tyre
Services.
Over one-third of the 19,000 petrol
stations are owned by oil companies. The
three companies with the largest number of
outlets are Shell, Esso and BP. Unleaded
petrol accounts for over half of petrol sold.
The majority of petrol stations are
self-service. The majority of outlets sell
diesel fuel.
HOTELS, PUBLIC HOUSES AND
CATERING
The hotel and catering trades, which include
public houses (pubs) and licensed bars,
employ 2.4 million people in Great Britain,
including:
• 327,000 in pubs and bars;
• 295,000 in restaurants, cafes and snack
bars;
• 289,000 in hotels and other residential
establishments; and
• 138,000 in clubs.
Around 165,000 self-employed people also
work in these sectors.
There are 52,000 hotels in Great Britain.
The largest hotel business is Forte, with
344 hotels in Britain. As well as catering and
226
FINANCE AND OTHER SERVICE INDUSTRIES
leisure interests, Forte has substantial
overseas interests. At the other end of the
scale, numerous guest houses and hotels each
have fewer than 20 rooms. Holiday centres,
including holiday camps with full board, self¬
catering centres and caravan parks, are run by
Butlins, Holiday Club, Center Parcs, Warner
Holidays and Pontin’s.
Britain has a very wide range of
restaurants, offering cuisine from virtually
every country in the world. Chinese, Indian,
Italian and Greek restaurants are among the
most popular. ‘Fast food’ restaurants are
becoming more widespread; these specialise
in hamburgers, chicken, pizza and a variety
of other foods to be eaten on the premises or
taken away. The most well-known chains,
many of which are US-owned, include
Wimpy (hamburgers), McDonald’s
(hamburgers), Burger King (hamburgers),
KFC and Pizza Hut. Traditional fish and
chip shops are the other main providers of
cooked take-away food. Sandwich bars
proliferate in towns and cities, typically in
areas where there are high concentrations of
office workers.
There are about 69,000 public houses,
which mainly sell beer, wines, soft drinks and
spirits to adults for consumption on the
premises, although an increasing number also
provide hot and cold food and many have
special separate facilities where children are
allowed. Some are owned by the large
brewing companies, which either provide
managers to run them or offer tenancy
agreements; these pubs tend to sell just their
own brands of beer, although some also offer
‘guest’ beers. Others, called ‘free houses’, are
independently owned and managed and
frequently serve a variety of beers. Wine bars
are normally smaller than pubs and tend to
specialise in wine and food; they more closely
resemble bars in other parts of Europe.
Permitted opening hours for some 100,000
licensed premises in England and Wales were
extended in 1986; the more popular pubs and
bars now open from 11.00 am to 11.00 pm
from Monday to Saturday (on Sunday pubs
may only open between 12.00 and 3.00 pm
and 7.00 and 10.30 pm). The introduction of
liquor licences for ‘cafe-style’ premises has
been proposed, which would allow children
under 14 to accompany their parents to
places where alcoholic drinks are available. In
Scotland a similar type of licence called a
‘refreshment licence’ has been available since
1976, and licensed premises can apply for a
‘children’s certificate’ permitting children to
accompany an adult on the premises within
certain hours.
TOURISM AND TRAVEL
In the region of 1.5 million people are
employed in tourism, and the industry
contributes £30,000 million annually to the
economy—about 5 per cent of gross domestic
product. Britain is one of the world’s six
leading tourist destinations and by the year
2000 tourism is expected to be the biggest
industry in the world.
Between 1980 and 1990 the number of
overseas visits to Britain grew by 50
per cent. In 1993 there were 19.1
million overseas visitors to Britain,
who spent £9,200 million. An
estimated 64 per cent of visitors came
from Europe and 17 per cent from
North America. Business travel
accounts for about one-fifth of all
overseas tourism revenue. Britain’s
tourist attractions include theatres,
museums, art galleries, and historic
houses, as well as shopping, sports
and business facilities.
Domestic tourism was worth £12,400
million in 1992 (see p. 38). Of British
residents opting to take their main holiday in
Britain, around half choose a traditional
seaside destination. Short breaks, valued at
about £2,000 million in 1992, make up an
increasingly significant part of the market,
with shopping accounting for about a third of
all expenditure on day trips. Scotland has
several skiing resorts.
The British have traditionally travelled
widely. Most British holiday-makers wishing
to go overseas buy ‘package holidays’ from
travel agencies, where the cost covers both
transport and accommodation. The most
popular package holiday destinations are
Spain, France and Greece. Long-haul
227
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
holidays to places like the United States, the
Caribbean and Australia are becoming more
popular as air fares come down. W inter skiing
holidays to resorts in Austria, France, Italy
and Switzerland and other countries inside
and outside Europe continue to attract large
numbers of Britons.
There are around 7,200 travel agencies in
Britain, of which 98 per cent belong to the
Association of British Travel Agents (ABTA).
Although most travel agents are small
businesses, there are a few large firms, such
as Lunn Poly and Thomas Cook, which have
hundreds of branches. Computerised
information and booking systems are used
extensively in travel agencies. There are also
629 tour operator members of ABTA; about
half are both retail agents and tour operators.
ABTA operates financial protection schemes
to safeguard its members’ customers and
maintains codes of conduct drawn up with
the Office of Fair Trading. It also offers a
free consumer affairs service to help resolve
complaints against members and an
independent arbitration scheme for tour
operators’ customers.
Tourist Authorities
The Department of National Heritage is
responsible for tourism in England, and the
Scottish, Welsh, and Northern Ireland Offices
have responsibility for tourism in their
respective countries. The government-
supported British Tourist Authority (BTA)
promotes Britain overseas as a tourist
destination and encourages the development
of tourist facilities in Britain to meet the
needs of overseas visitors. The tourist boards
for England, Scotland, W ales and Northern
Ireland encourage the development and
promotion of domestic tourism and work with
the BTA to promote Britain overseas.
The BTA and the national tourist boards
inform and advise the Government on issues
of concern to the industry. They also help
businesses and public sector bodies to plan by
researching and publicising trends affecting
the industry. The national tourist boards
work closely with regional tourist boards, on
which local government and business interests
are represented. The national tourist boards
offer financial assistance to the industry.
There are 800 or so Tourist Information
Centres in Britain, operating an information
service for visitors.
Three accommodation classification and
grading schemes are operated by the national
tourist boards:
• the Crown scheme for hotels, guest
houses, inns, bed and breakfast and
farmhouse holiday accommodation. A
new Lodge category has been introduced
for purpose-built accommodation
alongside motorways and major roads;
• the Key (Dragons used in Wales) scheme
for self-catering holiday homes; and
• the Quality ‘Q scheme for holiday
caravan, chalet and camping parks.
Common standards are applied throughout
Britain. All participating establishments are
inspected every year.
BUSINESS SERVICES
Exhibition and Conference Centres
Britain is one of the world’s three leading
countries for international conferences—the
others being the United States and France.
London and Paris are the two most popular
conference cities. A total of 110 towns and
cities in Britain now have facilities for
conferences and exhibitions.
Among the most modern purpose-built
conference and exhibition centres are the
International Conference Centre in
Birmingham and the Queen Elizabeth II
and Olympia Conference Centres, both in
London. Others are situated in Brighton
(East Sussex), Harrogate (North Yorkshire),
Bournemouth (Dorset), Cardiff,
Birmingham, Manchester, Nottingham and
Torquav (Devon). In Scotland both
Glasgow and Aberdeen have exhibition and
conference centres, and an International
Conference Centre is being built in
Edinburgh. Other large exhibition facilities
are situated in London at the Barbican,
Earls Court/Olympia, Alexandra Palace and
W embley Arena.
Many of the larger sites belong to a
marketing group, the British Conference and
228
FINANCE AND OTHER SERVICE INDUSTRIES
Exhibition Centres Export Council. Cardiff
International Arena is a 5,000-seat multi¬
purpose facility which opened in 1993.
Advertising
Britain is a major centre for creative
advertising, and multinational corporations
often use advertising created in Britain for
marketing their products throughout
Europe. British agencies have strong
foreign links through overseas ownership
and associate networks. Spending on
advertising in 1993 amounted to
£9,155 million. The press accounted for
56 per cent of the total, television for
29 per cent, direct mail for 10 per cent,
posters for 3 per cent, and commercial radio
and cinema for the rest. The largest
advertising expenditure is on food, retail and
mail order services, motor vehicles and
financial services. Advertising expenditure on
the top 100 brands rose by almost 10 per cent
in 1993 to a little over £1,000 million; the
biggest spenders in 1993 included BT, Ford,
Vauxhall, McDonald’s and J. Sainsbury.
British television advertising receives many
international awards.
Campaigns are planned by 1,300 advertising
agencies which, in some cases, in addition to
their creative, production and media buying
roles, also offer integrated marketing services,
such as consumer research and public relations.
Britain is home to two of the world’s largest
agencies—Saatchi and Saatchi and WPP
Group. Other leading agencies include J Walter
Thompson and Abbott Mead Vickers BBDO.
Government advertising campaigns—
recruitment for the armed services, health
promotion, road safety and so on—are
organised in the main by the Central Office of
Information, an executive agency (see p. 512),
which is able to secure large discounts
because of its centralised buying power.
Computing Services
The computing services industry comprises
software houses; production of packaged
software; consultancy; facilities management;
processing services; and the provision of
complete computer systems. It also includes
companies providing information technology
education and training, independent
maintenance, contingency planning and
recruitment, and contract staff.
The turnover of companies in the
Computing Services Association, which
represents about 75 per cent of the industry
in Britain, totalled more than £6,000 million
in 1993. Important areas for software
development include data and word
processing, telecommunications,
computer-aided design and manufacturing,
defence and consumer electronics.
Management Consultancy
Management consultants provide business
solutions by giving advice and technical
assistance to business and government
clients. Typically, consultants identify and
investigate problems and opportunities,
recommend appropriate action and help to
implement recommendations. Many
British-based consultancies operate
internationally; the most recent trend has
been for the largest firms to set up offices in
Eastern Europe and the Pacific Rim. The
35 member firms of the Management
Consultancies Association are among the
largest in the industry and account for more
than half of management consultancy work;
they range from Andersen Consulting and
CMG Management, with a strong technical
bias, to Coopers & Lybrand and PA
Consulting group, which specialise in
market/industry sectors. In 1993 the member
firms earned £750 million in Britain and
£125 million overseas.
Market Research
A wide range of domestic and overseas
clients, including government bodies, use
Britain’s advanced market research facilities.
Britain accounts for about 10 per cent of
worldwide market research spending. The
Association of Market Survey Organisations
is the main trade organisation, with 30
member companies; in 1993 its members
earned £330 million out of an estimated total
research industry turnover in excess of £500
million.
229
16 Manufacturing and
Construction Industries
Introduction 230 Construction 243
Sectors of Manufacturing 231
Britain became the world’s first industrialised country in the mid-19th
century. Wealth was based on manufacturing iron and steel, heavy machinery
and cotton textiles, and on coal mining, shipbuilding and trade.
Manufacturing still plays an important role and Britain excels in high-
technology industries like pharmaceuticals, electronics, aerospace and
offshore equipment, where British companies are among the world’s largest
and most successful. The British construction industry has made its mark
around the world and has continued to be involved in some of the most
prestigious domestic and international building projects, such as the
Channel Tunnel.
Introduction
Manufacturing accounted for 22 per cent of
gross domestic product (GDP) in 1993 and
for about the same percentage of
employment. About 82 per cent of visible
exports consisted of manufactured or semi¬
manufactured goods. Almost all manufacturing
is carried out by private-sector businesses.
In 1993 manufacturing output was 12 per
cent higher than in 1986, but 4 per cent
lower than in 1990 (see Table 16.2). The
Table 16.1: Manufacturing—Size of Businesses by Turnover and Employment
Annual
turnover (£'000)
Number of
businesses^ 1993
Employment
size
Number of
businesses^ 1993
Employment
' 1991
1-34
35M-9
50-99
100-249
250-499
500-999
1,000-1,999
2,000-4,999
5,000-9,999
10,000+
26,838
12,894
25,598
33,176
19,633
13,974
9,208
7,230
3,100
4,024
1-9
10-19
20-49
50-99
100-199
200-499
500-999
1,000+
90,672
13,934
14,314
5,628
3,234
2,138
686
516
280,805
194,481
437,656
390,344
448,027
656,131
469,360
1,381,514
Total
155,675
Total
131,122
4,258,318
Source: Size Analysis of United Kingdom Businesses 1993. Business Monitor PA 1003
“Defined as legal units, which includes companies, partnerships, sole proprietors, general government and non-profit-making
bodies.
230
MANUFACTURING AND CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRIES
recent recession led to a decline in
manufacturing output of 0.9 per cent in 1992,
but in 1993 output rose by 1.7 per cent.
Employment in manufacturing in Britain fell
from 5.2 million in 1986 to 4.4 million in
1993. Total capital investment in
manufacturing was £12,165 million in 1993,
comprising £10,146 million in plant and
machinery, £1,253 million in new building
work and £766 million in vehicles.
The construction industry contributed
5 per cent of GDP and employed about
1.2 million people in 1993, 4 per cent of the
total number of employees. Between 1992 and
1993 output fell by almost 2 per cent,
following much larger declines in 1991 and
1992 as recession continued to affect the
industry. Total domestic fixed capital
investment was £812 million.
Sectors of Manufacturing
Relative sizes of the main sectors are shown
in Tables 16.1 and 16.2. Table 16.3 indicates
output and investment. A more detailed
description of the some of the main sectors is
given below.
Mineral and Metal Products
British producers delivered 15.1 million
tonnes of finished steel in 1993, of which
52 per cent was exported. Over the past ten
years annual steel industry exports have
doubled, to 7.8 million tonnes, creating a
favourable balance of trade in steel products.
The major areas of steel production are in
south Wales and northern England, with
substantial further processing in the
Midlands. Major restructuring in the steel
industry took place during the 1980s and
early 1990s. Productivity and efficiency have
improved and the industry is now one of the
lowest-cost producers in Europe. The
number of people employed in the steel
industry in 1993 was 40,000, compared with
88,000 in 1981.
British Steel is the fourth largest steel
company in the world, producing about
three-quarters of Britain’s crude steel.
The company’s output is based on flat steel
products, plate, heavy sections and tubes.
These are used principally in the
construction, automotive, engineering,
transport, metal goods, packaging and
energy industries.
Table 16.2: Indices of Manufacturing Output (1990 = 100)
1992 Standard
Industrial Classification
Category
Share of
output 1990
(weight per 1,000)
1989
1992
1993
Food and beverages 29 98.9 100.5 101.2
Tobacco products 2 96.3 107.4 100.3
Textiles and leather products 14 102.5 89.6 89.8
Wood and wood products 7 101.5 86.1 87.2
Pulp, paper products, printing
and publishing 25 97.8 95.8 98.9
Solid and nuclear fuels, oil refining 6 103.0 110.7 112.8
Chemicals and synthetic fibres 24 100.3 104.8 107.4
Rubber and plastics products 10 97.2 96.7 100.8
Other non-metallic mineral
products 11 105.2 86.6 89.7
Basic metal and metal products 21 102.8 86.4 86.1
Machinery and equipment 27 97.8 84.8 84.0
Electrical and optical equipment 30 99.8 95.6 101.5
Transport equipment 28 101.7 91.1 88.2
Other manufacturing 3 98.5 84.7 80.3
Total 237 UKU 9T0 95.3
Source: United Kingdom National Accounts 1994 Edition
231
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Other important steel producers in Britain
include United Engineering Steels, Allied
Steel and Wire, Co-Steel Sheerness, the
Glynwed Group and the specialist stainless
steel producer Avesta Sheffield. Products
manufactured by these companies include
reinforcing bars for the construction industry,
wire rod, hot rolled and cold finished bars,
engineering steels and other special steels
for the aerospace and offshore oil and
gas industries.
Output of non-ferrous metals and their
alloys in 1993 included primary and
secondary (recycled) aluminium and copper,
as well as aluminium and copper and copper
alloy semi-manufactures. The production of
metal relies mainly on imported ores and
recycled material of both domestic and
overseas origin.
Britain is a major producer of specialised
alloys for high-technology requirements in
the aerospace, electronic, petrochemical, and
nuclear and other fuel industries. Titanium
and titanium alloys, which are light, strong
and flexible, are used in aircraft production,
power generation and North Sea oil
production. Nickel alloys are utilised in aero¬
engines for high-temperature environments.
In recent years considerable progress has
been made in producing ‘superplastic’
alloys, which are more ductile and elastic
than conventional alloys. Aluminium
lithium, developed by British Alcan
Aluminium, is also ideal for use in aircraft,
being lighter, stronger and more rigid than
normal aluminium.
There is also an important sector
producing copper and copper alloy semi¬
manufactures for use in a wide variety of
products like electric wire and cable, tube
and fittings for plumbing, and valves and
components for the engineering and
transport industries.
Ceramics
The ceramics industry manufactures clay
products, such as domestic pottery,
sanitaryware and tiles, and clay pipes for the
building trade. Domestic pottery production
includes china, earthenware and stoneware.
Tableware is produced in Stoke-on-Trent.
Britain is the world’s leading
manufacturer and exporter of fine
bone china, like Wedgwood, Spode
and Roval Doulton.
Table 16.3: Output and Investment in Manufacturing
1992 Standard
Industrial Classification Gross output
category (£ million) 1993
Gross domestic fixed
capital formation
(£ million) 1993
Solid and nuclear fuels, oil refining
Chemicals and synthetic fibres
Other non-metallic mineral products
Basic metals and metal products
Machinery and equipment
Electrical and optical equipment
Transport equipment
Food and beverages
Tobacco products
Textiles and leather products
Wood and wood products
Pulp, paper products, printing and publishing
Rubber and plastics products
Other manufacturing
Total
559
3,004
3,786
4,816
12,165
Source: United Kingdom National Accounts 1994 Edition
232
MANUFACTURING AND CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRIES
Research is being conducted into ceramics
for use in housebuilding and diesel and jet
engines. Important industrial ceramics
invented in Britain include silicon carbides
and sialons, which can withstand ultra-high
temperatures.
Glass Products
Flat glass is manufactured through the float
glass process, which was developed by
Pilkington Brothers and licensed to
glassmakers throughout the world. Pilkington
has also produced an energy-saving window
glass which reflects room heat without
impairing visibility. United Glass is a leading
manufacturer of bottles and other glass
containers. Glass-reinforced cement
composites for the construction industry were
invented in Britain in the early 1970s and are
made under licence in over 40 countries.
China Clay
Britain is the world’s biggest exporter of
china clay (kaolin), four-fifths of which is
used in paper-making. In 1993, 2.2 million
tonnes were sold overseas. The main
company is ECC International, part of the
English China Clays Group.
Chemicals and Related Products
Britain’s chemical industry is at the forefront
of modern technology, spending the
equivalent of about 5 per cent of total sales
on research and development (R & D). It is
the third largest chemical industry in Europe.
The nation’s fourth biggest manufacturing
industry, it provides direct employment for
303,000 people. Around a half of its output
of principal products is exported, making it
Britain’s greatest single export earner.
Exports in 1993 were worth £17,300 million,
while imports (mainly consisting of plastics
and organic chemicals) were valued at
£12,900 million.
Many major chemical companies in Britain
are multinationals; several are subsidiaries of
overseas companies and others are specialist
manufacturers of pharmaceuticals, such as
Glaxo and Wellcome. Imperial Chemical
Industries (ICI) is the sixth largest chemical
company in the world, with a range of 8,000
products. In a major restructuring programme,
ICI was demerged into two companies in
1993 to form ‘new’ ICI, built around industrial
chemicals, paints, materials and explosives,
and a separate company, Zeneca, comprising
Id’s pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals and
seeds, and specialities businesses.
Traditionally, Britain has been a major
producer of basic industrial chemicals, such
as inorganic and basic organic chemicals,
plastics and fertilisers, which together
comprise around two-fifths of output. The
most rapid growth in recent years has been in
speciality chemicals, particularly
pharmaceuticals and cosmetics.
Sales of the principal products of organic
chemicals amounted to £3,664 million in
1992 and those of other basic industrial
chemicals to £6,716 million. The most
important products sold in the organic
chemicals range are ethylene, propylene
and benzene.
Much inorganic chemical production
consists of relatively simple bulk chemicals,
such as sulphuric acid and metallic and non-
metallic oxides, serving as basic materials for
industry. Speciality chemicals include
industrial gases, essential oils and flavourings,
adhesives and sealants, and explosives,
including those used for car safety airbags.
Investment in environmentally safe products
and processes, such as substitutes for
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), is increasing.
A large proportion of world R & D in
agrochemicals is conducted in Britain. Notable
British discoveries include diquat and
paraquat herbicides, pyrethroid insecticides,
systemic fungicides and aphicides,
genetically-engineered microbial pesticides
and methods of encouraging natural parasites
to eradicate common pests in horticulture.
Exports of soap and toilet preparations in
1993 were valued at £1,691 million,
compared with imports of £1,011 million.
Total sales amounted to £4,173 million in
1992. This sector includes soap and
synthetic detergents, dominated by Lever
Brothers (part of Unilever) and by the
US-owned Proctor and Gamble. Boots and
SmithKline Beecham (the latter is jointly
233
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
owned by British and United States
interests) are significant producers of
perfumes, cosmetics and toilet preparations.
Plastics
Total annual turnover of the plastics industry
is estimated at £13,200 million; exports
reached £2,700 million in 1993. Around
180,000 people are employed in the industry,
three-quarters in the processing or conversion
sector. About 3,900 firms are engaged in
plastics processing—the conversion of plastics
materials into finished, semi-finished or sub-
assemblies of final products. Production
includes housewares and semi-finished
products for the automotive, domestic
appliance, mechanical goods, construction and
business equipment industries.
Paints
Sales of paint, varnishes and painters’ fillings
were worth £1,718 million in 1992. ICI is the
world’s second largest paint manufacturer.
Among its specialised products are new
ranges of synthetic resins and pigments,
powder coatings, non-drip and quick-drying
paints and paints needing only one top coat.
Its best-known consumer product is the
‘Dulux’ paint range. Two of the more recent
innovations have been solid emulsion paint
and a temporary water-based finish which can
be removed easily by chemical treatment, for
vehicle bodies and road markings.
Pharmaceuticals
Britain is the world’s fourth biggest exporter
of medicines, after Germany, Switzerland
and the United States. It has some of the
largest multinational manufacturers, as well as
medium-sized and smaller specialist
companies. Total sales in 1993 were around
£7,000 million, of which £3,685 million
was accounted for by overseas sales. The
main overseas markets are Western Europe
and North America, with Japan an
expanding market.
Employing over 80,000 people directly,
pharmaceuticals support employment for
250,000 people in such related activities as
research, distribution and retailing. The
industry invested more than £1,500 million
in R & D in 1993. This sum amounts to 20
per cent of British manufacturing industry’s
R & D and represents 8 per cent of total
world expenditure on medicines research.
Progress in devising vaccines has helped to
reduce dramatically the impact of infectious
diseases, such as whooping cough, mumps
and measles.
Britain is home to two of the world’s top
15 pharmaceuticals groups, Glaxo and
SmithKline Beecham. British firms make five
of the world’s 20 best-selling medicines,
including Glaxo’s ulcer treatment Zantac, the
world’s best-selling medicine, and ICI’s (now
Zeneca’s) beta-blocker Tenormin, for treating
high blood pressure. Among Zeneca’s newer
products are Zestril (for combating high
blood pressure), Zoladex (a prostate cancer
therapy) and Diprivan (an anaesthetic).
Other major developments pioneered in
Britain are semi-synthetic penicillins and
cephalosporins, both powerful antibiotics, and
new treatments for asthma, arthritis, migraine
and coronary heart disease. SmithKline
Beecham, which manufactures four of the
world’s top-selling antibiotics, has developed
Augmentin, used to treat a range of
infections that have become resistant to
antibiotics. Glaxo’s Zofran, an anti-nausea
drug used to counter the unpleasant
side-effects of cancer treatments, is one of the
company’s most successful new medicines.
British companies lead in the development
of molecular graphics, which contribute to
the rational design of new and improved
medicines through a computer-aided
technique for analysing the structures of
complicated organic molecules using a visual
display unit.
A growing trend is the production of
generic drugs. These are versions of branded
drugs whose patents have expired. They are
mostly unbranded and cheaper than the
branded originals. About 40 per cent of
doctors’ prescriptions are for generic drugs.
Biotechnology
Biotechnology has improved the specificity of
pharmaceuticals through greater
234
MANUFACTURING AND CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRIES
understanding of disease at the molecular
level. It has enabled companies to
manufacture products using genetic
modification. Britain has made major
advances in the development of drugs such as
human insulin and interferons, genetically-
engineered vaccines, and in the production of
antibiotics by fermentation; alternative
bacteriocidal drugs based on Nisin, a food
preservative made in Britain; agricultural
products such as infection-resistant crops;
and medical diagnostic devices, including the
world’s best-selling biosensor.
Major companies such as Zeneca,
Wellcome, Glaxo and SmithKline Beecham
undertake extensive research in
biotechnology. A second generation of
vaccines based on recombinant DNA
technology includes SmithKline Beecham’s
Engerix-B vaccine against hepatitis. Therapies
based on correcting the function of defective
genes are under development. Diseases being
targeted include those where a single
defective gene needs correcting, such as cystic
fibrosis, and those where there are genetic
and environmental components, like cardio¬
vascular disease.
Specialist products of Britain’s small and
medium-sized biotechnology firms comprise,
among other items, medical diagnostics and
microbial pesticides. The British company
Celltech was the first licensed by the United
States Government for the large-scale
production of monoclonal antibodies, proteins
which can seek out a particular substance in
the body. They are used to diagnose diseases,
identify different blood types and can be
employed in the treatment of a range of
conditions, including cancer.
Fibres
The main types of synthetic fibre are still
those first developed: regenerated cellulosic
fibres such as viscose, and the major
synthetic fibres like nylon polyamide,
polyester and acrylics. Extensive research
continues to produce a wide variety of
innovative products with characteristics
designed to meet market needs; antistatic and
flame-retardant fibres are examples. More
specialist products include the aramids (with
very high thermal stability and strength),
elastanes (giving very high stretch and
recovery) and melded fabrics (produced
without the need for knitting or weaving).
Britain’s second biggest chemical
company, Courtaulds, has developed a new,
solvent-spun, biodegradable fibre, Tencel,
which is twice as strong as cotton while
being soft enough to be used by designers of
luxury garments.
Mechanical Engineering and Metal
Goods
Exports of mechanical machinery—at £15,000
million—represented 13 per cent of total
visible exports in 1993. Output includes
pressure vessels, heat exchangers and storage
tanks for chemical and oil-refining plant,
steam-raising boilers (including those for
power stations), nuclear reactors, water and
sewage treatment plant, and fabricated
steelwork for bridges, buildings and
industrial installations.
Britain is among the world’s major
producers of tractors, which make up around
three-quarters of the country’s total output of
agricultural equipment. Sales of wheeled
tractors in 1993 were valued at £1,100
million. Leading tractor manufacturers
include Massey Ferguson and Ford.
Widely used technical innovations include
computer-controlled tractors, a highly
efficient pesticide sprayer and combined
mower/conditioners that reduce the drying
time for grass. Much new machinery is
designed for use in a variety of conditions to
meet the needs of overseas farmers.
Britain is the world’s eighth largest
producer of machine tools. Almost all are
purchased by the engineering, aerospace,
automotive, and metal goods industries. Total
sales of metal-working machine tools reached
almost £900 million in 1993. British
manufacturers have made technological
advances in probes, sensors, co-ordinate
measuring devices, laser melting and the
installation of flexible manufacturing systems.
Computer numerical-controlled machines
account for an increasing proportion of
output. The 600 Group is the biggest British
machine tool company.
235
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Most sales of textile machinery are to
export markets. British innovations include
computerised colour matching and weave
simulation, friction spinning, high-speed
computer-controlled knitting machines and
electronic jacquard attachments for weaving
looms. Bonas Machine Company of
Gateshead, producer of electronic jacquards,
exports 90 per cent of its £35 million annual
turnover, to more than 75 countries.
Britain’s mining and tunnelling equipment
industry leads in the production of coal¬
cutting and road-heading (shearing)
equipment, hydraulic roof supports,
conveying equipment, flameproof
transformers, switchgear, and subsurface
transport equipment and control systems.
J.C. Bamford is the world’s leading
manufacturer of backhoe loaders and
telescopic handlers. Sales of construction
equipment, such as excavators and backhoe
loaders, rose sharply in 1993, to over
£1,500 million.
The mechanical handling and lifting
equipment industry produces cranes and
transporters, lifting devices, escalators,
conveyors, powered industrial trucks and air
bridges, as well as electronically-controlled
and automatic handling systems. In 1993
sales in this sector were worth £2,500
million. Britain is also a major producer of
industrial engines, pumps, valves and
compressors, and of pneumatic and hydraulic
equipment. Companies like Babcock
manufacture steam generators and other
heavy equipment for power plants. Despite
an overall decline in the castings industry,
some foundries have been investing in new
melting, moulding and quality
control equipment.
Electrical, Electronic and Instrument
Engineering
Making extensive use of the most advanced
technologies, the electrical engineering
industry manufactures products for the
electricity supply sector, including power
plant, cable transformers and switchgear, and
lighting, plugs and sockets. The domestic
electrical appliance sector is dominated by a
few large firms, such as Thorn EMI.
Britain has the fourth largest electronics
industry in the world. Products include
computers, communications equipment and a
broad range of components.
The major electronic consumer goods
produced are radio and television sets, and
high-fidelity audio and video equipment.
Several Japanese companies, including Sony,
have established manufacturing bases in
Wales, making television sets, video recorders
and compact disc players. In the audio field
British manufacturers like Quad have a
reputation for high-quality goods, but are less
strong in the mass market.
Computers
This sector produces an extensive range of
systems, central processors and peripheral
equipment, from large computers for
large-scale data-processing and scientific
work to mini- and microcomputers for
control and automation systems and for
home, educational and office use. In 1993
exports reached a record level, around
£4,000 million.
The Trax, a novel design of
supercomputer processor with a wide
range of applications, including high-
definition television and defence
systems, was originally developed at
Brunei University, near London.
Britain makes 40 per cent of Europe’s
desktop computers. Nearly half of computers
and peripheral equipment intended for export
are made in Scotland. Several leading
overseas manufacturers of data-processing
equipment—for example, IBM, Unisys and
Compaq—have established manufacturing
plants in Britain. Britain’s biggest computer
manufacturer is the largely Japanese-owned
ICL. Other companies, such as Psion, have
concentrated on developing new products for
specialised markets. These include hand-held,
pocket-sized computers, increasingly used
by company sales forces, and notebook and
pen computers.
British firms make communications
software for portable and mainframe
computers. The world’s first modem
236
MANUFACTURING AND CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRIES
(computer telephone link) for portable
computers was designed in Britain. Psion is a
pioneer of the ‘palmtop’ computer, which has
the equivalent power of a desktop machine.
A Scottish firm, Calluna, has designed an
extremely small disc drive for use in
notebook-sized computers.
British firms and research organisations,
with government support, have been involved
in the development and application of the
family of ‘three-five’ semiconductor materials,
such as gallium arsenide; these are used in a
number of microwave devices and in the
production of faster-working computers.
Major advances are being made by British
firms in the field of ‘virtual reality’, a three-
dimensional computer simulation technique
with a host of industrial and other
applications. It is being used to design
buildings and a range of products, including
cars, pharmaceuticals and machine tools.
Communications Equipment
Britain’s main communications products are
switching and transmission equipment,
telephones and terminals. As the
telecommunications market has become fully
liberalised (see p. 302), there has been a
growing demand for equipment and services.
GPT is Britain’s foremost
telecommunications manufacturer; its product
range includes PBXs (private branch
exchanges), transmissions systems and
videoconferencing equipment.
Innovative work is being stimulated by the
expansion of cable television and the growth in
value added network services. There has been
rapid expansion in the market for cellular
telephones since the second half of the 1980s.
Transmission equipment and cables for
telecommunications and information networks
include submarine and high-specification
data-carrying cables. Supported by a
technically advanced cable industry, BT has
led in the development of optical fibre
communications systems and has paved the
way for simpler and cheaper optical cables by
laying the first non-repeatered cable over
100 km (62 miles) long, and by developing
the first all-optical repeater.
More than half of the world’s undersea
communications cables have been made and
laid by STC Submarine Systems, which, with
its US and French partners, completed the
laying of the first transatlantic optical fibre
cable in 1988. Now part of Canada’s
Northern Telecom, STC is building the first
fibre-optic cable linking Canada and Europe.
The cable, which will be made in Britain and
the United States, will carry up to 30,000
telephone calls simultaneously down each of
two pairs of optical fibres.
Britain also has a world lead in the
transmission of computerised data along
telephone lines for reproduction on
television screens.
Another sector of the industry manufactures
radio communications equipment, radar,
radio and sonar navigational aids for ships
and aircraft, thermal imaging systems, alarms
and signalling equipment, public broadcasting
equipment and other capital goods. Radar
was invented in Britain and British firms are
still in the forefront of technical advances.
Racal Avionics’ X-band radar for aircraft
ground movement control is in use at airports
in several countries. Solid-state secondary
surveillance radar, manufactured by Cossor
Electronics, is being supplied to 50 overseas
civil aviation operators. Cable and Wireless’s
submarine cable-laying robot ‘CIRRUS’, which
can work at depths of up to 1 km (3,280 ft),
is controlled entirely by a computer on its
mother ship.
Medical and Other Electronic Equipment
A range of electronic measurement and test
equipment is made in Britain, as well as
analytical instruments, process control
equipment, and numerical control and
indication equipment for use in machine
tools. Companies such as GEC and Oxford
Instruments produce electronic medical
equipment, like ultrasound scanners,
electromyography systems and patient
monitoring systems for intensive and
coronary care and other uses. Britain
pioneered magnetic resonance imaging.
The indigenous electronics components
industry is supplemented by subsidiaries of
leading overseas companies. An area of rapid
change in which Britain is particularly strong
237
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
is the manufacture of advanced components,
such as integrated circuits.
The instrument engineering industry
makes measuring, photographic,
cinematographic and reprographic equipment;
watches, clocks and other timing devices; and
medical and surgical instruments.
Overseas sales of scientific and
photographic equipment were worth £4,700
million in 1993.
Motor Vehicles
Just under 2 million new cars and commercial
vehicles were sold in 1993. Production has
recovered following the recession, with sales
of new cars up by around 12 per cent on the
previous year. Car output is dominated by
seven groups, accounting for 99 per cent of
the total: Rover (which became a subsidiary
of BMW in March 1994), Ford (including
Jaguar), Vauxhall, Peugeot-Talbot, Honda,
Nissan and Toyota. The remainder is in the
hands of smaller, specialist producers such as
Rolls-Royce, whose cars are renowned for
their quality and durability. Rover’s
production includes the highly successful
Land Rover four-wheel drive vehicle and the
600 range of family cars, launched in 1993. A
total of more than 530,000 passenger cars was
exported by the industry in 1993. Nissan was
the biggest car exporter that year.
A period of major change has accompanied
the arrival of the three major Japanese
manufacturers—Nissan, Toyota and Honda
which have invested heavily in ‘state of the
art’ plants. Japanese inward investment has
introduced new management techniques and
production methods into the sector. The
established motor vehicle manufacturers
and components suppliers are restructuring
as a result.
The motor components industry
consists of over 2,000 companies, such as
GKN, Lucas and Bosch, and is ranked as
one of Britain’s major industries.
Total sales of motor vehicle bodies and
parts amounted to £5,900 million.
Shipbuilding and Marine Engineering
The largest shipbuilding and shiprepairing
sector is warships and support vessels. In
addition to meeting all the needs of the Royal
Navy, warship yards build and convert ships
for overseas governments.
The Shipbuilders and Shiprepairers’
Association estimates that the order books of
British merchant shipbuilders for new
building were worth around £250 million at
the end of 1993; merchant shiprepairers had a
turnover of £120 million in 1993. I he
marine equipment industry is a major
contributor to the shipbuilding industry, as
equipment installed in a ship’s hull accounts
for about 50 per cent of its total cost. It
offers a complete range of products, from
diving equipment to sophisticated
navigational systems, around 70 per cent of
which is exported.
More than two decades of oil and gas
exploitation in the North Sea have generated
a major offshore industry (see p. 249).
Shipbuilders and fabricators build floating
production units and semi-submersible units
for drilling, production and emergency/
maintenance support, drill ships, jack-up rigs,
modules and offshore loading systems. UIE
Scotland, Highland Fabricators, John Brown
and McDermott Scotland are among the
larger manufacturers and designers.
Several thousand firms supply other
products needed by the offshore industry—
such as diving equipment and helicopters—as
well as services, including consultancy,
design, project management, and R & D to
the offshore industry. Their experience of
North Sea projects has enabled them to
establish themselves in oil and gas markets
throughout the world.
Aerospace
Britain’s aerospace industry is the third
largest in the Western world, after the
United States and France. With around 200
member companies of the Society of British
Aerospace Companies employing 134,500
people, it had a turnover in 1993 of about
£10,300 million. Exports totalled nearly
£6,400 million and contributed more than
£2,300 million in net terms to the balance of
payments. Aircraft and parts account for
around three-fifths of overseas sales, with
238
MANUFACTURING AND CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRIES
engines and parts, missiles and aerospace
equipment (including satellite equipment)
making up the rest. The impact of recession
on the civil aerospace market and reductions
in defence orders following the ending of the
Cold War, accompanied by fierce
international competition in the defence
products market, have led to further
rationalisation and consolidation of the
aerospace industry. Collaborative development
of civil and military aircraft, as well as aviation
equipment and satellites, is increasing to save
on the costs of long-term programmes.
The industry’s activities cover designing
and constructing airframes, aero-engines,
guided weapons, simulators and space
satellites, flight controls including ‘fly-by-
wire’ and ‘fly-by-light’ equipment (see
p. 309), avionics and complex components,
with their associated services. In order to
improve fuel economy, engine and airframe
manufacturers use lighter materials such as
titanium and carbon-fibre composites (see
p. 232), combined with advanced avionics and
improved aerodynamic techniques.
Britain pioneered the development of
hovercraft and remains a world leader in their
technology and production. Westland
Aerospace hovercraft range from large
commercial craft to smaller, 10-passenger
models. Slingsby Aviation builds hovercraft
for passenger transport, cargo, ambulance and
rescue, and surveying.
Civil Aircraft
As one of the leading British exporters of
manufactured goods, British Aerospace (BAe)
produces both civil and military aircraft, as
well as guided weapons and components.
Civil aircraft include the Avro RJ family of
regional quiet-jet airliners and the 64-seat
Jetstream ATP (advanced turboprop) airliner,
which is being developed as the 70-seat
Jetstream 61, the 29-seat Jetstream 41 and
19-seat Jetstream Super 31.
BAe has a 20 per cent share of the
European consortium Airbus Industrie, which
had a turnover of £8,700 million in 1993.
BAe designs and supplies the wings for the
whole family of Airbus airliners, from the
smallest short- to medium-haul A320 series
(the first civil airliner to use fly-by-wire
controls—see p. 309) to the large long-range
four-engined A340 introduced into service in
1993. Together with other international
aerospace organisations, BAe is studying the
feasibility of developing a successor to the
Concorde supersonic airliner and an ultra
high-capacity aircraft.
Short Brothers of Belfast (now Canadian-
owned) is engaged in the design and
production of civil aircraft, advanced nacelle
(engine casings) systems and components for
aerospace manufacturers as well as the
provision of aviation support services. It
designs and builds the wings for the Fokker
100 and 70 jetliners and is a partner in
manufacturing the 50-seat Canadair Regional
Jet airliner; the Learjet 45, a small business
jet aircraft; and the Bombardier Global
Express long-range business jet. Pilatus
Britten-Norman manufactures the Islander
light utility aircraft, which has had sales in
over 100 countries.
Military Aircraft and Missiles
British Aerospace is one of the world’s top
defence companies. More than four-fifths of
its military production was exported in 1993.
It includes the Harrier, a unique vertical/short
take-off and landing (V/STOL) military
combat aircraft. BAe also produces the Hawk
fast-jet trainer and, with McDonnell Douglas,
the Goshawk T45 carrier jet trainer. It has a
33 per cent share in the development of the
Eurofighter 2000, a co-operative venture
between Britain, Germany, Italy and Spain,
which had its maiden flight in March 1994.
The Tornado combat aircraft is built by a
company set up jointly by BAe, Alenia of Italy
and Deutsche Aerospace. A £5,000 million
order for 48 Tornado bombers for Saudi Arabia
was confirmed in 1993, making it one of
Britain’s biggest ever export deals. The United
States Air Force has chosen Slingsby Aviation’s
T67 Firefly trainer aircraft as its new basic
trainer. Slingsby also designs and makes
aerospace components and parts for airships.
Together with its Airbus partners, BAe
is examining the possibility of designing
and manufacturing a new large military
transport aircraft.
239
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
BAe and Shorts are major suppliers of
tactical guided weapon systems for use on
land, at sea and in the air.
Helicopters
In addition to producing aerospace
equipment, Westland manufactures the Sea
King and Lynx military helicopters. In
collaboration with Agusta of Italy, it is
developing the multi-role EH101 three-engine
helicopter, which will be delivered to the
Royal Navy and the Italian Navy by 1996—97.
The company is also a leading manufacturer
of composite helicopter blades.
Aero-engines
Rolls-Royce is one of the world’s three major
manufacturers of aero-engines, with a
turnover in 1993 of £2,100 million for its
aerospace division. The company’s civil
engine group produces engines for airliners
and regional, executive and corporate jets.
Rolls-Royce RB211-535 engines have been
selected by over 80 per cent of airlines for
their Boeing 757 airliners.
The company’s latest large engine, the
Trent, is aimed at the new generation of
wide-body twin-engined airliners, such as
Boeing’s 777 and the Airbus A330. The
Trent 800 variant is the most powerful engine
Rolls-Royce has produced and has already
run at over 100,000 lb thrust.
Rolls-Royce is a partner in the five-nation
International Aero Engine consortium, which
produces the low-emission V2500 aero-engine,
now in service on the Airbus A320.
The military engine group of Rolls-Royce
produces engines for both aircraft and
helicopters, and is a partner in the EJ200
engine project for the Eurofighter 2000.
The company also produces gas turbines
for power generation, for oil and gas pumping
and marine propulsion. Turnover of Rolls-
Royce’s industrial power wing amounted to
almost £1,400 million in 1993.
Aviation Equipment
Around one-third of the aerospace industry is
devoted to designing and manufacturing
aviation equipment. British firms have made
significant technological advances.
Manufacturers like Dowty, GEC-Marconi,
Lucas, Smiths Industries, Racal and BAe
provide equipment and systems for engines
and aircraft—propellers, navigation and
landing systems, engine and flight controls,
electrical generation, mechanical and
hydraulic power systems, cabin furnishings,
flight-deck controls and information
displays, including head-up displays
(HUDs), of which GEC-Marconi is the
world’s largest manufacturer.
British firms have made important
advances in developing ejection seats,
firefighting equipment and flight simulators,
as well as fly-by-wire and fly-by-light
technology, where control surfaces are moved
by means of automatic electronic signalling
and fibre optics respectively, rather than by
mechanical means. Fly-by-wire is being used
on the Airbus A330 and A340 as well as the
A320 and its derivatives. Britain’s aerospace
companies provide radar and air traffic
control equipment and ground power
supplies to airports and airlines worldwide.
Satellite Equipment
Over 400 companies in Britain are engaged in
space activities. The industry is strong in the
manufacture of satellites and ground
infrastructure for satellite systems and in the
analysis and exploitation of data from
satellites. Matra-Marconi Space is one of
the world’s leading producers of
communications satellites. It was the prime
contractor for all such satellites built for the
European Space Agency (ESA), and for the
Marecs and Inmarsat-2 series of maritime
communications satellites. It built payload
pallets for the United States Space Shuttle
and supplies SPELDA, a structure that
enables the ESA’s Ariane 4 launcher to carry
two spacecraft on the same mission. Work is
now in progress on ESA’s latest Cduster and
SOHO scientific spacecraft and the company
is acting as prime contractor for the
European Polar Platform. The first of ESA’s
new generation of environmental monitoring
missions, ENVISAT IV, is due for launching
in 1998 and uses the European Polar
240
MANUFACTURING AND CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRIES
Platform. Matra-Marconi Space is also the
main contractor for two Skynet 4 Stage 2
military communications satellites due to
come into operation in 1998.
Matra-Marconi Space has acted as main
contractor on many telecommunications
payloads, for example, for ESA. In addition,
it was prime contractor for the principal
radar instrument on the ESA’s European
Remote Sensing Satellites ERS-1 and ERS-2.
A new Earth Observation Data Centre
processes data from ERS-1 and other
satellites, and is helping to develop the
market for earth observation data. GEC
Ferranti Defence Systems produces the
inertial guidance system for the European
Ariane launcher and Pilkington Space
Technology is the world’s leading producer
of solar cell coverglasses for satellites.
Several companies, such as the National
Remote Sensing Centre, Logica, Data
Sciences, EOS and Cray Electronics, are
involved in processing earth observation data,
and a wide range of smaller companies
specialise in its interpretation.
Food and Drink
Britain has a large food and drink
manufacturing industry, which has accounted
for a growing proportion of total domestic
food supply in recent decades. In the last few
years, it has increased productivity and
undergone restructuring, partly in order to
take advantage of the single European market.
Approximately 500,000 people are employed
in the industry.
Frozen and prepared chilled foods, annual
sales of which stand at over £3,600 million and
£1,800 million respectively, other convenience
foods, yoghurts, dairy desserts and instant
snacks have formed the fastest-growing sector
of the food market in recent years. The
market in health and slimming foods continues
to expand. Companies have introduced new
low-fat and fat-free spreads and ice creams to
meet consumer demand. There has also been
a rise in sales of organically-grown produce as
well as products for vegetarians (soya-based
foods, for instance).
British firms are at the forefront of
innovation in the food industry. They
support research and development
programmes to ensure that products and
production methods meet the highest
safety standards and the expectations of
consumers. New foods, including ‘healthy’
alternatives, and better packaging are
constantly being developed.
Around 60 per cent of liquid milk in
Britain is distributed through a doorstep
delivery system employing about 80,000
people; the proportion is, however, declining.
Household milk consumption per head—
2.23 litres (3.9 pints) a week—is among the
highest in the world. Consumption of
skimmed and semi-skimmed milk continues
to rise as people seek to reduce the fat
content in their diet.
Milk for manufacturing purposes goes
principally into butter, cheese, condensed
milk, dried whole and skimmed milk, cream
and other products like yoghurt. The British
dairy industry accounted for 56 per cent of
butter supplies to the domestic market in
1993 and 68 per cent of cheese supplies.
Butter exports in 1993 were worth
£122 million. The other main exports are
skimmed milk powder and whole milk
powder, valued at £178 million in total.
About 80 per cent of bread is
manufactured in large bakeries; the total
bread market is valued at £3,000 million a
year. A significant increase in the varieties
available, a greater awareness of the
nutritional value of bread and the growth of
the sandwich market have helped stabilise
consumption. Exports of biscuits were valued
at £224 million in 1993 and those of
chocolate confectionery at £253 million.
Of major significance among the alcoholic
drinks produced in Britain is Scotch whisky,
which is one of Britain’s top export earners.
There are 110 distilleries in Scotland, where
the best known brands of blended Scotch
whisky, such as J & B, Johnnie Walker,
Famous Grouse and Teachers, are made
from the products of single malt and
single grain whisky distilleries. About
four-fifths of Scotch whisky production
is exported, to over 200 countries. The value
of whisky exports was £2,100 million in
1993, Europe taking 40 per cent and the
United States 14 per cent by volume.
241
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In 1993 purchases of beer in Britain
reached £13,600 million, about 3 per cent of
consumers’ expenditure. The brewing
industry has six major national brewery
groups, and about 160 regional and local
brewers. British malt, which is made almost
entirely from home-grown barley, is used by
brewers throughout the world. Demand for
traditional cask-conditioned ales (‘real ale’)
continues to rise, while lager now accounts
for just over half of all beer sales. In the
last few years there has been a shift
towards stronger bottled beers, a significant
proportion of which are imported. Cider is
made primarily in south-west England,
Gloucester, Hereford and Worcester.
There are around 450 vineyards and
150 wineries in Britain (mainly in southern
England), producing an average of
1.75 million litres of wine a year.
The soft drinks industry—comprising
carbonated drinks, concentrates, fruit juices,
and natural mineral and bottled waters—is
the fastest growing sector of the grocery
trade, with an annual turnover of about
£6,000 million.
Tobacco
The British tobacco industry manufactures
nearly all the cigarettes and tobacco goods
sold in Britain. Almost all domestic output is
provided by three major manufacturers
(Imperial Tobacco, Gallaher and Carreras
Rothmans). The industry specialises in the
production of high-quality cigarettes made
from flue-cured tobacco and achieves
significant exports. Europe, the Middle East
and Africa are important markets.
Textiles and Clothing
These products make a substantial
contribution to the British economy in terms
of employment, exports and turnover.
Together with the footwear and leather
industries, they employ around 415,000
people, equal to about 10 per cent of
manufacturing employment. For textiles,
there is a high degree of regional
concentration, particularly in the North West,
West Yorkshire (mainly wool), the East
Midlands (knitwear), Scotland and Northern
Ireland. The clothing industry is scattered
throughout Britain, with significant
concentrations in Manchester, Leicester and
London. The main products are yarn, woven
and knitted fabrics, apparel, industrial and
household textiles, and carpets based mainly
on wool, cotton and synthetic fibres. Exports
of textiles, clothing and footwear totalled over
£5,000 million in 1993.
The textile and clothing industry has
around 12,000 firms, comprising a few large
multi-process companies and two of the
world’s largest firms—Coats Viyella and
Courtaulds Textiles—as well as a large
number of small and medium-sized firms.
Increased investment in new machinery
and greater attention to design, training and
marketing have helped the industry to raise
competitiveness. New technologies, largely
designed to improve response times and give
greater flexibility in production, are being
used throughout the industry.
The Multi-Fibre Arrangement (MFA) of
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(GATT—see p. 170) allows a measure of
restraint on imports into the European Union
from low-cost countries; however, the MFA
is being phased out over 10 years under the
latest GATT settlement, reached in 1993
(see p. 170).
Britain’s wool textile industry is one of the
largest in the world, with two main branches
making woollen and worsted (fine wool fabric
often used for making suits). Synthetic fibre
is sometimes blended with wool. West
Yorkshire is the main producing area, but
Scotland is also famous as a specialised
producer of high-quality yarns, tweeds and
cloth. Raw wool is scoured and cleaned in
Britain in preparation for spinning. British
mills also process rare fibres such as
cashmere. Sales of the woollen and worsted
industry amounted to £1,400 million in 1993.
Low-cost competition has cut
progressively into British markets for cotton
and allied products. Production includes yarn
and fabrics of cotton, synthetic fibres and
cotton-synthetic mixes, with large-scale
dyeing and printing of cotton and synthetic
fibre fabric. The linen industry is centred in
Northern Ireland.
242
MANUFACTURING AND CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRIES
The high quality and variety of design
make Britain one of the world’s leading
producers of woven carpets. Over half the
value of carpet and rug output is made up of
tufted carpets. Woven carpets, mainly
Axminster, account for most of the remaining
sales. There is a higher wool content in woven
types, although in these, too, considerable use
is being made of synthetic fibres.
Industrial textiles account for an increasing
proportion of the industry’s output, covering
products such as conveyor belting and
geotextiles used in civil engineering. Many of
these are non-woven. Synthetic
polypropylene yarn is used in the
manufacture of carpet backing and ropes, and
woven into fabrics for a wide range of
applications in the packaging, upholstery,
building and motor vehicle industries.
The clothing industry is labour intensive,
involving about 7,700 companies. While a
broad range of clothing is imported from
Europe and Asia, British industry supplies
over half of domestic demand. Exports have
risen since the British fashion designer
industry regained prominence during the
1980s and traditional British tailoring
enables clothing companies such as
Burberry’s to compete overseas. The hosiery
and knitwear industry comprises about
1,500 companies, mainly in the east
Midlands and Scotland.
Other Manufacturing
There are 105 paper and board mills
employing 26,000 people. Among the largest
British groups are Arjo Wiggins Appleton,
St Regis and BPB Paper and Packaging.
Production has been concentrated in large-
scale units to enable the industry to compete
more effectively within the single European
market. Between 1985 and 1993 output
increased by 41 per cent. Over half the
industry is made up of forestry product
companies from Scandinavia, North America,
Australia and elsewhere. There has been a
significant trend towards waste-based
packaging grades. Usage of recycled waste
paper is increasing and research is helping to
extend it. In 1993 the total amount of waste
paper used in British newspapers accounted
for 73 per cent of newsprint produced.
Waste paper provides over half of the
industry’s fibre needs.
Employment in the paper products,
printing and publishing industries is about
450,000. Most of the printing and publishing
industry’s employment and output is
concentrated in firms based in south-east
England. Mergers have led to the formation
of large groups in newspaper, magazine and
book publishing. Reed Elsevier, one of the
world’s biggest publishing businesses,
resulted from a merger between Reed
International and the Dutch company
Elsevier in 1993. More than £2,700 million
worth of books were sold in Britain in 1993.
The book-publishing industry is a major
exporter, selling one-third of production in
overseas markets. Security printers (of, for
example, banknotes and postage stamps) are
important exporters, the major company
being De La Rue.
About half of all rubber tyres and inner
tubes sold by British manufacturers in 1993
went overseas. Tyre manufacturers include
subsidiaries of United States and other
overseas companies.
Construction
Construction work is carried out by private
contractors and public authorities employing
their own labour. From 1990 the industry
was in recession, with employment falling
from 1.8 million to 1.3 million in 1992. In
1993-94 there were signs of recovery, with
new orders on an upward trend, although
employment continued to fall. The
Department of the Environment assists
British construction and building products
and materials firms to secure overseas
contracts (see p. 245) by, for instance,
arranging inward and outward trade missions.
Most work is done by private firms, 98
per cent of which employ fewer than 25
people. While only 95 out of a total of
206,000 firms employ more than 600 people
directly, these companies undertake about
one-fifth of all construction in Britain. Some
larger firms own quarries and factories for
materials manufacture, and sophisticated
243
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
plant. Some undertake responsibility for all
stages of projects from initial design to
finished building. Efficiency and productivity
in construction have benefited from greater
off-site fabrication of standardised
components and from computerised
techniques such as electronic load safety
measures for cranes, distance measuring
equipment, computerised stock ordering and
job costing, and computer-aided design.
Building Materials and Products
A vast range of products is used in the
construction process, from glass and bricks to
tiles and bathroom fittings. These materials
are estimated to make up around 40 per cent
of the value of construction output. In 1993
sales of construction materials were worth
around £20,000 million, with exports
amounting to £2,500 million.
Most crushed rock, sand and gravel that is
quarried by the aggregates industry is used in
construction. The brick industry, one of
Britain’s oldest, is regarded as the world’s
most technically advanced: in the late 1980s
over £300 million was invested in improving
production. Portland cement, a 19th-century
British innovation, is the most widely used
chemical compound in the world.
Britain is a world leader in the
manufacture of glass used in windows, doors
and cladding. Pilkington developed the float
process for manufacturing distortion-free flat
glass (see p. 232), which is licensed
throughout the world. Substantially more
energy efficient, flat glass is used to allow
more light into buildings and to provide
insulation against heat loss in winter. The
manufacture and supply of windows and
doors is carried out by a large number of
companies operating in one of three distinct
product sectors—timber, metal (aluminium
and steel) and UP VC.
Project Procurement, Management and
Financing
The common basis of procurement is a lump¬
sum contract with provision for variation.
The largest projects are often carried out
under the direction of construction managers
or management contractors. Clients generally
employ architects, project managers or civil
engineers to advise on the feasibility of
projects, draw up plans, and inspect and
supervise the construction work.
Private and public sector projects are
managed in a variety of ways. Most clients
invite construction firms to bid for work by
competitive tender, having used the design
services of a consultant. The successful
contractor will then undertake on-site work
with a number of specialist sub-contractors.
Alternative methods of contracting are
becoming more common: for example,
contracts might include subsequent provision
of building maintenance or a comprehensive
‘design-and-build’ service, where a single
company accepts responsibility for every stage
of a project.
The Government provides substantial
work for the construction industry. Recently,
a number of schemes have been built and
paid for by private consortia, which then
charge the public for their use for a fixed
period of time before transferring ownership
back to the public sector; these are known as
‘BOOT’ (’Build, Own, Operate and
Transfer’) schemes. An example is the toll
bridge over the River Thames at Dartford,
Kent (see p. 287).
Major Construction Projects in Britain
The most important recent construction
project is the Channel Tunnel, the largest
single civil engineering project ever
undertaken in Europe (see p. 293).
Completed in 1993, its estimated cost was
about £10,000 million. Building work was
carried out by a consortium of ten French
and British contractors working together as
Transmanche Link (TML). The tunnel is
nearly 50 km (31 miles) long and is 70 m
(230ft) below sea level at its deepest.
Associated projects include a new
international station at Waterloo in London
and an international terminal at Folkestone.
Other major building projects in hand or
recently completed are the M25 motorway
widening scheme; the A55 Conwy Tunnel in
Wales; the extensive development in
London’s Docklands; and the Sizewell B
244
MANUFACTURING AND CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRIES
nuclear power station in Suffolk. Both
Stansted and Manchester airports have been
substantially redeveloped. There has also been
large-scale redevelopment of sports stadiums,
including Twickenham and Murrayfield (in
Edinburgh) rugby grounds, and Manchester
United and Arsenal football grounds.
A £20 million stadium for a football
ground at Millwall in south-east
London, completed in 1993, was the
first major new stadium to be built in
Britain since the end of the Second
World War.
Housing
During 1993 construction of 185,000
dwellings was started in Great Britain, up by
nearly a fifth on the 1992 figure. Starts by
private enterprise were 142,000, by housing
associations 41,000 and in the public sector
almost 2,000. Around 174,000 dwellings were
completed: over 137,000 by the private sector,
34,000 by housing associations and 2,000 by
the public sector. The total value of new
housing orders was nearly £6,500 million.
Building Regulations
The Department of the Environment’s
building regulations prescribe minimum
standards of construction in England and
Wales. Administered and enforced by local
government, the regulations apply to new
building, the installation or replacement of
fittings, and alterations and extensions to
existing buildings. There are similar controls
in Scotland and Northern Ireland. An
alternative to local authority building control
was introduced in 1984; under this there is a
system of private certification of compliance
with building regulations. The British
Standards Institution is making Britain’s
contribution to the drafting of European
standards, which are increasingly replacing
national construction standards.
Research and Advisory Services
The Building Research Establishment, an
executive agency of the Government, provides
advice and research services to the
Government on the design, construction and
performance of buildings together with the
health and safety of people in and around
buildings. Its areas of expertise include
prevention and control of fires and protection
of the environment. It has a key role in
developing European codes and standards and
has strong links with a variety of international
organisations. Major construction and
materials firms, universities, colleges and
research associations, as well as the British
Board of Agrement, carry out research and
provide advisory services. The Building
Centre provides exhibition and information
services on materials, products, techniques
and building services.
Overseas Contracting and Consultancy
British companies are engaged in many major
projects throughout the world and have been
in the forefront of innovative methods of
management contracting and construction
management. Contractors and consultants
undertake the supervision and all or part of
the construction of a project. Consultants are
involved in the planning, design and
supervision of construction projects. British
contractors and consultants have a reputation
for integrity and independence.
British contractors are currently
undertaking, or have recently completed,
work in 123 overseas countries and have a
permanent presence in 95 of them. In 1992
they won new international business valued at
£2,900 million, securing more new business
in Asia—a major growth region—than any of
their European competitors. Important
international contracts won in 1993-94
included:
• a management contract for EXPO ’98 in
Lisbon ($1,000 million);
• a major share in an international contract
to build a second bridge over the Tagus
river in Portugal (£550 million);
• a tunnelling contract for the Cairo waste
water project (£95 million);
• a contract to build a prestige apartment
block in Egypt (£64 million);
245
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
• a management contract for the
redevelopment of Kowloon station in
Hong Kong (£60 million); and
• a contract to construct a 30-storey hotel
and office tower in Mexico City (£50
million).
British engineering consultants were
engaged in over 3,000 projects in more than
140 countries, having offices in 78 of those
countries. In 1993 members of the
Association of Consulting Engineers were
involved in new work overseas valued at
almost £30,000 million. The capital value of
projects under way at the end of 1993 or
completed during the year was £66,000
million. British consulting engineers had
Further Reading
estimated gross earnings in 1993 of £605
million from overseas commissions. The three
largest categories of work covered roads,
bridges and tunnels; thermal power stations;
and water supply. The largest markets were
the Far East, Africa, India and the Middle
East. Major international projects include:
• Sabiya power station in Kuwait (£1,100
million);
• Yang Pu city development project in
China (£1,000 million);
• Hong Kong Route 3 country park section
(£1,000 million); and
• Oresund bridge crossing in Denmark
(£800 million).
The Aerospace Industry. Aspects of Britain series, HMSO, 1993.
Overseas Trade. Aspects of Britain series, HMSO, 1994.
246
17 Energy and Natural
Resources
Energy Resources 247
Energy Policy 248
Energy Consumption 248
Energy Efficiency 249
Oil and Gas 250
Oil 251
Gas 253
Coal 256
Electricity 257
New and Renewable Sources
of Energy 262
Non-fuel Minerals 263
Water 265
Energy production is a vital part of Britain’s economy. It directly employs
about 270,000 people—6 per cent of industrial employees. Offshore oil and
gas also provides employment for 250,000 in support industries—building oil
rigs, designing platforms and pipelines, operating boats and helicopters, etc.
The energy sector accounts for 5 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP),
11 per cent of total investment and 42 per cent of industrial investment. It
contributes £1,500 million a year to the balance of payments. It also includes
three of Britain’s ten largest companies—Shell, BP and British Gas.
Energy Resources
Britain has the largest energy resources of
any country in the European Union (EU) and
is a major world producer of oil and natural
gas—called primary sources. The other main
primary sources are coal, nuclear power and
some water power; secondary sources
(derived from primary sources) are
electricity, coke and smokeless fuels, and
petroleum products. In 1993 Britain was a
net exporter of fuels in volume terms—
4.2 million tonnes of oil equivalent—
representing a surplus of £1,250 million.
Coal still supplies a significant, but
declining, proportion of the country’s energy
needs—25 per cent of total inland
consumption in 1993. Nuclear power
provided about 25 per cent of electricity
supplied by the British electricity companies
in 1993.
Ownership and Exploitation
With the major exceptions of gold, silver, oil
and natural gas (owned by the Crown), and
coal (and associated minerals), minerals in
Great Britain are mainly privately owned. In
Northern Ireland gold and silver are owned
by the Crown, while rights to exploit
petroleum and other minerals are vested in
the Department of Economic Development.
On the United Kingdom Continental
Shelf (UKCS; see map, p. 252) the right to
work all minerals except coal is vested in the
Crown. The exclusive right to extract coal, or
license others to do so, both on land in Great
Britain and under the sea, is currently vested
in the British Coal Corporation. Normally,
ownership of minerals belongs to the owner
of the land surface, but in some areas,
particularly those with a long history of
mining, these rights have become separated.
247
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Mining and quarrying are usually carried out
by privately owned companies.
ENERGY POLICY
The President of the Board of Trade (who
heads the Department of Trade and
Industry—DTI) and the Secretary of State
for the Environment are responsible for
energy matters in Great Britain, except for
electricity in Scotland, which is under the
Secretary of State for Scotland. The
Secretary of State for Northern Ireland is
responsible for all energy matters there.
The aim of the Government’s energy
policy is to ensure secure, diverse and
sustainable supplies of energy in the forms
that people and businesses want, and at
competitive prices. Health, safety and
environmental policies, as well as EU and
other international commitments, have also to
be borne in mind.
Key elements are to:
• encourage competition among producers
and choice for consumers, and establish a
legal and regulatory framework to enable
markets to work well;
• ensure service in a commercial
environment, with consumers paying the
full cost of energy resources they
consume;
• privatise state-owned industries where
possible, thus exposing them to the
discipline of capital markets;
• promote energy efficiency; and
• promote wider share ownership.
The independent regulators’ main role is
to encourage the development of competition
and to protect the interests of consumers by
administering price controls and enforcing
standards of service.
Privatisation
British Gas, Britoil, Enterprise Oil, and the
non-nuclear electricity supply industry in
Britain are in the private sector. The Coal
Industry Bill, now before Parliament, contains
the Government’s proposals for restructuring
and privatising British Coal. T he Citizen’s
Charter commitment aims to give customers
of privatised utilities fair treatment and
strengthens the powers of regulators.
Customers are to be compensated when
standards are not met and greater
competition introduced into the gas industry.
International Commitments
Britain is actively engaged in international
collaboration on energy questions, notably
through its membership of the EU and of the
International Energy Agency (IEA; part of
the Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development, with 23 member countries).
The European Energy Charter is a multilateral
treaty which aims to set a legal framework for
energy investment and trade with Russia and
other economies in transition.
Britain supports the continuing
development of the single market in energy,
in particular through the removal of
obstacles to trade in the EU’s gas and
electricity markets.
Energy Report
The Government published its first annual
energy report, to provide information for
business and investment, in 1994. It deals
with trends in supply and demand, licensing
activity, and regulatory developments in the
energy sector as it moves towards a fully
competitive market for all fuels.
An independent energy advisory panel
advises on the preparation of the report. Energy
suppliers and users serve on the panel.
ENERGY CONSUMPTION
During 1982-93, when Britain’s GDP rose by
about 28 per cent, final energy consumption
on a ‘heat supplied’ basis increased by only
11 per cent. Energy consumption by final
users in 1993 amounted to 152.3 million
tonnes of oil equivalent1 on a ‘heat supplied’
basis, of which transport consumed 33 per cent,
industrial users 24 per cent, domestic users
30 per cent, and commerce, agriculture and
public services 13 per cent.
1 1 tonne of oil equivalent = 41,868 gigajoules.
248
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
Table 17.1: Inland Energy Consumption (in terms of primary sources)"
million tonnes oil equivalent
1983 1988 1991 1992 1993
Oil
Coal
Natural gas
Nuclear energy
Hydro-electric power
Net imports of electricity
Total
68.1
68.6
47.1
13.5
0.4
197.7
74.7
70.1
51.5
16.6
0.4
1.1
214.4
78.1
67.1
54.0
17.4
0.4
1.4
218.5
77.8
63.4
54.8
18.5
0.5
1.4
216.4
79.7
55.1
62.4
21.5
0.4
1.4
220.5
Source: Department of Trade and Industry
“Adjustments in the figures for recent years are the result of methodological review.
Note: Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
ENERGY EFFICIENCY
Britain’s consumers spend about £50,000
million a year on energy. The Energy
Efficiency Office (EEO), part of the
Department of the Environment (DOE),
estimates that 20 per cent—or £10,000
million—could be saved through measures
involving little, if any, cost. Energy
efficiency improvements offer a fast, cost-
effective means of reducing carbon dioxide
(C02) emissions. The EEO encourages
investment in energy efficiency
improvements through various programmes.
It provides consumers with the necessary
information to make energy efficiency
improvements, and gives grants where the
need is greatest. The EEO budget for
1994—95 has been increased to over
£100 million.
The Best Practice programme researches
and disseminates technical information. It
aims to generate savings of £800 million a
year by 2000. It also aims to increase the
capacity of Combined Heat and Power
(CHP) to 5,000 megawatts2 (MW) by 2000.
CHP is the simultaneous generation of
electricity and heat in a single process. It is
significantly more efficient than conventional
generation, makes substantial energy cost
savings and emits less C02.
The EEO operates two grant schemes.
The Home Energy Efficiency Scheme gives
advice and grants to householders on low
1 MW = 1,000 kilowatts (Kw).
incomes or over the age of 60 for draught¬
proofing and loft and water tank insulation.
The Energy Management Assistance Scheme
helps small and medium-sized companies to
improve their energy efficiency.
Among the EEO’s publicity initiatives, the
‘Making a Corporate Commitment’
campaign underlines the need for senior
management to commit itself to responsible
energy management. More than 1,600
organisations have so far joined. Publicity
campaigns, which include television and press
advertising, tell householders how they can
help combat global warming by improving
the energy efficiency of their homes.
Other work includes the promotion of
home energy labelling and energy labelling of
domestic appliances. In addition, the DOE’s
Green House Demonstration Programme has
established a network of energy efficiency
demonstration schemes across England to
encourage local authorities to develop and
apply energy efficiency to their housing. The
Programme ended in March 1994, but local
authorities are now required to include
energy efficiency as an integral part of their
housing strategies and investment programmes.
Revisions to the Building Regulations,
including double glazing, improved
insulation, heating controls, and home energy
labelling, are also under consideration.
The independent Energy Saving Trust,
set up by the Government, British Gas and
the electricity companies, develops new
programmes to promote the efficient use
of energy.
249
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
OIL AND GAS
Britain has substantial oil and gas reserves
offshore on the UKCS. The trend in
offshore oil and gas developments is
towards the exploitation of smaller
reservoirs, and advances in science and
technology have made this a more economic
proposition.
The Government must approve all plans
for the development of oil and gas fields. It
has granted exploration and production
licences as a result of 14 offshore licensing
rounds since 1964. By the end of 1993, 5,250
wells had been or were being drilled in the
UKCS: 2,428 development wells, 1,756
exploration wells and 1,066 appraisal wells.
Oil and Gas Licensing
In the 14th round, announced in June 1993
and the biggest in terms of blocks available
and applications received since 1971-72, 484
blocks were offered. Applications were
received for 128 blocks and 110 were
awarded. These include blocks in the English
Channel, Cardigan Bay, Solway Firth and the
North Channel. There is interest in the more
mature areas of the UKCS. Blocks were also
licensed in frontier acreage in the south-west
approaches. For the first time, companies
were asked to state their environmental
policies in their licence applications. The
15th round, announced in April 1994,
includes all available unlicensed acreage in
the Southern Basin and in the central North
Sea. Nominations for a 16th round were
also invited.
Offshore Supplies
The Oil and Gas Projects and Supplies
Office (OSO) of the DTI works to ensure
fair commercial opportunities for Britain in
all oil and gas markets. It also encourages
reduction of the cost of oil and gas
developments, to improve the competitiveness
of the UKCS.
All oil companies, their suppliers and the
DTI are partners in an initiative which aims
to reduce capital costs by at least 30 per cent
within two or three years.
Research
The Offshore Energy Technology Board
advises the OSO on its offshore technology
programme. A number of universities,
research institutes and private-sector
companies carry out oil-related research.
Funding comes from private sector oil and
supplies companies, OSO, the Marine
Technology Directorate Ltd and the
Petroleum Science and Technology Institute.
The Offshore Technology Park in Aberdeen
comprises several research facilities.
Export levels are increasing, with
some companies now exporting as
much as 50 per cent of their turnover.
About one-third of all orders placed
(worth over £2,000 million a year) are
for overseas.
Economic and Industrial Aspects
In 1993 UKCS oil and gas production
accounted for about 1.4 per cent of Britain s
gross national product at factor cost. Total
revenue from the sale of oil and gas produced
from the UKCS in 1993 is estimated to have
been £8,700 million and £3,600 million
respectively. Taxes and royalty receipts
attributable to UKCS oil and gas are
estimated to have been £1,350 million in
1993-94. The British supplies industry wins
about 75 per cent of UKCS contracts worth
about £5,000 million a year.
Gross capital investment from British
sources in the oil and gas extraction
industry amounted to some £4,700 million
in 1993. This was about 20 per cent of
British industrial investment and 5 per cent
of gross domestic fixed capital formation. Total
investment between 1965 and 1993 came to
about £57,000 million (£101,000 million at
1993 prices). Some 34,200 people were
employed offshore in September 1993.
Offshore Safety
The Offshore Safety Act 1992 raises the
maximum penalties for certain offences
against health and safety regulations. The Act
250
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
also completes the statutory transfer of
offshore safety responsibilities to the Health
and Safety Executive (HSE). Government
funding for the HSE’s Offshore Safety
Division will reach £35 million in 1994-95.
OIL
Before the 1970s Britain was almost wholly
dependent for its oil supplies on imports, the
only indigenous supplies coming from a few
land-based oilfields. However, the first
notable offshore discovery of oil in the UKCS
was made in 1969 and the first oil brought
ashore in 1975. Output of crude oil and
natural gas liquids (NGLs) in Britain in 1993
averaged 2.06 million barrels (about 274,205
tonnes) a day, making Britain the world’s
tenth largest producer.
North Sea Fields
There were 62 offshore fields producing
crude oil at the end of February 1994, and
20 new offshore development projects (seven
of them for oil) were approved during 1993.
The fields with the largest cumulative
production totals are Forties and Brent.
Ninian, Piper, Beryl, Fulmar, Magnus and
Claymore are other high-producing fields.
Production from most large fields is controlled
from production platforms of either steel or
concrete which have been built to withstand
severe weather, including gusts of wind of up
to 260 km/h (160 mph) and waves of 30 m
(100 ft). The Petroleum Act 1987 lays down
measures to be taken when offshore
installations and pipelines are abandoned.
The Government’s oil policy encourages
exploration, development and investment—to
maximise economic oil production for the
foreseeable future. Remaining recoverable
reserves of UKCS oil in the ‘proven’ plus
‘probable’ categories amount to 1,406 million
tonnes, while the total remaining potential of
the UKCS could be nearly 6,000 million
tonnes on current estimates.
Structure of the Oil Industry
About 250 private sector companies, including
many large oil firms, operate in Britain or
engage in work in the UKCS. Exploration
and development of the UKCS are carried
out by the private sector. The Government
receives royalties from UKCS oil.
The two leading British oil companies are
British Petroleum (BP) and Shell Transport
and Trading, which has a 40 per cent
interest in the Royal Dutch/Shell Group of
Companies. BP and Shell are the two
largest industrial companies in Britain in
terms of turnover.
Land-based Fields
Onshore production of crude oil and NGLs
is much less significant than offshore
production. In 1993 it was 3.9 million tonnes,
85 per cent of which came from Britain’s
largest onshore field at Wytch Farm (Dorset).
In addition to minor production from various
mining licensees, other onshore fields include
Welton (Lincolnshire) and Wareham
(Dorset). Small, independent companies play
an increasingly prominent role in onshore
exploration. At the end of 1993, 176 landward
petroleum licences were in force, covering an
area of 24,331 sq km (9,489 sq miles).
Refineries
Britain’s refinery industry is one of the most
modern and efficient in Europe. In 1993 the
refinery sector processed 96.3 million tonnes
of crude and process oils (4.3 per cent more
than in 1992), a figure close to maximum
capacity. About 80 per cent of output is in
the form of lighter, higher-value products
such as gasoline, DERV and jet kerosene. By
comparison, the proportion of Western
European output accounted for by these
higher-value products is about 70 per cent.
Consumption
Deliveries of petroleum products for inland
consumption (excluding refinery
consumption) in 1993 included 23.8 million
tonnes of motor spirit, 9.7 million tonnes of
kerosene, 19.6 million tonnes of gas and
diesel oil (including DERV fuel used in road
vehicles), 10.8 million tonnes of fuel oil and
11.9 million tonnes of other products.
251
Oil
50
_L_
100 150 km
_i i
i 1
100 miles
▼
4
Offshore oilfields in production
or under development
Onshore oil finds
Oil refineries (over 1 million
tonnes annual capacity)
  Oil pipelines
A Terminals
Magnus—i
Deveron * \
Osprey •
Eider-
Tern-
Hudson-
N. Cormorant \\v
S. Cormorant ■
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
Table 17.2: Oil Statistics
1983
1988
1991
million tonnes
1992 1993
Oil production:"
land
offshore
Refinery output
Deliveries of petroleum
products for inland
consumption
Exports (including re-exports):
crude petroleum, natural
gas liquids (NGLs)
and feedstocks
refined petroleum products
Imports:
crude petroleum, NGLs
and feedstocks
refined petroleum
products
0.3
114.6
70.9
64.5
69.9
13.3
30.3
9.9
0.8
113.7
79.8
72.3
73.3
15.8
44.3
9.2
3.7
83.1
85.5
74.5
55.1
19.4
57.1
10.1
4.0
85.2
85.8
75.5
57.6
20.2
57.7
10.6
3.9
90.2
89.6
75.8
64.2
23.1
61.7
10.0
Source: Department of Trade and Industry
^ Crude oil plus condensates.
Trade
Britain’s refinery sector has set new records
for exports in each of the last three years. In
1993, it exported over 25 million tonnes of
refined petroleum products and NGLs
(separated at North Sea terminals), nearly 30
per cent of its output (worth £3,000 million
to the balance of payments). Virtually all
exports went to Britain’s partners in the EU
and the IEA, the largest markets being
France, Italy, the Irish Republic, the
Netherlands and Germany, and, outside the
EU, the United States.
Oil Pipelines
Oil pipelines brought ashore about 80 per
cent of offshore oil in 1993. Some 1,930 km
(1,199 miles) of major submarine pipeline
brings oil ashore from the North Sea
oilfields. Major crude oil onshore pipelines
(from harbours, land terminals or offshore
moorings to refineries) include those
connecting Grangemouth to Finnart, Cruden
Bay to Grangemouth, and Purbeck to
Southampton. Onshore pipelines also carry
refined products to major marketing areas;
for example, a 423-km (263-mile) pipeline
runs from Milford Haven to the Midlands
and Manchester, while similar pipelines also
run from Fawley to Wolverhampton and
from Lindsey to north London. Chemical
pipelines include one from Mossmorran to
Grangemouth and another (405 km—252
miles) from Grangemouth to Stanlow.
GAS
Public supply of manufactured gas in
Britain began in the early 19th century in
central London. For many years gas was
produced from coal, but during the 1960s
growing imports of oil brought about
production of town gas from oil-based
feedstocks. Following the first commercial
natural gas discovery in the UKCS in 1965
and the start of offshore gas production in
1967, supplies of offshore natural gas grew
rapidly and by 1977 natural gas had
replaced town gas in the public supply
system in Great Britain. Up to the end of
1993 some £14,870 million had been spent on
developing natural gas resources on the
UKCS and 962,000 million cubic metres had
been produced. Britain is the world’s fifth
largest gas producer.
253
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Structure
The gas industry in Great Britain, in state
ownership since 1949, was privatised in 1986.
British Gas pic supplies gas to consumers in
accordance with its authorisation as a public
gas supplier under the Gas Act 1986. It is
currently the only public gas supplier. Over
30 independent companies supply gas to
industrial and commercial customers in
competition with British Gas. The regulatory
regime for the private gas sector places
responsibility on the Office of Gas Supply
(OFGAS) for ensuring that British Gas is
operating within the terms of its
authorisation. The Act also established the
Gas Consumers’ Council, independent of
both British Gas and OFGAS, and responsible
for investigating consumer complaints.
At the end of 1993, British Gas was
instructed to separate its transport and supply
businesses. It is also the Government’s
intention to phase competition into the
domestic gas market from 1996.
Production
In 1993 indigenous production of natural gas
amounted to 65,488 million cubic metres.
This included 3,919 million cubic metres of
gas used for drilling, production and
pumping operations on North Sea production
platforms and at terminals. Total availability
of UKCS gas amounted to 60,682 million
cubic metres—17.8 per cent higher than in
1992. In addition, about 4,600 million cubic
metres of gas were imported from Norway.
Some 640 million cubic metres were
exported. British natural gas accounts for
about a quarter of total primary fuel
consumption in Britain. Natural gas from the
three most prolific of the 48 offshore
gasfields—Leman, Indefatigable (South) and
the Hewett area—accounted for over half the
cumulative total gas produced in the UKCS.
In addition to supplies from gasfields,
associated gas delivered to land via the h ar
North Liquids and Associated Gas System
(FLAGS) and from Alwyn North made
further significant contributions. Gas from
the South Morecambe field in the Irish Sea
and from the twin North Sean and South
Sean fields is used to augment supplies to
meet peak demand in winter.
There are various methods of natural gas
storage, including salt cavities and storage
facilities for liquefied natural gas. The
partially depleted Rough field is used as a
major gas store. Gas is drawn from the
national transmission system in summer and
injected into the Rough reservoir—for rapid
recovery during periods of peak winter
demand.
Reserves
Remaining recoverable gas reserves in present
discoveries are estimated at between 630,000
million and 1.92 million million cubic metres.
If possible gas from existing discoveries and
potential future discoveries are added, the
remaining total reserves are estimated to be
in the range of 1.06 million million to
3.5 million million cubic metres. Indigenous
offshore natural gas reserves are likely to
meet most of the British demand well into
the next century.
Transmission
The British Gas national and regional high-
pressure pipeline system of some 265,000 km
(164,660 miles) transports natural gas
around Great Britain. It is largely supplied
from four North Sea shore terminals, and
one in Barrow-in-Furness (Cumbria). The
high-pressure transmission system is
inspected regularly.
Newly built natural gas pipelines, run
by independent operators, run from
Horndean to Barking and from Theddlethorpe
to Killingholme.
Consumption
Sales of natural gas in Britain totalled 668
terawatt3 hours (TWh) in 1993. About 49
per cent of this is for industrial and
commercial purposes, the remainder being for
domestic use by 18 million consumers. Gas is
used extensively in industries requiring the
control of temperatures to a fine degree of
3 1 TW = 1,000 gigawatts. 1 GW = 1,000 MW.
254
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
accuracy, such as the pottery and glass
industries, and in certain processes for
making iron and steel products.
Some 226 TWh of this gas were sold to
industry in Britain, and 103 TWh to
commercial (including other non-domestic)
users. Industrial gas prices have fallen by
about 25 per cent in real terms since
privatisation, and domestic prices by 22 per
cent. An increasingly large part of domestic
demand is for gas for central heating. In
1993, 340 TWh were sold to domestic users.
Development
British Gas has a worldwide reputation for
gas technology, with a research and
development programme costing £80 million
in 1993. It is one of seven sponsors of a
plan to build a pipeline linking Britain with
Zeebrugge in Belgium and with the European
gas market. Among its overseas activities,
the company is exploring for gas in Poland
and Bulgaria.
COAL
Despite the size of recent cutbacks, Britain
has one of the world’s most technologically
advanced coal industries. Coal mining in
Britain can be traced back to Roman times.
Taxes raised on its sale helped pay for
rebuilding London, and St Paul’s Cathedral,
after the Great Fire of 1666. Coal played a
crucial part in the industrial revolution of the
18th and 19th centuries. In its peak year, 1913,
the industry produced 292 million tonnes of
coal, exported 74 million tonnes and
employed over 1 million workers. In 1947
(when 200 million tonnes were produced) the
coal mines passed into public ownership, and
the National Coal Board (now the British
Coal Corporation) was set up. In 1955 there
were 850 British Coal collieries in operation;
by 1992 the number had dwindled to 50.
Privatisation
In 1993, British Coal offered 28 collieries for
lease/licence to the private sector. By May
1994, six had been taken over by private
mining companies: Clipstone
(Nottinghamshire) and Rossington (South
Yorkshire) by RJB Mining pic; Trentham
(Staffordshire), Coventry (West Midlands)
and Markham Main (Derbyshire) by Coal
Investments pic; and Betws (Dyfed) by Betws
Anthracite Ltd. In 1994, the Coal Industry
Bill will enable 16 remaining deep and 32
opencast mines to be offered for sale in five
businesses—based on Scotland, Wales, the
North East and the Central Coalfield
(in two parts). The Government is also
offering for sale seven further collieries closed
by British Coal, but kept on care and
maintenance, to the private sector.
Grants of about £900 million were made
available by the Government to British Coal
in 1993-94 to offset the cost of colliery
closures, redundancy payments and other
restructuring expenses carried out to meet
declining markets. Payments under the
Redundant Mineworkers Payments Scheme
in 1993-94 amounted to £33.1 million.
British Coal licenses the private sector to
work mines employing fewer than 150 men
underground, and opencast sites producing
less than 250,000 tonnes. A new public body,
the Coal Authority, is to take on certain of
British Coal’s functions, including licensing.
Its powers, however, will not be subject to
these limits.
Market for Coal
In 1993-94 inland consumption of coal was
84.7 million tonnes, of which about 75 per
cent was by power stations, 10 per cent by
coke ovens and 5 per cent by domestic users.
British Coal sales of coal to power stations
totalled 46.1 million tonnes in 1993-94.
Exports in 1993-94 were 1.1 million tonnes,
while imports amounted to 18.4 million tonnes.
Britain’s coal industry has long been
heavily dependent on electricity generation.
Increasing competition in this market has put
greater pressure on the coal industry to
reduce costs. Long-term contracts for the
supply of gas for electricity generation,
improvement in nuclear output, and cheaper
coal from overseas, have helped to squeeze
British Coal markets.
By agreement reached with the generators
in England and Wales in 1993, British Coal
256
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
will supply 160 million tonnes of coal over
five years. British Coal has also signed
contracts with the Scottish electricity industry
for the supply of more than 2 million tonnes
of Scottish coal a year through to 1998.
These contracts will be reallocated to
successor companies on privatisation.
Production
In 1993-94 total output of 59.9 million tonnes
comprised 42.5 million tonnes of British Coal
deep-mined coal, 13.5 million tonnes from its
opencast mines and 3.9 million tonnes from
licensed mines (deep and opencast).
British Coal’s investment programme
amounted to £149 million in 1993-94. A new
colliery, Asfordby (Leicestershire), is being
designed for the combined longwall/
continuous mine production strategy,
employing approximately 450 people and
producing about 1.75 million tonnes a year.
Another colliery, Maltby (South Yorkshire),
has been redeveloped and will absorb
Silverwood colliery during 1994.
Employment in British Coal deep mines
has been reduced from about 138,000 in 1985
to 10,700 at the end of March 1994, including
a reduction of 27,000 mining jobs in the year
1993-94 alone. Since 1984, British Coal,
through its job creation arm, British Coal
Enterprise, has helped create job opportunities
for 100,000 people in areas where mining was
previously the main source of employment.
Research
Clean coal technologies, such as fluidised bed
boilers, are now widely employed to reduce
pollutant emissions in industry. Two
advanced systems, integrated
gasification/combined cycle and pressurised
fluidised bed combustion, are also being
developed. In 1993-94 the DTI more than
doubled its annual contribution for coal
research and development to £7 million. The
work includes over 100 projects with British
industry and universities, and also
collaboration with overseas organisations. The
coal liquefaction plant at Point of Ayr
(Clwyd) converts 2.5 tonnes of coal a day into
petrol, diesel and other transport fuels.
ELECTRICITY
England and Wales
The privatised electricity supply industry in
England and Wales consists of two main
generating companies, the National Grid
Company (NGC) and 12 regional electricity
companies (RECs). The two main non¬
nuclear generators, National Power and
PowerGen, the publicly owned nuclear
generator, Nuclear Electric pic, and other
generators and importers sell electricity to
suppliers through a market known as the
pool. The NGC operates the transmission
system—bulk transfer of electricity across the
national grid—and owns the pumped
storage stations at Dinorwig and Ffestiniog.
It is owned by the RECs through a
holding company.
Distribution and supply of electricity are
the business of the RECs. Distribution
involves transfer of electricity from the
national grid and its delivery, across local
systems, to consumers. Supply is the
purchase of electricity from generators and its
sale to customers. Each REC is authorised to
supply any premises within its own area. The
RECs and the main generators hold second-
tier licences to supply customers throughout
the country—but only those with a maximum
consumption of 100 kW. Other companies
have also entered this complex market by
obtaining a second-tier licence.
The Government plans to sell its 40 per
cent shareholding in each of National Power
and PowerGen during 1994-95.
Scotland
Industry restructuring in Scotland created
three companies. ScottishPower pic and
Scottish Hydro-Electric pic generate, transmit,
distribute and supply electricity. They are
also contracted to buy all the output from
Scottish Nuclear Ltd, a government-owned
company which operates the nuclear power
stations at Hunterston (Strathclyde) and
Torness (Lothian), and have contracts to
share the output from each other’s generation
capacity. Opportunities exist for electricity
trading in the pool (see above).
257
Dounreay
Peterhead ■
Fasnakyle
Rannoch *Errochl''
£ ^Clunie
Lochay
Sloy.
Cockenzie
lunterston B
Chapelcross >
♦ r
Galloway
Coolkeerac
Ballylumforc
Kilroot;
Hartlepool
Calder Hall
| Roosecote Wilton
■ ^Heysham II
Heysrtam I Drax
Ferrybridge Cb bb
eside ’ Thorpe Marsh Ec^OTBm
jav I Fiddler’s ■ _ "
CottamB ^est'
ADinorwig <Jnce High Marnham
AFfestinioQ^ Staythfirpe ■ ^
09 * Ratcliffe-on-Soar
Ru" eley■■V
Rheidol <, AandB DrakelowBancK
iillingholme A
Ironbridge
Sacking Tj|bi
W. Thurrock |
DidcotBDDidcot B • B.
ry ■
Littlebrook
Pembi
Dungeness BB,
Dungeness I
;ley R. A Hinkley R. B
Electricity
Orkney
Islands
Shetland
Islands
0 20 40 60 80100120 km
L
80 miles
Conventional power stations
(250 MW and over)
Conventional power stations
(250 MW and over)
under construction
Nuclear power stations
Under construction
Power-producing reactors
of the UKAEA or BNFL
Hydro-electric power stations
(over 45 - MW capacity)
Pumped storage schemes
♦
A
Killingholme
PowerGen
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
Associated Functions
Certain service and co-ordinating functions
for the industry are undertaken by the
Electricity Association, jointly owned by the
electricity companies of Great Britain.
Regulation of the industry is the
responsibility of the Office of Electricity
Regulation, headed by the Director General
of Electricity Supply, whose duties include
the promotion of competition and the
protection of consumer interests.
Northern Ireland
Northern Ireland’s four power stations were
transferred to the private sector in 1992. The
flotation of Northern Ireland Electricity
(NIE) pic in 1993 completed the
privatisation of the industry. Regulation is
shared between the Department of Economic
Development and the Director General of
Electricity Supply (NI).
Consumption
In 1993 sales of electricity through the
distribution system in Britain amounted to
282,764 GWh. Domestic users took 36 per
cent of the total, industry 34 per cent, and
commercial and other users the remainder.
Generation
National Power owns 36 operational fossil-
fuelled power stations, which generate about
40 per cent of the electricity supplied to the
transmission and distribution networks in
England and Wales. PowerGen’s 19
operational fossil-fuelled power stations
generate about 30 per cent. The nuclear
stations in Great Britain generate almost
22 per cent.
In 1993-94, 49 per cent of electricity used
in Scotland was produced by Scottish
Nuclear’s two stations. In addition to nuclear
generation, Scotland’s electricity needs are
met from hydro, coal and gas generation,
using gas from the Miller field at Peterhead
power station—a total output capacity of
9,900 MW. Scottish Nuclear sells 74.9 per
cent of its output to ScottishPower and the
rest to Hydro-Electric.
Non-nuclear power stations owned by
Britain’s major power producers consumed
67.4 million tonnes of oil equivalent in 1993,
of which coal accounted for 56 per cent and
oil 6 per cent.
Independent generators are allowed to
compete on equal terms with the major
generators and have equal access to the
grid transmission and local distribution
systems. National Power and PowerGen
Table 17.3: Generation by and Capacity of Power Stations owned by the Major
Generating Companies in Britain
Electricity generated (GWh) Per cent Output
1983
1988
1993“ 1993 capacity (MW)
Nuclear plant
Other steam plant
Gas turbines and
oil engines
Pumped storage plant
Natural flow
hydro-electric plant
Renewables other than
hydro
Total
45,776 58,867 84,433 16.6
208,514 222,887 210,597 73.5
356 464 359 3.7
1,897 2,121 1,437 4.1
3,892 4,121 3,522 2.0
1 165 0.1
260,436 288,511 300,514 100
11,274
46,836
2,018
2,787
1,327
65
64,306
Electricity supplied (net)“ 241,305 266,711 281,175
Source: Department of Trade and Industry
“Electricity generated less electricity used at power stations (both electricity used on works and that used for pumping at
pumped-storage stations).
Note: Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
259
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
have agreed to sell about 6,000 MW of their
fossil-fuelled plant by 1996—to increase both
the number of independent generators and
competition in generation.
To control acid emissions National Power
and PowerGen are fitting flue gas
desulphurisation (FGD) equipment to their
existing coal-fired power stations at Drax
(North Yorkshire) and Ratcliffe on Soar
(Leicestershire). ScottishPower expects to fit
FGD at its main coal station, Longannet. In
addition, a ten-year programme to control
nitrogen oxide (NOx) emissions through the
installation of low-NOx burners at 12 major
power stations in England and Wales is in
progress. ScottishPower is fitting low-NOx
burners at Longannet.
For new stations the trend is towards the
construction of combined cycle gas turbines
(CCGTs). They are cheaper, and take less
time, to build than other types of station.
Their use of natural gas, low in sulphur, also
helps to reduce acid and C02 emissions. In
England and Wales, 18 such stations over 50
MW are commissioned or under
construction. Some 8 per cent of electricity in
Britain was derived from gas in 1993.
The NGC, together with Electricite de
France, runs a 2,000-MW cross-Channel
cable link, providing the capacity for the
transmission of electricity between the two
countries. The link has generally been used
to supply baseload electricity—the minimum
amount that needs to be generated—from
France to England, but a contract concluded
in 1993 provides for exports from England at
times of peak demand in France.
Transmission lines linking the Scottish
and English grid systems enable cross-border
trading. This interconnector is run jointly by
the NGC and ScottishPower. Capacity at the
Scottish end of the interconnector has been
increased from 850 MW to 1,600 MW. NIE
pic and ScottishPower have plans to
construct a 250-MW interconnector between
Scotland and Northern Ireland, to come into
use in 1997.
Nuclear Power
In 1956 the world’s first industrial-scale
nuclear power station, at Calder Flail
(Cumbria), began to supply electricity to the
national grid. It, together with the Magnox
station at Chapelcross (Dumfries and
Galloway), is still operated by British Nuclear
Fuels pic (BNFL). There are also 12
commercial nuclear power stations operated
by Nuclear Electric and Scottish Nuclear.
The former has five Magnox stations (with
capacities ranging from 245 to 950 MW) and
five Advanced Gas-cooled Reactor stations
(AGRs; ranging from 1,010 MW to 1,250 MW).
Scottish Nuclear operates two 1,320 MW
AGR stations. Nuclear Electric has also built
Britain’s first pressurised water reactor
(PWR; 1,175 MW) at Sizewell (Suffolk).
Three commercial Magnox stations (one each
in England, Wales and Scotland) have been
shut down and are being decommissioned.
Nuclear power generation increases
diversity of energy supply and helps
maintain its security, and nuclear stations
produce no sulphur dioxide (S02), NOx or
C02. The Government wishes to maintain
the nuclear option, provided nuclear power
can demonstrate that it is competitive with
other sources.
In England and Wales the ‘fossil fuel levy’
is set at 10 per cent of electricity sales. Most
of the revenue raised is to pay a premium to
nuclear generators, as the cost of producing
energy from nuclear sources is greater than
that of producing it from fossil fuel sources.
The levy is expected to raise £9,100 million
up to 1997-98 to help cover the unavoidable
costs associated with the operation of existing
stations. A small but growing proportion goes
to pay a premium to renewable generators.
British Nuclear Fuels
BNFL provides services covering the
whole nuclear fuel cycle. It is wholly owned
by the Government.
BNFL’s thermal oxide reprocessing plant
(THORP) began operations in March 1994.
Built at a cost of £2,800 million, including its
share of associated facilities, THORP
reprocesses spent fuel from British and
overseas oxide reactors. Environmental
protection plant costing £600 million was
brought on stream at the same time. BNFL
has begun supplying fuel for the PWR at
260
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
Sizewell and has contributed its waste
management and decommissioning expertise
to international joint ventures. A subsidiary
company, BNFL Inc, was established in the
United States in 1990 and has won
environmental restoration contracts with the
United States Department of Energy.
UK Atomic Energy Authority
Since 1994 the UK Atomic Energy
Authority (UKAEA) has been reorganised
into two: AEA Technology and UKAEA
(Government Division). AEA Technology
operates as a commercial business, providing
science and engineering services to the
nuclear industry worldwide and to other
industrial sectors. UKAEA (Government
Division) is responsible for the safe
management and decommissioning of AEA’s
nuclear facilities, radioactive waste
management, fuel reprocessing and the
Government’s nuclear research and
development programme.
Nuclear Research
Most of DTFs nuclear expenditure is on the
decommissioning of redundant nuclear
research and development facilities. These
include research and demonstration power
reactors, such as the Winfrith (Dorset) Steam
Generating Heavy Water Reactor, the
Windscale (Cumbria) AGR, the Dounreay
(Highland) Fast Reactor and the Prototype
Fast Reactor. The radioactive wastes arising
from this programme are safely and cleanly
managed until their final disposal in purpose-
built and authorised facilities.
The Government plans to spend ^16
million in 1994-95 on fusion research. About
half of this is the cost of the EU Joint
European Torus (JET) nuclear project at
Culham (Oxfordshire). The remaining half
goes to fund a national programme of fusion
research carried out by the AEA as part of
the EU fusion programme.
DTI also funds assessments of advanced
reactor safety, international safety standards
and the transfer of technology to help
improve nuclear safety in the former Soviet
Union, and in central and eastern Europe. In
1993 it contributed £8.25 million to the
European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development to finance safety improvements
at the higher-risk nuclear plants in those
countries.
Nuclear Safety
Britain has a rigorous system of nuclear
safety regulation, enforced by the HSE’s
Nuclear Installations Inspectorate, which
ensures that high standards of safety are
incorporated into the design, construction,
operation, maintenance and decommissioning
of all nuclear plant, and eventual disposal of
resulting wastes. While the safety of such
plant in Britain is the ultimate responsibility
of the nuclear operator, the Inspectorate has
the power to shut down a plant if it thinks it
unsafe and may also require improvements to
an installation if it believes the appropriate
standards of safety are not being met.
Discharges of radioactive waste have to be
kept within the limits and conditions set by
authorisations granted under the Radioactive
Substances Act 1993. Within maximum dose
limits, operators of nuclear facilities are
required to keep discharges as low as is
reasonably achievable and failure to do so
makes them liable to prosecution.
Emergency Plans
The precautions taken in the design and
construction of nuclear installations in
Britain, and the high safety standards in
their operation and maintenance, reduce the
chance of accidents which might affect the
public to an extremely low level. However,
all operators are required, as a condition of
their site licences, to prepare emergency
plans, including those for dealing with an
accidental release of radioactivity. These are
regularly tested in exercises under the
supervision of the Nuclear Installations
Inspectorate.
International conventions have been
established on the early notification of a
nuclear accident which may have possible
transboundary effects, and on the mutual
provision of assistance in the event of a
nuclear accident or radiological emergency.
261
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
NEW AND RENEWABLE SOURCES OF
ENERGY
Renewable energy sources provide about
6 per cent of EU primary energy production.
The Government encourages development
of new and renewable technologies which
promise to become economically attractive
and environmentally acceptable—to
contribute to:
• diverse, secure and sustainable energy
supplies;
• a reduction in the emission of pollutants;
and
• internationally competitive renewables
industries.
It is working towards a figure of
1,500 MW (3 per cent of Britain’s current
capacity) of new electricity generating
capacity from renewable energy sources, for
Britain as a whole, by 2000. Renewables
might, though, be able to supply up to
20 per cent of Britain’s 1991 electricity
needs by 2025. By the end of 1991 two
renewables orders for England and Wales
under the non-fossil fuel obligation
(NFFO, which currently supports
renewables to the extent of about £60 million
a year) had resulted in contracts for 197
projects, with a total capacity of over 600
MW. By March 1994, 138 of these projects
were generating 306 MW. The first
Northern Ireland NFFO order, for nearly
16 MW of renewables capacity (mainly wind),
was made in March 1994. The third NFFO
renewables order for England and Wales, and
the first Scottish renewables order, were also
set in train for a prospective total of 330 to
440 MW.
Research and development policy
concentrates resources on key technologies—
energy from coppice and waste, wind, solar
and fuel cells—and aims to increase their
appeal to investors. Emphasis on technology
transfer continues. Expenditure on the
Government’s renewables programme for
1994-95 is just under £20 million. Planning
policy requires the environmental benefits of
wind and other renewables to be taken into
account, but also stresses the need to protect
the local environment.
International collaboration is undertaken
through multilateral and bilateral
arrangements within the IEA and the EU.
These include:
• JOULE, which supports research into
economically viable and environmentally
sound energy technologies;
• THERMIE, which aims to promote
innovative energy technologies in energy
efficiency, renewable energy and clean
coal and hydrocarbons; and
• ALTENER, which is designed to foster
development of renewable sources in the
EU, and increase trade in products,
equipment and services.
Wastes and Biomass
These offer the largest potential resource
of any renewable and are likely to be
among the earliest exploited. By March 1993,
82 waste/biomass projects had begun to
operate under the first two renewables
NFFO orders, with a combined output of
235 MW. The main energy sources used to
generate electricity are: municipal and
industrial wastes (with potential for up to
10 per cent of electricity supply by 2025),
landfill gas, agricultural and forestry wastes
and energy crops.
Wind Energy
This has the potential to contribute perhaps
30 TWh a year to electricity supply by 2025.
Under the first two NFFO renewables
orders, contracts were placed for 58 wind
energy projects, with a total declared net
capacity (DNC—a measure of average
output) of 96 MW. By March 1994,
29 projects (comprising some 370 wind
turbines—53 MW DNC, largely in Wales
and north-west England) had been
commissioned and were generating to the
grid. Another 6.5 MW DNC were under
construction. In response to public concern
about the visual impact of wind farms and
possible noise from turbines, the Government
expects to see no more than about 20 wind
farms in the third NFFO renewables order
later in 1994.
262
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
Solar
Britain’s solar energy resource is potentially
large, but also diffuse, and there is much
unplanned use of solar gain. Estimates
suggest that such use contributes up to
150 TWh a year to energy needs in
buildings. The photovoltaic (PV)
industry shows promise in the export
market. The Government is assessing the
potential of buildings-integrated PV systems,
where PV units would be placed in the
fa9ades of domestic and commercial
buildings, which are likely to be the most
promising application.
Hydroelectricity
Large-scale hydro schemes account for about
2 per cent of generation in Britain, with most
to be found in Scotland. The Government
has provided funding of up to half the cost of
an initial feasibility study for small-scale
hydro schemes (below 5 MW). In March
1994, 27 small-scale hydro projects were
generating under renewables NFFO
arrangements, with a combined output of
19 MW.
Other Technologies
The Government has spent over £70 million
on research, development and
demonstration in geothermal, tidal and
wave power. It has concluded that these
technologies have limited potential to
contribute commercially to energy supplies
in the next few decades. They have
therefore been allocated to a ‘watching brief
category. No further commitments will be
made once current programmes have been
completed.
Non-fuel Minerals
Although much of Britain’s requirements
for industrial raw materials is met by
imports, the non-fuel minerals it produces
make an important contribution to the
economy. Output of non-fuel minerals in
1992 totalled 320 million tonnes, valued at
£1,748 million. Construction raw materials,
in particular aggregates, form the bulk of the
value of non-fuel minerals production. The
total number of employees in the extractive
industry was some 40,000 in 1992.
Table 17.4: Production of Some of the Main Non-fuel Minerals
million tonnes
1983
1987
1992
Sand and gravel
Silica sand
Igneous rock
Limestone and dolomite
Chalk a
Sandstone
Gypsum '
Salt, including salt in brine
Common clay and shale''
China clay
Ball clay
Fireclay
Iron ore
Potash
Fluorspar
Fuller’s earth
107.0
4.0
36.9
94.0
12.4
14.7
2.9
6.3
22.4
2.5
0.6
0.7“
0.4
0.5
0.1
0.2
117.8
4.0
46.0
113.7
13.4
16.4
3.4
7.1
18.3
3.1
0.7
0.9
0.3
0.7
0.1
0.2
98.9
3.6
57.7
107.9
9.2
14.9
2.5
6.1
12.2
2.5h
0.7
0.6
0.0
0.9
0.1
0.2
Source: British Geological Survey, United Kingdom Minerals Yearbook 1992
'"Great Britain only.
^Moisture-free basis.
263
Some Minerals Produced in Britain
Orkney
Islands
Shetland
Islands
marble
0 20 40 60 80100120 km
I I I \ I I I
"1
I 1 ! T
0 20 40 60 80 miles
:a sand b^es
A barytes A90IC
gold
silica sand •
Major metallic
and industrial
mineral workings
A Major mineral deposits
(unworked)
V'
gold Sait
A A •
diatomite
►silica sand jr
r
a /
/ .
fluorspar, lead!
\ NORTHERN PENNINE
Cj^OREFI
gypsum^
barytes
salt
pots
silica
zinc, copp
SOUTHERN
silica sand PENNINE
/Sv OREFIELD
salt*D ^fluorspar barytes, leac
- • gypsum
3*1 CHESHIRE fTv* m ?|3yP^m
SALTS ELD I 9yPsum
silica sand
silica sand
• fuller's earth
► fuller’s earth
'silica sand
'fuller’s earth
fuller’s earth sj|jca sand
• •fuller’s earth
• ball clay
ball clav
ball
• ■
gypsum
cl .
tin
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
Exploration
The Government is seeking to restrict the
growth in England of quarries supplying rock,
and sand and gravel for building. It also
expects the construction industry to double
the use of recycled material, and to reduce its
dependence on aggregates extracted on land
from 80 to 68 per cent by 2006. Coastal
superquarries from outside England may
make an increased contribution to aggregates
requirements in the future. Scottish Office
guidelines on minerals working in Scotland
include a policy that there should be no more
than four superquarries in Scotland over the
period to 2009.
The British Geological Survey is carrying
out a long-term programme for the DTI
aimed at identifying areas with mineral
potential. Gold exploration by the private
sector has decreased, but continues, especially
in Scotland, Northern Ireland and south-west
England. In Wales small-scale production of
gold takes place at the Gwynfynydd and
Clogau mines. Reports by the Mineral
Reconnaissance Programme, funded by the
DTI, include a description of a gold-bearing
fault zone in Glen Clova in the south-east
Scottish highlands. It has been traced over
1.6 km and may extend over 10 km.
Production
In terms of value, production of limestone
and dolomite was estimated at £486 million
in 1992, sand and gravel £425 million, clays
£277 million, igneous rock £245 million,
potash £68 million, sandstone £65 million,
salt £49 million, chalk £38 million, silica
sands £36 million, gypsum and anhydrite
£18 million, fuller’s earth £14 million,
fluorspar £9 million and tin £7 million. In
1992 the production of metals in non-
ferrous ores totalled 3,000 tonnes, mainly
tin from Cornwall. South Crofty, the one
remaining Cornish mine and one of the
very few sources of tin in the EU,
produced 2,232 tonnes of tin-in¬
concentrate in 1992, equivalent to about
20 per cent of Britain’s demand. Some lead
and a little zinc are produced as by-products
of fluorspar.
Water
Britain’s water supplies are obtained partly
(about 75 per cent) from surface sources such
as mountain lakes, reservoirs and river
intakes, and partly (about 25 per cent) from
groundwater. About 99 per cent of the
population in Great Britain and 97 per cent
in Northern Ireland are served by the public
water supply system. Water put into the
public supply system (including industrial
and other uses) in England and Wales
amounted to about 16,757 megalitres (Ml) a
day in 1993, of which average domestic daily
consumption per head was 150 litres. An
average of 2,206 Ml a day was supplied in
Scotland in 1992-93.
Some 45,176 Ml a day were abstracted in
England and Wales in 1992, of which public
water supplies accounted for 17,958 Ml a
day. The electricity generating companies and
other industry took 20,287 Ml a day.
Agriculture took 412 Ml a day.
England and Wales
The Secretaries of State for the Environment
and for Wales, the Director General of Water
Services and the National Rivers Authority
(NRA) are the principal regulators. The
Drinking Water Inspectorate regulates
drinking water quality. The Minister of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and the
Secretary of State for Wales are responsible
for policy relating to land drainage, flood
protection, sea defence, and the protection
and development of fisheries.
Water Companies
The ten water service companies have
statutory responsibilities for water supply, its
quality and sufficiency, and for sewerage and
sewage treatment. The supply-only
companies, of which there were 29 in the
private sector in 1989, now number 21.
They supply water to about a quarter of
the population.
The Water Industry Act 1991 allows the
water companies to determine their own
methods of charging. An alternative to the
charging system based on rateable values,
265
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
however, must be found by the year 2000. In
the Government’s view, water metering is
potentially the fairest way of paying for
water, even though it would take time to
introduce and would not be appropriate
everywhere. In general, companies require
new properties to have metered supplies.
A system of economic regulation and
guaranteed standards of service is overseen by
OFWAT, the office of the Director General
of Water Services. It has a duty to ensure
that water companies are able to finance the
carrying-out of their statutory obligations; it
also promotes economy and efficiency within
the water industry and, where appropriate,
competition; and it also has to protect the
interests of customers and to ensure that
there is no undue preference or
discrimination in the fixing of charges. The
Director General also sets limits to the rate at
which water companies can increase their prices.
The Water Supply (Water Quality)
Regulations 1989 define wholesomeness and
incorporate the requirements of the EC’s
drinking water directive. They impose
physical, chemical and microbiological
standards for water intended for domestic
and food production purposes. The task of
the Drinking Water Inspectorate is to
ensure that drinking water is wholesome and
that companies comply with the Regulations.
Of 3.75 million tests carried out in 1992,
98.7 per cent came within the legal limits.
National Rivers Authority
The NRA is a non-departmental public
body with statutory duties and powers in
relation to water resources, pollution control,
flood defence, fisheries, recreation,
conservation and navigation in England and
Wales. The water environment for which it
has responsibility includes all rivers, lakes,
reservoirs, estuaries, coastal waters and water
stored naturally underground. The NRA’s
consent is needed for abstraction of water and
discharge of effluent.
Development Projects
The water industry in England and Wales
has a ten-year investment programme costing
£30,000 million at 1992-93 prices. Thames
Water’s 80-km (50-mile) distribution system
to meet the growing demand for water in
London is due for completion in 1996. North
West Water has a 25-year investment
programme to clean up the polluted rivers of
the Mersey Basin.
Water is an increasingly scarce
resource, yet consumption is forecast
to rise by as much as 43 per cent in 30
years. South-east England, for
example, where five years of winter
rainfall well below the long-term
average ended in 1992, receives 14 per
cent of Britain’s rainfall, yet contains
about 30 per cent of its population.
The NRA encourages companies to
promote efficient water use and to reduce
leakage (estimated at about 25 per cent in
1994)—thus helping to remove the need for
land-consuming and expensive reservoirs.
More household meters would, the NRA
says, curb demand.
Scotland
In Scotland responsibility for public water
supply, sewerage and sewage disposal rests
with the nine regional and three islands
councils (‘the water authorities’). In addition,
the Central Scotland Water Development
Board (CSWDB) is responsible for providing
water in bulk to five regional councils in
central Scotland. In 1993-94 the Board
supplied authorities with an average 271 Ml a
day. Parliament is considering a Bill which
would create three public water authorities to
take over provision of these services from the
local authorities on 1 April 1996 and would
also dissolve the CSWDB on that date. An
independent representative body for
consumers would also be established.
The Secretary of State for Scotland is
responsible for promoting conservation of
water resources and provision by water
authorities and water development boards of
adequate water supplies. He has a duty to
promote the cleanliness of rivers and other
inland waters, and the tidal waters of
Scotland. River purification authorities have a
266
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
statutory responsibility for water pollution
control. Water is charged for according to
type of consumer: domestic consumers pay
council water charges or metered charges;
non-domestic consumers pay non-domestic
water rates, or metered charges. For sewerage
services, domestic consumers pay through the
council tax, and non-domestic consumers pay
non-domestic sewerage rates and, where
appropriate, trade effluent charges. Charges
and rates are decided by each authority.
Scotland has a relative abundance of
unpolluted water from upland sources.
Northern Ireland
The Department of the Environment for
Northern Ireland is responsible for public
water supply and sewerage throughout
Northern Ireland. It is also responsible for
the conservation and cleanliness of water
resources and, with the Department of
Agriculture, may prepare a water
management programme with respect to
water resources in any area. There is a
domestic water charge which is contained in
the regional rate, while agriculture, commerce
and industry pay metered charges. There are
abundant potential supplies of water for both
domestic and industrial use. An average of 680
Ml of water a day was supplied in 1993-94.
Research
Several organisations and centres of expertise
provide water research services to
government, the NRA, water companies and
the Scottish river purification boards.
The Water Research Centre, a private
company, has a large programme of research
into, for example, environmental issues and
drinking water safety.
Research carried out by institutes of the
Natural Environment Research Council
embraces river modelling, water quality,
climate change, effects on resources and the
impact of pollution on freshwater.
Among its various roles the Institute of
Hydrology studies the statistics of floods
and droughts.
Further Reading
The Energy Report 2: Oil and Gas Resources of the United Kingdom 1994. Department of Trade
and Industry. HMSO.
Digest of United Kingdom Energy Statistics 1994. Department of Trade and Industry. HMSO.
United Kingdom Minerals Yearbook 1993. British Geological Survey. HMSO.
Digest of Environmental Protection and Water Statistics. No. 16, 1994. Department of the
Environment. HMSO.
Energy and Natural Resources. Aspects of Britain series. HMSO, 1992.
267
18 Agriculture, the Fishing
Industry and Forestry
Agriculture 268
Production 269
Food Safety 274
Exports 274
Marketing 274
Role of the Government 275
Control of Diseases and Pests 279
The Fishing Industry 280
Research 282
Forestry 283
British agriculture is noted for its high level of efficiency and productivity. In
1993 Britain was self-sufficient in 58 per cent of all types of food and animal
feed, and in 73 per cent of indigenous-type food and feed. In 1994 the
proportion of agricultural land covered by the Environmentally Sensitive
Areas (ESAs) scheme increased by 15 per cent with the designation of a
further 12 areas. Other plans encourage organic farming and public access to
set-aside land and ESAs. Completion of the GATT Uruguay round
negotiations in December 1993 created the basis for freer trade in agricultural
produce and a reduction in subsidies.
Agriculture
In 1993 British agriculture employed 2.2 per
cent of the total workforce. Food, feed and
beverages accounted for about 11 per cent of
Britain’s imports by value, compared with
about a quarter in the 1960s. The agricultural
contribution to gross domestic product was
£7,600 million in 1993, 1.4 per cent of the
total. Britain is a major exporter of
agricultural produce and food products,
agrochemicals and agricultural machinery.
The Government aims to foster an
efficient and sustainable agriculture industry
through the provision and sponsorship of
research, development and advisory services;
provide financial support where appropriate;
implement measures to control disease, pests
and pollution; and improve marketing
arrangements for food and food products. It
also promotes high standards of animal
welfare, and the balancing of environmental
protection with the needs of economic
development. The latter includes
conservation of the countryside’s natural
beauty and promotion of its enjoyment.
In accordance with the Citizen’s Charter,
annual performance targets which emphasise
quality of service are set for the executive
agencies of the Ministry of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food (MAFF; see p. 275).
Farmers and crofters in Scotland have
similar targets.
Land Use
The area of agricultural land has been
declining, although there has been a
reduction in the net rate of loss in recent
years. In 1993 there were 11.3 million
hectares (28 million acres) under crops and
grass. A further 5.8 million hectares (14.4
million acres) were used for rough grazing,
most of it in hilly areas. Soils vary from the
268
AGRICULTURE, THE FISHING INDUSTRY AND FORESTRY
thin poor ones of highland Britain to the rich
fertile soils of low-lying areas such as the
fenlands of eastern England. The climate is
generally temperate, though rainfall
distribution over Britain is uneven. The
South East receives only about 600 mm a
year, compared with over 1,500 mm in parts
of west Scotland, Cumbria and Wales.
Unsettled and wet weather during 1993 on
the whole produced plentiful grass for grazing
and conservation, but hampered progress with
the harvest and autumn fieldwork.
Land Use in Britain
In 1993 there were some 244,200 farm holdings
in Britain (excluding minor holdings), with an
average size of 70.2 hectares (173.4 acres)—
again excluding minor holdings. About
two-thirds of all agricultural land is owner-
occupied. Some 44 per cent of holdings are 8
European size units (ESU)1 or smaller.
Labour productivity has increased by over
30 per cent over the past ten years. Total
income from farming (that of farmers,
partners, directors and their spouses, and
family workers—see Table 18.1) was
estimated at £3,953 million in 1993, 41 per
cent more than in 1992—largely because of a
rise of 17.6 per cent (worth £948 million) in
the industry’s net product and a further fall, of
£237 million, in interest paid.
At the end of 1992 the industry’s capital
stock amounted to some £30,830 million, of
which buildings and works made up over
two-thirds. The overall stock of fixed capital
is about 4 per cent down on 1982-84.
Agricultural Land Use 1993
TOTAL AREA ON AGRICULTURAL
HOLDINGS
8.1% All other land,
CROPS
4.1% Horticulture
5.4%
Peas and
beans
4.4%
Sugar
beet
8.3%
Oilseed
rape
25.8% Barley
13.1% Other crops
38.9% Wheat
PRODUCTION
Home production of the principal foods is
shown in Table 18.2 as a percentage by
weight of total supplies (that is, production
plus imports minus exports).
Livestock
Over half of full-time farms are devoted
mainly to dairy farming or to beef cattle and
sheep. The majority of sheep and cattle are
ESUs measure the financial potential of the holding in terms of
the margins which might be expected from crops and stock.
8 ESU is judged the minimum for full-time holdings.
269
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Table 18.1: Labour Force in Agriculture
’000 persons
1982-84
Average
’000 persons
1993
Workers
Regular whole time
hired: male
female
family: male
female
Total
Regular part-time
hired: male
female
family: male
female
Total
Seasonal or casual
male
female
salaried managers^
Total workers
121
11
30
5
166
19
23
12
 7
61
57
40
8
332
74
11
22
3
110
19
19
13
7
57
58
30
8
263
Farmers, partners and directors
whole-time
part-time
Total farmers, partners and directors
Total farmers, partners,
directors and workers
Spouses of farmers, partners and
directors (engaged in farm work)
203
88
292
624
75
176
108
284
547
78
Total labour force (including
farmers and their spouses) ’
699
625
Source: Agriculture in the United Kingdom 1993
a This figure relates to Great Britain only.
h Figures exclude schoolchildren and most trainees.
Note: Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
reared in the hill and moorland areas of
Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and
northern and south-western England. Beef
fattening occurs partly in better grassland
areas, as does dairying, and partly on arable
farms. British livestock breeders have
developed many of the cattle, sheep and pig
breeds with worldwide reputations, for
example, the Hereford and Aberdeen Angus
beef breeds, the Jersey, Guernsey and
Ayrshire dairy breeds, Large White pigs and
a number of sheep breeds. Developments in
artificial insemination and embryo transfer
have enabled Britain to export semen and
embryos from high-quality donor animals.
Livestock totals are given in Table 18.3.
Cattle and Sheep
Cattle and sheep constitute more than 40 per
cent of the value of Britain’s agricultural
gross output. Dairy production is the largest
270
AGRICULTURE, THE FISHING INDUSTRY AND FORESTRY
Table 18.2: British Production as a Percentage of Total New Supplies
1982-84 1993
Food Product average (provisional)
Beef and veal
Eggs
Milk for human consumption (as liquid)
Cheese
Butter
Sugar (as refined)
Wheat
Potatoes
98
99
100
70
63
55
106
91
102
98
99
72
72
62
120
91
Source: MAFF
part of the sector, followed by cattle and
calves, and then fat sheep and lambs. Most
dairy cattle in Britain are bred by artificial
insemination. In 1993 the average size of
dairy herds was 64 (excluding minor
holdings), while the average yield of milk per
dairy cow was 5,304 litres (1,211 gallons).
Average household consumption of liquid
(including low-fat) milk per head in 1993 was
2.18 litres (3.83 pints) a week.
About two-thirds of home-fed beef
production originates from the national dairy
herd, in which the Friesian breed is
predominant. The remainder is derived from
suckler herds producing high-quality beef
calves in the hills and uplands, where the
traditional British beef breeds, such as
Hereford and Aberdeen Angus, are raised.
Imported breeds include the Charolais,
Limousin, Simmental and Belgian Blue. In
1993 the size of the beef-breeding herd
continued to expand. The increase to
December 1993 more than offset the further
decrease in the dairy herd.
Britain has a long tradition of sheep
production, with more than 60 breeds and
many cross-bred varieties. Research has
provided vaccine and serum protection
against nearly all the epidemic diseases.
Sheepmeat production is the main source of
income for sheep farmers, and wool provides
a small additional return.
Grass (including silage) covers most
British agricultural land and supplies 60-80
per cent of the feed for cattle and sheep.
Grass production has been enhanced by the
increased use of fertilisers, methods of
grazing control, and improved herbage
Table 18.3: Livestock and Livestock Products
1982-84
average
1991
1992
1993
(provisional)
Cattle and calves (’000 head)
Sheep and lambs (’000 head)
Pigs (’000 head)
Poultry (’000 head)rt
13,249
33,980
7,962
80,220
11,866
43,621
7,596
94,664
11,804
43,998
7,609
91,965
11,729
43,901
7,754
98,469
Milk (million litres) 15,943 13,654 13,527 13,576
Eggs (million dozen/ 983 822 812 807
Beef and veal (’000 tonnes) 1,053 1,023 967 876
Mutton and lamb (’000 tonnes) 291 418 392 382
Pork (’000 tonnes) 745 797 806 826
Bacon and ham (’000 tonnes) 206 176 167 177
Poultry meat (’000 tonnes) 822 1,074 1,077 1,080
Source: MAFF
"Includes ducks, geese and turkeys. Figures for the latter are for England and Wales only.
Hen and duck eggs.
271
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
conservation for winter feed. Rough
grazings are used for extensively grazed sheep
and cattle, producing young animals for
fattening elsewhere.
A harmonised identification system being
introduced throughout the European
Union (EU) will enable animals to be
traced to their farm of origin, for disease
control purposes and for checking payments
made under the Common Agricultural
Policy (CAP).
Pigs
Pig production occurs in most areas but is
particularly important in East Anglia and
Yorkshire. There is an increasing
concentration into specialist units and larger
herds—19 per cent of farms account for
79 per cent of the pig herd.
Poultry
High husbandry standards and use of
improved genetic stock have helped to increase
efficiency in poultry meat production. In 1992
acquisitions—larger companies buying up
smaller concerns—resulted in a more efficient
industry, which remains able to supply the
continuing increase in demand, also partly
satisfied by imports. Poultry production in
1993 was 1.08 million tonnes, dominated by
broilers. Broiler production, at 838,000 tonnes,
was 8,000 tonnes below the level for 1992.
Broilers from the 8 per cent of holdings with
over 100,000 table birds account for well over a
half of the total population. Production of hen
eggs fell from 806 million dozen in 1992 to 800
million dozen in 1993. A decline in demand
has led to lower production as well as fewer
imports. Britain remains broadly self-sufficient
in poultry meat and eggs (see p. 271).
Table 18.4: Main Crops
1982-84
average
1991
1993
1992 (provisional)
Wheat
Area (’000 hectares)
Production (’000 tonnes)
Yield (tonnes per hectare)
Barley
Area (’000 hectares)
Production (’000 tonnes)
Yield (tonnes per hectare)
Oats
Area (’000 hectares)
Production (’000 tonnes)
Yield (tonnes per hectare)
Potatoes
Area (’000 hectares)
Production (’000 tonnes)
Yield (tonnes per hectare)
Oilseed rape
Area (’000 hectares)
Production (’000 tonnes)
Yield (tonnes per hectare)
Sugar beet
Area (’000 hectares)
Production (’000 tonnes)
Yield (tonnes per hectare)
1,766
12,029
6.81
2,115
10,669
5.04
115
519
4.53
196
6,737
34.40
222
688
3.11
201
8,840
44.67
1,981
14,363
7.25
1,393
7,627
5.47
104
523
5.04
177
6,267
35.50
440
1,278
2.90
196
7,673
39.14
2,067
14,095
6.82
1,297
7,365
5.68
101
502
5.01
180
7,802
43.80
421
1,166
2.76
197
9,300
47.21
1,759
12,890
7.33
1,164
6,038
5.19
92
479
5.23
170
7,117
41.70
377
1,011
2.68
197
8,550
43.40
Sources: Agriculture in the United Kingdom 1993, and Agricultural Census, June 1993
111
AGRICULTURE, THE FISHING INDUS'ERY AND FORESTRY
Animal Welfare
The welfare of farm animals is protected by
legislation and it is an offence to cause
unnecessary pain or distress to commercially
reared livestock. Detailed regulations require
owners of intensive units to arrange for the
daily inspection of their stock and the
equipment on which it depends. The law
bans close confinement crates for keeping
veal calves, and is phasing out close
confinement systems for keeping pigs. There
are further controls to safeguard the welfare
of animals in markets, during transport and
at slaughter. The Farm Animal Welfare
Council, an independent body set up by the
Government, advises on legislative or other
changes. Britain continues to lead in
pressing for higher standards of animal
welfare, particularly during transport,
throughout Europe.
Crops
The farms devoted primarily to arable crops
are found mainly in eastern and central-
southern England and eastern Scotland. The
main crops are shown in Table 18.4. In
Britain in 1993—the first full year to have
been affected by the set-aside arrangements
introduced as part of the 1992 CAP
reforms—cereals were grown on just over 3
million hectares (7.5 million acres), an area
13 per cent down on 1992. Production, at
19.5 million tonnes, was 2.6 million tonnes
down on 1992. Production of wheat, barley
and oats fell in 1993, but higher yields were
recorded for wheat and oats.
Between 40 and 50 per cent of available
domestic wheat supplies (allowing for imports
and exports) are normally used for flour
milling, and a similar amount for animal feed.
About a third of barley supplies are used for
brewing, malting and distilling (there were
plentiful supplies of good-quality malting
barley in 1993), and virtually all the
remainder for animal feed.
Large-scale potato and vegetable
cultivation can be found on the fertile soils
throughout Britain, often with irrigation.
Principal areas are the peat and silt fens of
Cambridgeshire, Lincolnshire and Norfolk;
the sandy loams of Norfolk, Suffolk, West
Midlands, Nottinghamshire, South Yorkshire
and Lincolnshire; the peat soils of South
Lancashire; and the alluvial silts of parts of
the Thames and Humber valleys. Early
potatoes are produced in Shropshire,
Pembrokeshire, Cornwall, Devon, Essex,
Kent and Cheshire. Production of high-grade
seed potatoes is confined to Scotland,
Northern Ireland and the Welsh borders.
Sugar from home-grown sugar beet
provides just over 60 per cent of home needs,
most of the remainder being refined from
raw cane sugar imported under the Lome
Convention (see p. 171).
Horticulture
In 1993 the land utilised for horticulture
(excluding potatoes, peas for harvesting dry
and mushrooms) was about 187,000 hectares
(462,095 acres). Vegetables grown in the open
accounted for 67 per cent of this, orchards
for 17 per cent, and soft fruit and
ornamentals (including hardy nursery stock,
bulbs and flowers grown in the open) each
for 7 per cent. More than one vegetable crop
is, in some cases, taken from the same area of
land in a year, so that the estimated area
actually cropped in 1993 was 254,400 hectares
(628,620 acres).
Mushrooms are the single most valuable
horticultural crop, with a farm gate value of
£165 million in 1993. Apples are also a
significant crop. Output (of dessert and
cooking apples) reached 319,000 tonnes.
Field vegetables account for 55 per cent of
the value of horticultural output and are
widely grown throughout the country. Most
horticultural enterprises are increasing
productivity with the help of improved
planting material, new techniques and the
widespread use of machinery. Some field
vegetables, for example, are raised in blocks
of compressed peat or loose-filled cells, a
technique which reduces root damage and
allows plants to establish themselves more
reliably and evenly.
Glasshouses are used for growing tomatoes,
cucumbers, sweet peppers, lettuces, flowers,
pot plants and nursery stock. Widespread use
is made of automatic control of heating and
273
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
ventilation, and semi-automatic control of
watering. Energy-efficient glasshouses use
thermal screens, while low-cost plastic tunnels
extend the season for certain crops previously
grown in the open.
Organic Farming
The Government is encouraging the
development of organic farming and growing,
to respond to consumer demand and benefit
the environment. It implements EU organic
standards, supports a considerable research
programme and aids conversion to organic
production under a regulation which obliges
EU members to adopt schemes beneficial to
the environment (see below).
The organic production and processing
standards are implemented by the United
Kingdom Register of Organic Food
Standards, which has a board of independent
experts appointed by ministers.
FOOD SAFETY
EU food law harmonisation covers food
safety, fair trading and informative labelling.
The Government carries out research and
surveillance to identify any risks. Food law
enforcement falls mainly to local authorities.
In particular, MAFF has programmes to
promote food safety and against diseases
affecting food supply. Its expenditure on food
safety research in 1994—95 is about £\0
million. The link between diet, nutrition and
health is one of the main subjects studied.
Among the groups assisting MAFF on
food safety, the Steering Group on Chemical
Aspects of Food Surveillance oversees a
programme which encompasses pesticides and
veterinary residues. The Steering Group on
the Microbiological Safety of Food is
surveying the entire food chain—from
producer to consumer.
EXPORTS
Provisional data for 1993 suggest that the
volume of exports related to agriculture
(food, feed and drink) dropped by 7.2 per
cent, when their value amounted to
£8,361 million. The main markets are
Western Europe, North America and the
Middle East. Exports include speciality
products such as fresh salmon, whisky
(exports to the EU alone were worth over
£765 million), biscuits, jams and conserves,
as well as beef and lamb carcasses and cheese.
Export promotion is headed by Food From
Britain, an organisation funded by MAFF
and industry.
One of the world’s largest agricultural
events, the annual Royal International
Agricultural Exhibition, held at Stoneleigh in
Warwickshire, enables visitors to see the
latest techniques and improvements in British
agriculture. Some 175,000 visitors attended in
1994, of whom 5,500 were from overseas.
Other major agricultural displays include the
Royal Smithfield Show, held in London,
which exhibits agricultural machinery,
livestock and carcasses; the Royal Highland
Show; the Royal Welsh Show; and the Royal
Ulster Agricultural Show. There are also
important regional shows.
MARKETING
The Government’s food marketing
initiative encourages a partnership
approach—between companies, or between
individual growers, for example—throughout
the agriculture and food industries. The
Marketing Development Scheme, successor
to the Group Marketing Grant, was
introduced in 1994 under powers provided by
the Agriculture Act 1993. The new scheme
provides non-capital grants (for development
of best practice and training, for example,
and other proposals that do not involve
capital expenditure) up to £150,000.
Departments also operate EU grant schemes to
help capital investment aimed at improving the
processing of agricultural and fishery products.
Agricultural goods are marketed by private
traders, producers’ co-operatives and some
marketing boards. The Agriculture Act 1993
ends the milk marketing schemes in Britain.
In November 1994 a co-operative, Milk
Marque, inherited certain assets of the Milk
Marketing Board for England and Wales.
The Act provides for the termination of the
Potato Marketing Scheme, but no decision
has been taken to invoke this provision.
274
AGRICULTURE, THE FISHING INDUSTRY AND FORESTRY
Marketing arrangements for wool continue to
be administered by the British Wool
Marketing Board.
In 1993-94 MAFF approved Group
Marketing Grant projects for over 50
producer groups, with a total turnover
between them of over £530 million.
Much agricultural and horticultural
produce, such as grain, fruit and vegetables, is
handled by marketing co-operatives and other
farmers’ businesses; these had a turnover of
some £3,000 million in 1993.
In Scotland separate marketing measures
are being developed to improve sales of
agricultural and fish products, especially
overseas. The Scottish Food Strategy Group
has recommended a single Quality Mark for
Scottish food and drink.
ROLE OF THE GOVERNMENT
Four government departments have joint
responsibility for agriculture and fisheries
matters—MAFF; the Scottish Office
Agriculture and Fisheries Department; the
Welsh Office; and the Department of
Agriculture for Northern Ireland.
Common Agricultural Policy
support prices, as well as rates of levy, export
refunds and other aids, are set in European
Currency Units and are converted into the
currencies of the member states at fixed rates
of exchange—‘green rates’. These green rates
are kept broadly in line with market rates in
accordance with an agreed formula.
Public Expenditure under the CAP
by the Intervention Board and the
Agricultural Departments
FORECAST 1993/94
2.5%
Other, inc. pigmeat
29.8%
Arable area
payments
scheme
2.4%
Processed
goods
4.5% Sugar
10.9%
Milk products
11.3%
Beef and veal
18.7%
Sheepmeat
The CAP aims to ensure stable markets and a
fair standard of living for producers, and to
assure regular supplies of food at reasonable
prices. For many commodities support prices
are set annually; there are also levies on
imports to maintain internal market prices.
Surpluses are bought by intervention boards
(the Intervention Board executive agency in
Britain) to be stored and sold when
appropriate. Intervention stocks can be
disposed of within the EU where this can be
done without disrupting internal markets.
Exports, from the market and intervention
stocks, are facilitated by the provision of export
refunds to bridge any gap between EU prices
and world prices. In some cases there are also
direct payments to producers—for example,
the arable area payments scheme (see below),
the suckler cow premium, the beef special
premium and the ewe annual premium. The
Nearly all the EU’s agricultural
expenditure (£28,000 million in 1994) is
channelled through the European
Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund.
The Fund’s guarantee section finances
market support arrangements, while the
guidance section provides funds for
structural reform—for example, farm
modernisation and investment—and payments
to assist certain farmers to change to
alternative enterprises.
In Britain’s view, the cost of the CAP,
which accounts for over 50 per cent of the
EU’s budget, remains excessive. To achieve a
more market-oriented CAP and the ending of
costly surpluses, the Government is seeking
further reductions in price support. It also
considers that quota systems as an alternative
method of controlling production impede
economic development.
275
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Reforms
Those agreed in 1992 have been implemented
for arable crops (see p. 272), beef and
sheep. Commitment to environmental
protection, which Britain secured as part of
the CAP, has been followed in a number
of areas.
Beef. The phased reductions in the
categories of beef animals eligible for
intervention, the intervention price and the
annual ceilings for intervention purchases in
Britain had the effect of reducing significantly
the quantities of beef entering intervention in
1994. To compensate for this, there have
been significant increases in the rates of
premium payable under the beef special
premium and suckler cow premium schemes
since 1993.
Sheepmeat. Claims for ewe premium are now
subject to individual quotas on the number of
animals eligible. Quota may be permanently
transferred or temporarily leased between
producers. Normally, when quota is
transferred without the holding, 15 per cent
is siphoned off to the national reserve.
Allocations from the national quota are made
to special case categories.
Environment. Member states are obliged to
encourage environmentally beneficial
farming.
The Integrated Administration and
Control System is designed to ensure uniform
enforcement of the reformed CAP and to
reduce the scope for fraud.
GATT Uruguay Round
The Final Act of the GATT Uruguay Round
of multilateral trade negotiations was signed
in April 1994 (see p. 170). The agreement (to
come into effect in 1995) brings agriculture
fully within GATT disciplines for the first
time. It
• limits expenditure on agricultural
subsidies: (a) overall domestic support
will be 20 per cent below that in
1986-88; (b) outlays on export subsidies
will be cut by 36 per cent by comparison
with 1986-90; and subsidised export
volumes must fall by 21 per cent from
their level in 1986-90;
• aims to open up more markets by
converting all barriers to agricultural
imports into tariffs—to be reduced by an
average of 36 per cent over six years;
existing tariffs will, similarly, be cut by
an average of 36 per cent by 2000; and
• requires signatories to the Agreement to
introduce reduced tariff import quotas
equal to 3 per cent of consumption in
any agricultural product sector, rising to
5 per cent by 2000.
Price Guarantees, Grants and Subsidies
Expenditure in Britain in 1993-94 on CAP
market regulation and on price guarantees,
grants and subsidies was estimated at
£287 million and £2,727 million respectively.
Farmers are eligible for grants aimed at
environmental enhancement of their farms
and pollution control. Hill and upland
farmers can also benefit from payments per
head on cattle and sheep, known as hill
livestock compensatory allowances (HLCAs).
The Marketing Development Scheme (see
p. 273) helps farmers and growers to develop
effective marketing skills.
In Less Favoured Areas (LFAs), where
land quality is poor, farmers benefit from
enhanced rates of grant and special
payments on livestock. Their purpose is to
support the continuation of livestock farming
in hills and uplands, thus conserving the
countryside and maintaining a viable
population in the LFAs.
Farmers in LFAs are expected to receive
some £550 million in subsidy from all
sources in 1994. A rise in their incomes of
some 70 per cent in 1992-94 has brought
about a reduction in payments to them of
HLCAs from £130 million in 1992-93 to
£105 million in 1993-94.
Smallholdings and Crofts
In England and Wales county councils let
smallholdings to experienced people who
want to farm on their own account. Councils
may lend working capital to them. At 31
March 1993 there were about 5,180
smallholdings in England and 890 in Wales.
Land settlement in Scotland has been carried
276
AGRICULTURE, THE FISHING INDUSTRY AND FORESTRY
out by the Government, which, while now
seeking to dispose of holdings to its sitting
tenants, still owns and maintains 119,000
hectares (293,800 acres) of land settlement
estates, comprising 1,446 crofts and holdings.
In the crofting areas of Scotland (the
former counties of Argyll, Inverness, Ross
and Cromarty, Sutherland, Caithness,
Orkney and Shetland) much of the land is
tenanted by crofters (smallholders). They
enjoy the statutory protection provided by
crofting legislation and can benefit from
government schemes which exist to support
and help crofting communities—such as
agriculture and livestock improvement
schemes. Most crofters are part-time or
spare-time agriculturalists using croft
income to supplement income from
activities such as weaving, fishing, tourism
and other occupations. The Crofters
Commission has a statutory duty to promote
the interests of crofters.
Agricultural Landlords and Tenants
Approximately 35 per cent of agricultural
land in England and Wales is rented. Here
the Government plans to simplify the legal
framework on the leasing of land. In
Scotland, the proportion is somewhat
higher—50 per cent of farmland is rented—
partly because of the relatively large areas of
common grazings tenanted by crofters.
Most farms in Northern Ireland are
owner-occupied, but, under a practice
known as ‘conacre’, occupiers not wishing
to farm all their land let it annually to
others. About one-fifth of agricultural land is
let under this practice and is used mainly
for grazing.
Agriculture and Protection of the
Countryside
During 1993 Britain secured EU agreement
that member states should be able to attach
appropriate environmental conditions to the
payment of livestock subsidies. Further
progress was made in improving the
environmental potential of set-aside.
Environmentally Sensitive Areas
The ESA scheme (see Table 18.5) encourages
farmers to maintain or adopt environmentally
beneficial agricultural practices in parts of the
country where the landscape, wildlife or
historical features are of national importance.
ESAs are regularly reviewed and information
on their economic and environmental impact
is published. The newest, designated in 1994,
include Dartmoor and the Cotswold Hills in
England, Preseli and the Clwydian Range in
Wales, the Argyll Islands and Shetland
Islands of Scotland, and the Sperrins and
Slieve Gullion in Northern Ireland.
Participation in the ESA scheme is
voluntary. Farmers enter into ten-year
agreements with the relevant agriculture
department. An agreement specifies the
agricultural management practices to be
carried out. Each ESA has varying tiers of
entry, from basic care and maintenance to
more extensive forms of management and
environmental restoration. Details also vary,
but participants may not convert grassland to
arable and are subject to restrictions on
fertiliser and chemical usage.
Most ESAs also restrict the numbers of
stock on the land as well as operations such
as the timing of cultivation. The annual
Table 18.5: ESAs - as at 31 March 1994
Number
of ESAs Agreements
Land
designated
Payments
Areas covered to farmers
by agreements in 1993-94
a ’ooo)
'000 hectares {’000 acres)
England
Wales
Scotland
Northern Ireland
22
7
10
5
4,761
80
822
863
1,148 (2,836)
520 (1,285)
1,439 (3,556)
248 (613)
272 (667)
64 (158)
106 (262)
16 (39)
16,548
1,541
963
586
Sources: MAFF; Welsh Office; Scottish Office; Northern Ireland Office
277
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
payments are designed to compensate for
reduced profitability, through the adoption of
these less intensive production methods, and
for the further work some management
practices require. Additional payments are
made for distinct items (such as hedgerows
and stone wall renewal) set out in
conservation plans, and for allowing public
access to suitable farmland.
Other Schemes
The Farm Woodland Premium Scheme offers
incentives to farmers to plant woodlands on
agricultural land. Trees planted on arable or
improved grassland qualify for annual
payments of up to £250 a hectare for either
ten or 15 years, depending on the type of
woodland created. Between 1 April 1992 and
31 March 1994, applications to plant nearly
17,400 hectares (43,000 acres) of woodland in
Britain were approved. Three-quarters of this
area will be planted with broadleaved trees.
Under the arable area payment scheme,
growers can claim area-based payments on
cereals, oilseeds and protein crops. In order to
qualify, growers must set aside part of the
area on which they have claimed payment. In
1993 over 62,000 applications were received
in Britain for some 4.1 million hectares
(10.1 million acres).
The Farm and Conservation Grant Scheme,
part-funded by the EU, provides grants to
farmers for pollution control equipment and
environmental improvements (such as hedges
and stone walls). Since 1989 some £182
million has been paid to farmers in Britain, of
which £138 million was for installing and
improving waste handling facilities.
As well as expanding the scope of the
existing ESA scheme the Government has
introduced a Habitat Scheme, offering
payments to farmers to promote nature
conservation on their farms by taking
carefully selected areas of land out of
production for 20 years and managing them
in environmentally beneficial ways. It has also
launched a Nitrate Sensitive Areas Scheme,
which will help protect selected groundwater
sources used to supply drinking water, and
an Organic Aid Scheme to help farmers
wishing to convert to organic production.
Subject to EU approval, two further
schemes will be introduced during 1994:
• a Countryside Access Scheme to increase
opportunities for public access on set-
aside land; and
• a Moorland Scheme aimed at protecting
and improving the condition of heather
and other shrubby moorland.
Proposals for Scotland, Wales and Northern
Ireland are along broadly similar lines. By the
time they come fully into effect, annual
expenditure on these new measures in Britain
will exceed £100 million.
Farm Diversification
Many farmers have diversified into non-
agricultural enterprises to increase their
incomes. A study by Exeter University in
1991 estimated that nearly 80,000 jobs on
farms were reliant on non-agricultural
activities. The most common are leisure
amenities such as golf courses, tourist
accommodation, or riding. Often these are
small-scale, with low financial returns. In
contrast, many farmers run large-scale farm
shops which make a substantial contribution
to their income. In 1994 board and lodging
for holidaymakers on farms in England and
Wales brought in some £70 million and
benefited the rural economy by £115 million.
Agricultural Training
ATB-Landbase, an independent company,
acts as the Industry Training Organisation
(see p. 179) for the agriculture and
horticulture industries. ATB-Landbase
oversees the industry’s training needs and
arranges training through its network of
providers and instructors. It operates under a
contract with the Government, which
provides the funding. At local level Local
Enterprise Companies and Training and
Enterprise Councils (see p. 178) help develop
business skills. ATB-Landbase also arranges
training in wider rural skills, business
management and the management of shows
and similar events. The agricultural colleges
and independent instructors also help train in
the agricultural and horticultural businesses.
278
AGRICULTURE, THE FISHING INDUSTRY AND FORESTRY
Professional, Scientific and Technical
Services
In England and Wales ADAS (Food, Farms,
Land and Leisure), an executive agency,
provides professional, scientific and technical
services for agriculture and its ancillary industries.
Most types of advice and servicing are on a
fee-paying basis, although initial advice to
farmers on conservation, use of land for
woodlands and animal welfare is available free.
The Government also funds the Farming and
Wildlife Advisory Growers to provide free initial
conservation advice. Similar services in Scotland
come from the Scottish Office Agriculture and
Fisheries Department through the Scottish
Agricultural College. In Northern Ireland they
are available from the Department of
Agriculture’s agriculture and science services.
CONTROL OF DISEASES AND PESTS
Farm Animals
Safeguarding Britain’s high animal health status
includes measures to prevent the import of
disease in live animals, genetic material, meat
and other animal products. From 1 January
1993 internal frontier controls within the EU
were replaced by intensified checks at points
of origin and spot checks at destinations,
together with a system of checks on imports
from third countries. Further measures have
been taken against any increased risk:
• continuous surveillance at all English
south and east coast ports;
• targeting consignments from countries
where there is disease; and
• stepped-up routine checks, at destinations,
on 50-60 per cent of all imported livestock.
There is evidence that measures to control
bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) are
working. The incidence of BSE is down to
very low levels in cattle under five years old.
Professional advice and action on the
statutory control of animal disease and the
welfare of farm livestock are the responsibility
of the government State Veterinary Service,
whose veterinary investigation centres also
advise private practitioners treating animals
on the farm.
Rabies
Special measures apply to prevent rabies
entering Britain. Dogs, cats and certain other
mammals are subject to import licence and
six months’ quarantine. From July 1994
commercially traded dogs and cats which
satisfy strict conditions are allowed entry
without quarantine from other EU states.
There are severe penalties for breaking the
law. No cases of rabies outside quarantine
have occurred in Britain since 1970.
Fish
The fisheries departments operate statutory
controls to prevent the introduction and
spread of serious diseases of fish and
shellfish. These controls include the licensing
of live fish imports, the licensing of deposits
of shellfish on the seabed, and movement
restrictions on sites where outbreaks of
notifiable diseases have been confirmed.
Plants
The agriculture departments are responsible
for limiting the spread of plant pests and
diseases and for preventing the introduction
of new ones. They issue the health
certificates required by other countries to
accompany plant material exported from
Britain, and authorise growers who wish to
sell on the EU’s single internal market.
Certification schemes encourage the
development of healthy and true-to-type
planting stocks.
Pesticides
All pesticides must be approved for their
safety and efficacy. There are strict controls
on the supply, storage and use of pesticides,
and their maximum residue levels in food.
Controls on pesticides are the joint
responsibility of six government departments
on the basis of advice from the independent
Advisory Committee on Pesticides.
Arrangements for the approval of pesticides
in Britain are being integrated into an EU-
wide system under the terms of a directive on
pesticides authorisations.
279
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Veterinary Medicinal Products
The manufacture, sale and supply of
veterinary medicinal products are controlled
by legislation. Licences are issued by the
Veterinary Medicines Directorate on behalf of
the agriculture and health ministers for
products that have been approved on the
basis of safety, quality and efficacy.
Independent expert advice on these criteria
and on suspected adverse reactions is
provided by the Veterinary Products
Committee. Approval of veterinary medicines
is being harmonised under an EU-wide
system from 1995.
The Fishing Industry
The fishing industry provides 55 per cent by
quantity of British fish supplies, and is an
important source of employment and income
in a number of ports. Cod, haddock, whiting,
herring, plaice and sole are caught in the
North Sea off the east coasts of Scotland and
England; mackerel, together with cod and
other demersal fish (caught on or near the
bottom of the sea), are found off the west
coast of Scotland; sole, plaice, cod, herring
and whiting in the Irish Sea; and mackerel,
sole and plaice off the south-west coast of
England. Nephrops, crabs, lobsters and other
shellfish are taken from the inshore waters all
around the coast. A fleet also operates in
distant waters—around Greenland and north
Norway, for example.
Fish Caught
In 1993 demersal fish accounted for 53 per
cent by weight of total British landings,
pelagic fish (caught near the surface) for 36
per cent and shellfish for 11 per cent.
Landings of all types of fish (excluding
salmon and trout) by British fishing vessels
totalled 727,000 tonnes. Cod and haddock
represented 13 and 11 per cent respectively
of the total value of demersal and pelagic fish
landed, while anglerfish, plaice and mackerel
(each with 8 per cent), hake (6 per cent) and
whiting (5 per cent) were the other most
important sources of earnings to the industry.
The quayside value of landings of all sea fish,
including shellfish, by British vessels in 1993
was £517 million.
The Fishing Fleet
At the end of 1993 the British fleet consisted
of 11,108 registered vessels, including 451
deep-sea vessels longer than 24.4 m (80 ft).
Among the main ports from which the
fishing fleet operates are Aberdeen, Peterhead,
Fraserburgh (Grampian), Lerwick (Shetland),
Kinlochbervie, Ullapool (Highland), North
Shields (Tyne and Wear), Hull, Grimsby
(Humberside), Lowestoft (Suffolk), Brixham
(Devon), Newlyn (Cornwall), and Kilkeel,
Ardglass and Portavogie (Northern Ireland).
The Government aims to conserve fish
stocks, taking account of biological and
environmental considerations and of marine
ecology. Its primary purpose is to create the
Table 18.6: Imports and Exports of Fish
1992
1992
tonnes
1993"
Imports ^
Salt-water and shellfish'
Freshwater fish
Fish meals
Fish oils
Exports and re-exports
Salt-water fish and fish products
Freshwater fish
420,377 331,114
52,973 49,838
237,350 177,965
na 95,332
398,860
22,665
155,694
2,615
313.149
41,654
208,856
108,984
116.150
2,981
Sources: MAFF; Scottish Office; Northern Ireland Office
“Figures do not contain trade within EU.
* Fresh, frozen, cured and canned.
280
AGRICULTURE, THE FISHING INDUSTRY AND FORESTRY
best opportunities for Britain’s fishermen. In
accordance with measures to conserve fish
stocks announced in 1992 all commercial
fishing vessels now have to be licensed.
However, implementation of restrictions on
days at sea has been suspended pending a
ruling from the European Court of Justice.
Government financial support for
decommissioning vessels is continuing.
Fish Farming
Fish farming is centred on Atlantic salmon and
rainbow trout, which are particularly suited to
Britain’s climate and waters. Production of
salmon and trout has grown from less than
1,000 tonnes in the early 1970s to 48,691
tonnes of salmon (all in Scotland) and 15,000
tonnes of trout in 1993. Scotland produces the
largest amount of farmed salmon (with a first-
sale value of £170 million) in the EU. Shellfish
farming concentrates on molluscs such as
oysters, mussels, clams and scallops, producing
an estimated 5,700 tonnes a year.
The fish and shellfish farming industries
make an important contribution to rural
infrastructure, especially in remote areas such
as the Highlands and Islands of Scotland. In
1993 the industries were estimated to have a
combined wholesale turnover of some
£205 million. Production is based on almost
1,195 businesses operating from some
1,890 sites and employing more than
5,000 people.
Administration
The fisheries departments are responsible for
the administration of legislation concerning the
fishing industry and for fisheries research. The
safety and welfare of crews of fishing vessels
and other shipping matters are provided for
under legislation administered by the
Department of Transport.
The Sea Fish Industry Authority is
concerned with all aspects of the industry,
including consumer interests. It undertakes
research and development, provides training,
and encourages quality awareness. It also
administers a government grant scheme for
fishing vessels, to promote a safe, efficient and
modern fleet.
Fishery Limits
British fishery limits extend to 200 miles or
the median line (broadly halfway between the
British coast and the opposing coastline of
another coastal state), measured from
baselines on or near the coast of Britain. Only
British vessels may fish within 6 miles of the
coast. Certain other EU member states have
fishing rights between 6 and 12 miles in
certain areas and for named species, as
British vessels have in other member states’
coastal waters. Outside 12 miles EU vessels
may fish against agreed EU quotas in named
areas, while the only non-EU countries whose
vessels may fish in EU waters are those with
which the EU has reciprocal fisheries
agreements (Norway, Sweden and the Faroes)
which define areas and quantities of species
of permitted catch.
Common Fisheries Policy
Britain plays an active role in the
implementation and development of the EU’s
Common Fisheries Policy (CFP). The CFP’s
system for the conservation and management
of the EU’s fishing resources means that total
allowable catches are set each year in order to
conserve stocks. Decisions are based on
independent scientific advice. These catch levels
are then allocated between member states on
a fixed percentage basis, taking account of
traditional fishing patterns. Activity is also
regulated by a number of technical conservation
measures, including minimum mesh sizes for
towed nets and net configuration restrictions,
minimum landing sizes and closed areas
designated mainly to protect young fish. Each
member state is responsible for enforcement
of the rules on its own fishermen and those
of other member states in its own waters.
National compliance with EU regulations is
monitored by EU inspectors.
The CFP also covers the common
organisation of the market in fishery and
aquaculture products and policies on the size
and structure of the EU fleet.
CFP provisions are supplemented by a
number of fisheries agreements between the
EU and third countries, the most important
for Britain being the agreements with
281
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Norway, Greenland and the Faroe Islands.
EU catch quotas have also been established in
the international waters of the north-west
Atlantic and around Spitzbergen (Svalbard).
Fish and Shellfish Hygiene
Community legislation sets minimum hygiene
standards for the production and marketing of
fish and shellfish. Live bivalve molluscs
(oysters, mussels and cockles) can be
marketed only if they come from areas
classified by the Government according to
strict microbiological standards.
Salmon and Freshwater Fisheries
Salmon and sea-trout are fished commercially
in inshore waters around the British coast.
Eels and elvers are also taken commercially in
both estuaries and freshwater. Angling for
salmon and sea-trout (game fishing) and for
other freshwater species (coarse fishing) is
popular throughout Britain. There is no
public right to fish in freshwater lakes and
rivers in Great Britain. In England and Wales
those wishing to fish such waters must first
obtain permission from the owner of the
fishing rights and a licence from the National
Rivers Authority. In Scotland salmon fishing
is administered by district salmon fishery
boards. In Northern Ireland fishing is
licensed by the Fisheries Conservancy Board
for Northern Ireland and the Foyle Fisheries
Commission in their respective areas, and 65
public angling waters, including salmon, trout
and coarse fisheries, are accessible to
Department of Agriculture permit holders.
Research
The total government-funded programme of
research and development in agriculture,
fisheries and food in 1994-95 amounts to
about £320 million. This includes funding by
MAFF, the Scottish Office Agriculture and
Fisheries Department, the Department of
Agriculture for Northern Ireland and the
Office of Science and Technology. The
Government funds research essential for the
public good—for example, into food safety,
human health, animal welfare and flood
protection. It also funds research which seeks
to encourage an efficient and competitive
industry consistent with high standards of
consumer protection and care for the
environment. It looks to industry to fund
those areas of research where individual firms
or ventures benefit directly. Research is
carried out in a network of organisations,
including research institutes, specialist
laboratories and higher education institutions.
Agriculture and Food
The Biotechnology and Biological Sciences
Research Council (BBSRC), formed in 1994
(see p. 313), absorbed the work of the former
Agricultural and Food Research Council
(AFRC). The BBSRC also took over
responsibility for biological science from the
former Science and Engineering Research
Council. Research work has been guided by
the recommendations of the independent
Priorities Board for Research and
Development in Agriculture and Food.
The BBSRC receives funds from the
science budget through the Office of
Science and Technology, and income from
work commissioned by MAFF, by industry
and by other bodies. It carries out research
in its eight institutes and in higher
education through its grants scheme.
ADAS carries out research and development
under commission from MAFF and works
under contract for other bodies. These
undertakings are carried out at research farms
across England and Wales, and through
regional centres or on clients’ premises.
MAFF also commissions research at its
other agencies—the Central Veterinary
Laboratory and the Central Science
Laboratory (which incorporated the Food
Science Laboratories in 1994). The five
Scottish Agricultural and Biological Research
Institutes, funded by the Scottish Office
Agriculture and Fisheries Department, cover
areas of research complementary to those of
the BBSRC institutes, while including work
relevant to the conditions of northern Britain.
Development work in Scotland is carried out
by the Scottish Agricultural College, which
operates from three centres.
282
AGRICULTURE, THE FISHING INDUSTRY AND FORESTRY
In Northern Ireland basic and applied
research is done by the Department of
Agriculture in its specialist research divisions
and at its three agricultural colleges. It also
has links with the Queen’s University of
Belfast and the Agricultural Research
Institute of Northern Ireland.
Fisheries and Aquatic Environment
MAFF laboratories deal with marine and
freshwater fisheries, shellfish, marine
pollution, fish farming and disease. It also
commissions research work from the Natural
Environment Research Council, the Sea Fish
Industry Authority and a number of
universities. MAFF has two seagoing
research vessels. In Scotland, the Scottish
Office Agriculture and Fisheries Department
undertakes a similar, and complementary,
range of research and also has two seagoing
vessels. The Department of Agriculture
laboratories in Northern Ireland undertake
research on marine and freshwater fisheries,
and also have a seagoing research vessel.
Forestry
Woodland covers an estimated 2.4 million
hectares (5.9 million acres) in Britain: about 7
per cent of England, 15 per cent of Scotland,
12 per cent of Wales and 5 per cent of
Northern Ireland—about 10 per cent of the
total land area and well below the 25 per cent
average for the whole of Europe.
Britain’s forestry programme aims to:
• protect forest resources;
• increase their value and promote the
market for home-grown timber;
• conserve woodland as a home for wildlife
and rare and endangered species;
• improve the environment;
• develop opportunities for recreation;
• enhance landscape and cultural heritage;
• promote appropriate management and
training; and
• encourage public understanding and
participation.
Doubling of the forest area since 1919
has meant substantial growth in
Britain’s wood processing industry.
Since the early 1980s nearly 250,000
hectares (618,000 acres) of new
woodland have been created. Forestry
employs more than 40,000 people.
Britain’s woodlands produce about 7
million cubic metres (240 million
cubic feet) of wood a year—about 15
per cent of total consumption. The
Government plans to spend £283
million supporting the management
of state and private forests and their
expansion in the three years 1994-95
to 1996-97.
The area of productive forest in Great Britain
is 2.18 million hectares (5.38 million acres),
39 per cent of which is managed by the
Forestry Commission. The rate of new
planting in 1993-94 was 1,385 hectares
(3,422 acres) by the Commission and
15,875 hectares (39,228 acres) by other
woodland owners, with the help of grants
from the Commission, mainly in Scotland.
In 1993-94, 10,780 hectares (26,638 acres)
of broadleaved trees were planted, a
practice encouraged on suitable sites. Much
new planting is by private owners.
The volume of timber harvested on
Commission lands in 1993-94 totalled 4.3
million cubic metres (152 million cubic feet).
The Commission’s Woodland Grant
Scheme pays grants to help create new
woodlands and forests and regenerate existing
ones. Management grants under the scheme
contribute to the cost of managing woodlands
to provide silvicultural, environmental and
social benefits. Supplements are available for
planting community woodlands and for
planting on better land.
The Forestry Commission and Forestry
Policy
The Forestry Commission, established in
1919, is the government department
responsible for forestry in Great Britain. The
Commissioners advise on forestry matters and
are responsible to the Secretary of State for
283
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Scotland, the Minister of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food, and the Secretary of
State for Wales.
Within the Commission, the Forestry
Authority controls tree felling, provides
grants and advice to private woodland
owners, and sets standards for the forestry
industry as a whole. Forest Enterprise
develops and manages the Commission’s
forests and forestry estate, as a multiple-use
resource, supplying timber, opportunities for
recreation, and enhancing nature conservation
and the forest environment. After a major
review of forestry in 1993-94, Forest
Enterprise is to become an executive agency
within the Forestry Commission, which is to
remain in the public sector. A Policy and
Resources Group sees to parliamentary
business, policy development, and European
and international liaison.
The Commission has sold 108,619
hectares (268,403 acres) of plantation and
plantable land since 1981 and has, at the
Government’s request, to dispose of
100,000 hectares (247,000 acres) during the
1990s. The Commission is financed partly
by the Government and partly by receipts
from sales of timber and other produce,
and from rents.
Forestry Initiatives
Plans for three Community Forests in
England—Thames Chase (east of London),
Mercia (Staffordshire) and Great North
(Tyne and Wear)—have been approved. A
new national forest in the English Midlands
(500 sq km; 200 sq miles) is being
2 The Forestry and Countryside Commissions and local
authorities plan to create Community Forests near certain
towns—as recreational and productive woodlands in areas that at
present do not have them.
established. Plans are also in hand to restore
Sherwood Forest (Nottinghamshire). As part
of its rural initiative (see p. 338), the
Government is encouraging local
communities to participate in the
development of 350 sq km (135 sq miles) of
existing forest in the valleys of south Wales—
about 20 per cent of the land area—which is
owned by the Forestry Commission.
Community forests are also being
promoted and developed in Scotland and
Northern Ireland.
Forestry Research
The Forestry Authority maintains two
principal research stations, at Alice Holt
Lodge, near Farnham (Surrey), and at Bush
Estate, near Edinburgh, for basic and
applied research into all aspects of forestry.
Aid is also given for research work in
universities and other institutions. A database
on forestry and tree-related research in Great
Britain has been compiled by the Forestry
Research Co-ordination Committee and is
updated annually.
The Forestry Authority conducts an
annual forest health survey which monitors
the effects of stress factors on broadleaves
and conifers.
Forestry in Northern Ireland
The Department of Agriculture may acquire
land for afforestation and give financial and
technical assistance for private planting. The
state forest area has grown steadily since 1945.
By 1993, 62,115 hectares (153,424 acres) of
plantable land had been acquired, of which
60,823 hectares (150,233 acres) were planted.
There were 16,000 hectares (39,520 acres) of
privately owned forest. Some 430 professional
and industrial staff work in state forests.
Further Reading
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, Aspects of Britain series, HMSO, 1993.
Agriculture in the United Kingdom 1993. HMSO.
Forestry Commission. Annual report. HMSO.
284
19 Transport and
Communications
Transport 285
Roads 285
Road Haulage 289
Passenger Services 290
Railways 291
Inland Waterways 295
Shipping and Ports 295
Civil Aviation 298
Communications 301
Telecommunications 301
Postal Services 305
Britain’s transport and communications infrastructure is developing rapidly.
The opening of the Channel Tunnel (see p. 293) has linked the rail transport
system of Great Britain to that of the European mainland. Rail services are
being privatised. Britain’s road network is developing, with the emphasis on
upgrading existing routes rather than building new motorways. Investment at
seaports and airports and in air traffic control equipment continues to
expand capacity and ease the international movement of people and goods.
Britain’s telecommunications infrastructure continues to develop, with 45 new
licences granted to new operators for fixed links since 1991.
Transport
There has been a considerable increase in
passenger travel in recent years. Travel in
Great Britain rose by 31 per cent between
1983 and 1993. Travel by car and van rose by
40 per cent and air travel was up 75 per cent.
However, travel by motor cycle, pedal cycle
and by bus and coach has been declining. In
all, car and van travel accounts for 86 per
cent of passenger mileage within Great
Britain, buses and coaches for about 6 per
cent, rail for 5 per cent and air less than
1 per cent. The amount of freight hauled by
road increased by 39 per cent between 1983
and 1993.
Car ownership has also risen substantially.
In all, 68 per cent of households in Great
Britain had the regular use of one or more
cars in 1992; 23 per cent had the use of two
or more cars. At the end of 1993 there were
24.8 million vehicles licensed for use on the
roads of Great Britain, of which 20.8 million
were cars (including 2.2 million company
cars); 1.9 million light goods vehicles;
590,000 other goods vehicles; 740,000 motor
cycles, scooters and mopeds; and 153,000
buses and coaches.
ROADS
Total motor traffic for 1993 is estimated at
410,200 million vehicle-km. The total road
network in Britain in 1993 was 388,714 km
(233,300 miles). Trunk motorways accounted
for 3,200 km (1,900 miles) of this, less than
1 per cent, and other trunk roads for
14,500 km (8,700 miles), or about 3.7 per
cent. However, motorways carry about 15 per
cent of all traffic and trunk roads about 17
per cent. Combined, they carry over half of
all goods vehicle traffic in Great Britain.
285
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
A Road User’s Charter was published in
April 1994, setting out the standards expected
of the new Highways Agency (see below) on
motorways and trunk roads. These cover
matters such as safety and security on the
road network, the maintenance and
improvement of the network, and answering
queries and complaints.
Management
Responsibility for trunk roads in Great
Britain, including most motorways, rests in
England with the Secretary of State for
Transport, in Scotland with the Secretary of
State for Scotland and in Wales with the
Secretary of State for Wales. Central
government meets the majority of the costs of
construction and maintenance. In April 1994
a new executive agency of the Department of
Transport, the Highways Agency, took over
responsibility for building, improving and
maintaining motorways and trunk roads in
England. Its total budget is about £2,000
million in 1994-95.
The main highway authorities1 for non¬
trunk roads are presently:
• in England, the county councils, the
metropolitan district councils and the
London borough councils;
• in Wales, the county councils; and
• in Scotland, the regional or islands
councils.
1 The structure of local government in Great Britain is currently
under review (see p. 72), which could affect these arrangements.
In Northern Ireland the Department of
the Environment for Northern Ireland is
responsible for the construction,
improvement and maintenance of all
public roads.
Research on transport issues, such as
congestion, safety and infrastructure, is
carried out by the Transport Research
Laboratory (TRL). This is an executive
agency of the Department of Transport, but
the Government announced in March
1994 that it intends to privatise the TRL in
1995-96. Universities and other higher
education institutions, consultants
and industry also undertake research,
while some is done collaboratively within
EU programmes.
Road Programme
In March 1994 the Government announced
the findings of a review of its programme to
improve the motorway and trunk road
network. Schemes in the programme have
been assessed for priority. The most
important projects will be implemented more
quickly. By contrast, 49 schemes that were no
longer environmentally acceptable or not
needed in the foreseeable future have been
withdrawn, while preparation work is being
suspended on 67 others. In particular, the
number of proposals for building new
publicly-funded trunk routes has been
sharply reduced to only six.
In spring 1994, 55 motorway and trunk
road schemes were under construction in
England and 273 further schemes were in
Table 19.1: Road Length (as at April 1993)
Public
roads
All-purpose
trunk roads
and trunk
motorways
kilometres
Trunk
motorways^
England
Scotland
Wales
Northern Ireland
Britain
278,841
52,023
33,612
24,238
388,714
10,471
3,123
1,698
2,338
17,630
2,689
254
120
113
3,176
Source: Department of Transport . 0 .
"In addition, there were 47 km (29 miles) of local authority motorway in England and 31 km (20 miles) in Scotland.
286
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
preparation. Expenditure of about £ 1,360
million on new trunk road construction is
planned for 1994—95, with 22 new schemes
due to start. The trunk road maintenance
programme is ^670 million. The Department
of Transport is supporting 269 major local
authority road schemes, including 35 new
schemes. A total of £329 million of
government grant is available to support
local authority road schemes in England
in 1994-95.
Road communications in Wales will
benefit from the second Severn crossing, the
recent completion of the M4 motorway and
improvements to the A55 and A465 roads.
The A55 is now dual carriageway across the
mainland. The Welsh Office’s trunk roads
and transport programme for 1994—95 totals
£194 million. A total of £64 million is also
being made available to support major local
authority road schemes in Wales.
The Government has committed £500
million over three years to new road
construction in Scotland. The main priorities
within the trunk road programme are the
completion of the Glasgow to Carlisle
motorway, which is now well advanced, and
of the motorway network in central Scotland.
These routes provide important links for
commerce and industry to the south and to
mainland Europe. The Government’s future
strategy also includes a series of ‘route action
plans’ designed significantly to improve
safety and journey times on specific major
routes. The possibility of a privately funded
second road bridge across the Firth of Forth
is being considered as part of a package of
measures in the area. A total of £175 million
is also being made available to provide for
local authority capital expenditure on roads
and transport schemes in Scotland.
In Northern Ireland the emphasis is on
improving arterial routes, constructing more
bypasses, and improving roads in the
Belfast area, including the construction of
a new cross-harbour link planned for the
mid-1990s.
Private Finance
The Government is encouraging greater
private sector involvement in the design,
construction, operation and funding of roads.
Privately funded schemes recently completed
or being undertaken include:
• a crossing of the River Thames at
Dartford, which opened to traffic in late
1991 and links into the M25 London
orbital motorway;
• a second crossing of the River Severn,
which should be completed by 1996;
• a relief road north of Birmingham, which
will be the first overland toll route in
Britain; and
• a bridge under construction between the
mainland of Scotland and Skye.
In 1993 the Government issued a
consultation paper on the wider application of
tolls on routes between cities and on ways of
involving private finance. It has also
announced plans to develop an electronic
tolling system, which has attracted
considerable interest from industry.
Licensing and Standards
The Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency
(DVLA) maintains official records of drivers
and vehicles in Great Britain. At the end of
1993 it held records on 35.5 million drivers
and 25 million licensed vehicles. New drivers
of motor vehicles must pass a driving test
before getting a full licence to drive.
The Driving Standards Agency is the
national driver testing authority in Great
Britain. It also supervises professional driving
instructors and the compulsory basic training
scheme for learner motor cyclists. Minimum
ages are:
• 16 for riders of mopeds, drivers of small
tractors, and disabled people receiving a
mobility allowance;
• 17 for drivers of cars and other passenger
vehicles with nine or fewer seats
(including that of the driver), motor
cycles and goods vehicles not over 3.5
tonnes permissible maximum weight;
• 18 for goods vehicles over 3.5, but not
over 7.5, tonnes; and
• 21 for passenger vehicles with over nine
seats and goods vehicles over 7.5 tonnes.
287
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Before most new cars and goods vehicles
are allowed on the roads, they must meet a
number of safety and environmental
requirements, based primarily on standards
drawn up by the EU. This form of control,
known as type approval, is operated by the
Vehicle Certification Agency.
The Vehicle Inspectorate is the national
testing and enforcement authority. It meets
this responsibility mainly through:
• annual testing and certification of
heavy and light goods vehicles, buses
and coaches;
• administration of the ‘MOT’ testing
scheme, under which cars, motor cycles
and some light goods vehicles of
3,000-3,500 kg (59-68 cwt) design gross
weight are tested at private garages
authorised as test stations;
• roadside enforcement checks of
roadworthiness, overloading and
drivers’ hours;
• carrying out, on behalf of the Traffic
Commissioners, investigations and
assessments of operators’ vehicle
maintenance arrangements; and
• the investigation of serious accidents and
vehicle defects, and overseeing vehicle
recall campaigns.
In Northern Ireland the Driver and
Vehicle Testing Agency (DVTA) is
responsible for testing drivers and vehicles
under statutory schemes broadly similar to
those in Great Britain. Private cars five or
more years old are tested at DVTA centres.
Road Safety
Although Great Britain has one of the highest
densities of road traffic in the world, it has a
good record on road safety, with the lowest
road accident death rate in the EU. Figures
for 1993 show that 3,814 people were killed
on the roads (down 10 per cent on 1992 and
the first time since records were kept that the
figure has been below 4,000), 45,000 seriously
injured and 257,200 slightly injured. This
compares with nearly 8,000 deaths a year in
the mid-1960s. Several factors, such as
developments in vehicle safety standards,
improvements in roads, the introduction of
legislation on seat-belt wearing and drinking
and driving, and developments in road safety
training, education and publicity, have
contributed to the long-term decline in
serious casualties.
The introduction of automatic
cameras to detect speeding and traffic
light offences has had considerable
safety benefits. In west London, for
example, speed cameras have led to
an 18 per cent drop in accidents
and a 37 per cent drop in fatal or
serious injuries in their first full year
of operation.
The Government’s aim is to reduce road
casualties by one-third by the end of the
century, compared with the 1981-85 average.
Priority is given to reducing casualties among
vulnerable road-users (children, pedestrians,
cyclists, motor cyclists and the elderly),
particularly in urban areas, where about 75 per
cent of road accidents occur. For example, the
child road safety campaign encourages drivers
to slow down when children are likely to be
about, particularly in urban areas. Other
strategies for achieving lower casualties are
improvements in highway design, better
protection for vehicle occupants, encouraging
the use of cycle helmets and measures to
combat drinking and driving.
Traffic in Towns
Traffic management schemes are used in
many urban areas to reduce congestion, create
a better environment and improve road safety.
Such schemes include, for example, one-way
streets, bus lanes, facilities for pedestrians
and cyclists, and traffic-calming measures
such as road humps and chicanes to constrain
traffic speeds in residential areas. It is now
also possible for local authorities to
introduce 20 mph (32 km/h) zones, subject
to central government consent. Over 100
have been set up in the few years since they
became possible.
Many towns have shopping precincts
designed for the convenience of pedestrians,
288
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
from which motor vehicles are excluded for
all or part of the day. Controls over on-street
parking are enforced through excess charges
and fixed penalties, supported where
appropriate by powers to remove vehicles. In
parts of London wheel clamping is also used
to immobilise illegally parked vehicles.
In 1992 the Government announced the
designation of a network of priority ‘red
routes’ in London about 480 km (300 miles)
long, the first of which was scheduled to
come into operation during 1994. Red routes,
to be marked by red lining and special signs,
will be subject to special stopping controls
and other traffic management measures,
strictly enforced with higher penalties. The
Traffic Director for London has been
appointed to co-ordinate the introduction and
operation of the priority routes throughout
London. A pilot scheme in north and east
London, introduced in 1991, has caused
significant falls in journey times and greater
reliability for buses, with a consequent rise in
passenger numbers.
The Government has also set up a wide-
ranging study into urban traffic congestion,
including the lessons to be learnt from
improvements to traffic management in other
countries, and the question of ‘congestion
charging’ in London and other cities.
ROAD HAULAGE
Road haulage traffic by heavy goods vehicles
amounted to 128,600 million tonne-km in
1993, 6 per cent more than in 1992. There
has been a move towards larger and more
efficient vehicles carrying heavier loads—
about 80 per cent of the traffic, measured in
tonne-km, is now carried by vehicles of over
25 tonnes laden weight. Much of the traffic is
moved over short distances, with 73 per cent
of the tonnage being carried on hauls of 100
km (62 miles) or less. Public haulage (private
road hauliers carrying other firms’ goods)
accounts for 72 per cent of freight carried in
Great Britain in terms of tonne-km. In 1993
the main commodities handled by heavy
goods vehicles were:
• crude minerals (310 million tonnes);
• food, drink and tobadco (300 million
tonnes); and
• building materials (153 million tonnes).
Road haulage is predominantly an industry
of small, privately owned businesses. There
were about 125,300 holders of an operator’s
licence in March 1994, operating 404,200
heavy goods vehicles. Nearly 90 per cent of
operators have fleets of five or fewer vehicles.
The biggest operators in Great Britain are
NFC pic, P & O Industrial Services Division,
LEP Group pic, Ocean Group pic and
Transport Development Group pic.
Licensing and Other Controls
In general, those operating goods vehicles or
trailer combinations over 3.5 tonnes gross
weight require a goods vehicle operator’s
licence. Licences are divided into restricted
licences for own-account operators carrying
goods connected with their own business, and
standard licences for hauliers operating for
hire or reward. Proof of professional
competence, financial standing and good
repute is needed to obtain a standard licence.
Responsibility for granting licences rests with
seven independent Traffic Commissioners.
The Deregulation and Contracting Out Bill,
at present before Parliament, contains
proposals to simplify the operator licensing
system, while maintaining protection of the
environment and road safety. In Northern
Ireland own-account operators do not
require a licence, although this matter is
under consideration.
Regulations lay down limits on the hours
worked by drivers of goods vehicles, and
minimum rest periods. Tachographs, which
automatically record speed, distance covered,
driving time and stopping periods, must be
fitted and used in most goods vehicles over
3.5 tonnes gross weight in Great Britain.
Speed limiters must also be fitted to heavy
lorries. Originally these had to be set to limit
speed to 60 mph (97 km/h). However, from
January 1994 a programme began to reduce
this gradually to 56 mph (90 km/h).
International Road Haulage
International road haulage has grown rapidly
and in 1993 about 1.4 million road goods
vehicles were ferried to mainland Europe or
289
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the Irish Republic. Of these, 394,800 were
powered vehicles registered in Britain. In
1993 British vehicles carried almost 11
million tonnes internationally, more than
double the amount carried in 1984. About
95 per cent of this traffic was with the
European Union.
International road haulage within the EU
was fully liberalised in January 1993.
‘Cabotage’ (the operation of domestic road
haulage services within a member state by a
non-resident) will be fully liberalised in 1998.
Until then, quotas of permits are available
which allow cabotage anywhere within the
EU. Haulage with countries outside the EU
takes place under bilateral agreements, most
of which allow unrestricted numbers of
British lorries into the country concerned,
although some require permits. The European
Conference of Transport Ministers issues a
limited but increasing number of permits
which allow free access to, and transit across,
a number of countries in Central and Eastern
Europe. The British quota for 1995 is 174, an
increase of 75 over 1994 levels.
PASSENGER SERVICES
Buses
Outside London, almost all bus services in
Great Britain are now provided by companies
in the private sector, ranging from major
groups with over 1,000 vehicles to small
operators with fewer than five. Outside
London there are very few restrictions on
operators providing services. Local authorities
subsidise the provision of extra services
which are socially necessary but uneconomic,
after competitive tendering.
London Transport (LT) is a statutory
corporation responsible for providing public
transport in London. Its main operating
subsidiaries are London Buses Ltd (LBL)
and London Underground Ltd. LT, which
provides 600 bus routes, already involves the
private sector in the provision of bus services,
and private sector companies operating under
contract to LT now run a quarter of all
London’s bus routes. The Government is
planning to privatise LBL. One of its
subsidiaries was sold in January 1994, three
more in September 1994 and the
Government is planning to sell the remainder
in 1994—95. In the longer term deregulation
is proposed. Provision would be made for the
operation of socially necessary but
uneconomic services and the continuation of
a London-wide concessionary travel scheme.
The Department of Transport has
allocated about £20 million over the period
1992-94 for local authority bus priority
measures. These include bus lanes, traffic
light priority signalling, and park and ride
schemes. A further £6.2 million has been
allocated in 1994-95 to local authorities in
London. This funding, up from £3.3 million
in 1993-94, will also enable detailed design
work for a 720-km (450-mile) bus priority
network in the capital, which will cover
nearly 70 per cent of the areas where buses
are most delayed.
To assist passengers new information
systems are being provided. For example, in
Southampton a bus passenger information
system known as Stopwatch provides
information to passengers at 30 stops.
In Northern Ireland subsidiaries of the
publicly owned Northern Ireland Transport
Holding Company provide almost all road
passenger services. Citybus Ltd operates
services in Belfast, and Ulsterbus Ltd
operates most of the services in the rest of
Northern Ireland. These companies have
about 300 and 1,000 vehicles respectively.
Coaches
In Britain long-distance coach services are
provided by companies in the private sector.
There are no restrictions on routes served or
the number of vehicles operated. A national
network of routes is maintained by the
National Express company, largely through
franchised operations. Passenger comfort in
coaches has been improved in recent years.
While all regular, and some shuttle,
overseas coach services still require
authorisation or permission from the
authorities of the countries to or through
which they travel, most tourist services
within the EU have been liberalised.
Operators no longer need prior permission to
run either holiday shuttle services, where
290
ASTRONOMY
A photograph of Jupiter taken by scientists at the
Royal Greenwich Observatory at Roque de los Muchachos
in the Canary Islands (pictured here). The photograph, taken
using the William Herschel 4.2 metre telescope, shows the
effects of the recent collisions with Comet Shoemaker Levy 9.
Major conservation and
recreation areas
National Parks
Forest Parks
Areas of
Outstanding
Natural Beauty
(National Scenic
Areas in Scotland)
Heritage Coast
(Coastal Conservation
Zones in Scotland)
National Trails
World Heritage Sites
cV*' NORTHER
f; ^ I R E»L AND
*
Liverpool^
Agricultural land use
Orkney
Islands
Shetland
Islands
Urban areas
Forests
Dairying
Hill farming and stock rearing
Rearing and feeding
Cropping
Cash roots, horticulture,
pigs and poultry, fruit
Boundaries
between countries
Aberdeen*
r
Edinburgh .
4!
Belfast
• York
Leed|^
Manchester
Newcastle upon Tyne
lesbrough
-
[jeffield
Stoke^in-Trent
Nottingham Norwich
m. / '
Leicester
Birmingham „
Cambridge
L^hdon^
*
0 Sotithamptc^ Brighton
Portsmouth
o
20 40 60 miles
ARCHAEOLOGY
A scientist at Glasgow
University meticulously
cleans fossilised dinosaur
eggs recently discovered
in Inner Mongolia.
Special scanning
equipment is being
developed to examine an
egg still embedded in
the stone, as it is
believed that it may
contain an embryo.
The discovery of a 500,000-year-old
leg bone in a quarry in Boxgrove,
Sussex, is one of the most important
archaeological finds in Europe.
Examination of the bone at the
Palaentology Laboratory of the
Natural History Museum, London,
has revealed that the man, alive
during the temperate stage of the Ice
Age, was over 1.83 m (6 ft) tall and
weighed over 75.5 kg (12 stone).
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
accommodation is included as part of the
package, or occasional coach tours to, from or
within another member state. Since January
1993 passenger cabotage has been allowed for
tours where a single vehicle carries the same
group of passengers throughout a journey.
From January 1996, this freedom will be
extended to all non-regular services.
Taxis
There are about 56,000 licensed taxis in
Great Britain, mainly in urban areas; London
has about 17,500. In London and several
other major cities taxis must be purpose-built
to conform to very strict requirements and
new ones have to provide for people in
wheelchairs. In many urban districts drivers
must have passed a test of their knowledge of
the area. At present, a local authority can
only limit the number of licensed taxis if it is
satisfied that there is no unfulfilled demand
for taxis in its area.
Private hire vehicles with drivers
(‘minicabs’) may be booked only through the
operator and not hired on the street. In most
areas outside London private hire vehicles are
licensed. The Government launched a review
of the taxi licensing regime in England and
Wales in October 1993.
There are about 4,000 licensed taxis in
Northern Ireland. Licences are issued by the
Department of the Environment for
Northern Ireland on a basis broadly similar
to that in Great Britain.
RAILWAYS
Railways were pioneered in Britain: the
Stockton and Darlington Railway, opened in
1825, was the first public passenger railway
in the world to be worked by steam power.
The main railway companies in Great Britain
were nationalised in 1948, coming under the
control of the British Railways Board (BR).
Now arrangements for a privatised railway
network are being introduced.
Privatisation
The Government’s approach, enshrined in
the Railways Act 1993, includes:
• the franchising of all BR’s existing
passenger services to the private sector;
• the transfer of BR’s freight and parcels
operations to the private sector;
• the creation of a new right of access to
the rail network for private operators of
both passenger and freight services;
• the separation of track from train
operations, under which Railtrack—a
government-owned company—is
responsible for operating all track and
infrastructure, and passenger services are
operated by BR until they are franchised;
• the appointment of a Rail Regulator to
oversee the fair application of
arrangements for track access and
charging, and a Franchising Director
responsible for negotiating, awarding and
monitoring franchises;
• opportunities for the private sector to
lease stations; and
• improved grant arrangements for
individual rail services or groups
of services.
Railtrack is seeking the involvement of
private sector finance to improve the
network—for example, bids from private
consortia are being sought for the
modernisation of the West Coast Main Line.
BR has restructured its passenger services
into 25 train operating units as a basis for the
privatised railway network. The Government
has set the Franchising Director a target of
awarding the first six franchises by the end of
1995 and for over half of BR’s current
passenger services to be franchised by April
1996. Future responsibility for rolling
stock provision will pass to the private
sector in 1995, with the sale of BR’s three
rolling stock leasing companies. These lease
stock to the operators, including to BR
pending franchising.
Three new, competing rail freight
companies, each with a geographic heartland,
were set up in autumn 1993 and will be
privatised in 1995. The Government invited
bids for the Freightliner container traffic
business in May 1994. The two rail
parcels businesses are also being sold to the
private sector.
291
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
New regulations require rail operators to
prepare a ‘safety case’ to demonstrate that
safe practices will be followed at all times;
these cases are monitored by Railtrack.
Railway employees who undertake work with
safety implications are required to be fit and
competent. The Railway Inspectorate, part of
the Health and Safety Executive (see p. 190),
is responsible for validating Railtrack’s own
safety case.
The first six passenger services to be
franchised will be: the East Coast
Main Line; the Gatwick Express; the
Great Western Main Line; the
London, Tilbury and Southend line;
ScotRail; and the South Western
division of Network SouthEast.
Operations
In 1993-94 BR’s turnover, including financial
support and income from other activities but
excluding internal transactions, was £3,646
million. It received grants of £930 million as
compensation for the public service obligation
to operate sections of the passenger network
that would not otherwise cover their cost.
As part of the Citizen’s Charter initiative,
BR published its Passenger’s Charter.
Compensation is payable to passengers when
service falls by more than a small margin
below these standards. Under the
privatisation proposals, franchisees will be
required to produce their own charters,
which will be expected at least to match the
standards achieved by BR.
Investment
There has been substantial investment in
Britain’s railways in recent years. BR’s
programme totalled £1,206 million in
1993-94. Major areas of expenditure included
rolling stock and facilities for Channel
Tunnel traffic from the opening of the tunnel
(see p. 293).
In October 1993 BR announced its first
rolling stock leasing deal. Under this, 41 new
Networker trains are being acquired for
lines in Kent and Essex. The trains are
being financed by ABB, their builder, which
will receive an annual leasing payment for
their use.
Passenger Services
The passenger network (see map facing inside
back cover) comprises a fast inter-city
Table 19.2: Railway Operations
1989-90
1990-91 1991-92 1992-93 1993-94
758
33,648
143
Passenger journeys
(million)
Passenger-km
(million)
Freight traffic
(million tonnes)
Trainload and wagonload traffic
(million net-tonne km) 16,742
Assets at end of period:
Locomotives 2,095
High Speed Train power units 197
Other coaching units 13,833
Freight vehicles^ 21,970
Stations (including freight
and parcels)
Route open for traffic (km)
2,598
16,588
763
33,191
138
15,986
2,030
197
13,631
20,763
2,615
16,584
740
32,057
136
15,347
1,896
197
12,925
19,877
2,556
16,558
745
31,693
122
15,509
1,794
197
12,309
15,912
2,543
16,527
713
30,362
103
13,764
1,688
197
11,802
13,871
2,553
16,535
Source: British Railways Board. f
"In addition, a number of privately owned wagons and locomotives are operated on the radway network for customers of
British Rail.
292
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
network, linking the main centres of Great
Britain; local stopping services; and commuter
services in and around the large conurbations,
especially London and south-east England.
InterCity 125 trains, travelling at maximum
sustained speeds of 125 mph (201 km/h), are
the world’s fastest diesel trains. With the
introduction of electric InterCity 225 trains,
Britain now has more services running at
over 100 mph (160 km/h) than any other
country in Europe.
About 30 per cent of route-mileage is
electrified, including the East Coast Main Line
linking London and Edinburgh. A new
generation of diesel multiple-unit trains has
been introduced on regional services, while the
first of a new generation of electric Networker
trains entered service in Kent in 1992, and 674
coaches were in service by mid-1994.
Freight
Over 90 per cent of rail freight traffic by
volume is of bulk commodities, mainly coal,
coke, iron and steel, building materials and
petroleum. The opening of the Channel
Tunnel has presented an important
opportunity for non-bulk freight movement.
The Government makes grants to encourage
companies to move goods by rail rather than
road; over 200 schemes have been helped
since 1975 at a cost of over £80 million in
cash terms. A total of £43 million has been
set aside for freight facilities and track access
grants in England alone over the period
1994—95 to 1996-97. Freight users have had
rights of open access to the rail network since
April 1994. This allows the introduction of
services by new rail freight operators and
companies operating on their own account.
Northern Ireland
In Northern Ireland the Northern Ireland
Railways Company Ltd, a subsidiary of the
Northern Ireland Transport Holding
Company, operates the railway service on
about 330 km (206 miles) of track. It
published a revised passenger charter in 1992.
This includes a compensation scheme that
operates if targets for punctuality and
reliability are not met.
Channel Tunnel
The Channel Tunnel, the largest civil
engineering project in Europe to be financed
by the private sector, was officially
inaugurated by Her Majesty the Queen and
President Mitterrand of France in May 1994.
Freight services began later the same month
and passenger services began in October
1994. The project, which is estimated to
have cost about £10,000 million, was
undertaken by Eurotunnel, a British-French
group which has a 65-year operating
concession from the British and French
governments. Construction was carried out
for Eurotunnel by Transmanche Link, a
consortium of ten British and French
construction companies.
Eurotunnel Services
Eurotunnel operates shuttle trains through
one-way twin rail tunnels between the
terminals near Folkestone and Calais, with
the journey taking about 35 minutes from
platform to platform. These trains provide a
drive-on, drive-off service, with separate
shuttle trains for passenger and freight
vehicles. Car and coach passengers stay with
their vehicles during the journey. Lorry
drivers travel separately from their vehicles,
in a club car at the front of the shuttle.
When full services are established,
Eurotunnel plans to run passenger shuttle
services every 15 minutes and freight shuttle
services every 20 minutes at peak periods. As
traffic grows, it should be possible for the
frequency of services to be increased.
Railway Services
About £1,400 million has been invested in
new passenger and freight rolling stock and
infrastructure improvements for Channel
Tunnel services. Once a full service is
operating, about 30 Eurostar high-speed
trains will run each day between the London
terminal at Waterloo and Paris or Brussels.
Daytime passenger services from the
Midlands, northern England and Scotland to
Paris and Brussels should begin operating
from the end of 1995. Overnight services
293
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
from London, south Wales, Scotland, the
Midlands, the North West and the South
West to the continent should also start from
1995. A part-privately funded international
station is also being built at Ashford in
Kent, scheduled for completion by the
end of 1995.
Freight services through the Channel
Tunnel are operating from a network of
regional terminals to major industrial centres
on the Continent. Four terminals—in .
London, Glasgow, Manchester and
Birmingham—started operations when the
Tunnel opened. Because of infrastructure
improvements and advanced wagon designs,
over 90 per cent of standard continental
swap-bodies will be able to travel over the
lines between the tunnel and the British
terminal network, even though the British
loading gauge is smaller than the continental
gauge. The terminal facilities allow the easy
transfer of freight between road and rail.
A new rail link between London and the
Channel Tunnel is proposed to meet the
forecast growth in demand for through rail
services. Most of the route for the rail link
was announced by the Government in
January 1994, with the remaining sections
being announced in April. The route
passes through Kent, crossing the River
Thames near Dartford. It then runs through
the east of London to a second London
terminal at St Pancras.
It is expected that a Bill will be
introduced for the construction of the rail
link. The £2,700 million project will be a
public—private sector joint venture, with the
Government hopeful of appointing a private
sector partner early in 1995.
Railways in London
London Underground Ltd (LUL) operates
services on 408 km (254 miles) of railway, of
which about 170 km (106 miles) are
underground. The system has 248 stations,
with 467 trains operating in the peak period.
About 735 million passenger journeys were
made on London Underground trains in
1993-94. LUL has a charter that sets out
standards of service to passengers and a
compensation scheme that applies when
delays of 15 minutes or more occur within
LUL’s control. The most recent version was
published in June 1994, setting more
demanding performance targets.
Major investment in the Underground is
under way or planned. Work started in
October 1993 on an extension of the Jubilee
Line to Stratford (east London) via
Docklands and the north Greenwich
peninsula. The extension is scheduled to
open in 1998. A proposed CrossRail
scheme would link Paddington with
Liverpool Street via a tunnel which would
be used by full-sized overground, rather
than smaller, Underground trains. A line
from Chelsea to Hackney is also being
considered. Total LUL investment in new
lines will be £527 million in 1994—95, of
which most will be spent on the Jubilee
Line but with some planning work on
CrossRail. LUL has also applied for an
Order to build a northern extension to the
East London Line to Dalston, where it
would link with BR’s North London Line.
Much work is also under way updating the
existing system, including a £750 million
modernisation of the Central Line,
scheduled for completion by early 1995, and
the refurbishment of over 200 trains at a
cost of £195 million.
The Docklands Light Railway (DLR), a
23-km (14-mile) route with 27 stations,
connects the City of London with
Docklands, Beckton and Stratford. An
extension is planned to Greenwich and
Lewisham, subject to private finance being
available. Approval is also being sought for
the Croydon Tramlink, which would
connect Croydon with Wimbledon,
Beckenham and New Addington.
Other Urban Railways
The Glasgow Underground traverses a
10-km (6-mile) loop in central Glasgow.
Other light rail lines include:
• the Tyne and Wear Metro, which
connects Newcastle upon Tyne city
centre with Newcastle Airport,
Gateshead, North and South Shields,
Heworth and Jarrow, with an extension
planned to Sunderland; and
294
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
• the 31-km (19-mile) Greater Manchester
Metrolink, which connects Manchester
city centre with Altrincham and Bury,
with extensions planned to Salford
Quays, Oldham, Rochdale, Manchester
Airport and Ashton-under-Lyne.
Traditional tramcars also operate between
Blackpool and Fleetwood.
The first phase of the South Yorkshire
Supertram, which connects Sheffield
city centre with Middlewood,
Hillsborough, Halfway and Meadowhall,
began commercial operations in
March 1994. The majority of the £240
million construction cost was met by
the Government. The system is the
responsibility of South Yorkshire
Supertram Ltd, a subsidiary of the
South Yorkshire Passenger Transport
Executive. Once the full system is
operational, it will be privatised.
Further light rail schemes are proposed.
Parliamentary approval has been given to the
first lines of the Midland Metro, which will
connect Birmingham with Wolverhampton,
the National Exhibition Centre and
Birmingham Airport, and for the Leeds
Supertram. Approval is being sought for the
Greater Nottingham Rapid Transit scheme.
Private Railways
There are over 100 small, privately owned
passenger-carrying railways in Great Britain,
mostly operated on a voluntary basis and
providing limited services for tourists and
railway enthusiasts. The main aim of most of
these railways is the preservation and
operation of steam locomotives. They are
generally run on old BR branch lines, but
there are also several narrow-gauge lines,
mainly in north Wales.
INLAND WATERWAYS
Inland waterways are popular for recreation,
make a valuable contribution to the quality of
Britain’s environment, play an important part
in land drainage and water supply, and are
used to a limited extent for freight-carrying.
The most significant amounts of freight are
carried on the rivers Thames, Forth, Humber
and Mersey and the Manchester Ship Canal.
The publicly owned British Waterways is
responsible for 3,200 km (2,000 miles) of
waterways in Great Britain. The majority of
waterways are primarily for leisure use, but
about 620 km (385 miles) are maintained as
commercial waterways. British Waterways is
developing its historical heritage for
recreational and commercial use, often in
conjunction with the private sector. In
1993-94 British Waterways’ turnover
amounted to £82 million, including a
government grant of £49.3 million to
maintain its waterways to statutory standards.
SHIPPING AND PORTS
In March 1994 British companies owned 668
trading vessels of 13.6 million deadweight
tonnes. Among the ships owned by British
companies were 168 vessels totalling 8.6
million deadweight tonnes used as oil,
chemical or gas carriers and 471 vessels
totalling 4.9 million deadweight tonnes
employed as dry-bulk carriers, container ships
or other types of cargo ship. About 72 per
cent of British-owned vessels are registered
in Britain or British dependent territories
such as Bermuda.
The tonnage of the British-registered
trading fleet has been declining. In
recognition of this, measures to encourage
British shipowners to register their vessels in
Britain have recently been introduced. These
include the simplification of registration law,
a proposed relaxation of officer nationality
rules, and the extension of the existing
financial assistance for officer cadets to
include junior officers studying for higher
certificates. Fiscal changes announced in 1993
enabled shipowners to carry forward tax
charges resulting from ship sales to set
against further investment within
a three-year period.
Cargo Services
About 94 per cent by weight (76 per cent by
value) of Britain’s overseas trade is carried by
295
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
sea. In 1992 British seaborne trade amounted
to 311 million tonnes (valued at £178,000
million) or 1,240,000 million tonne-km
(770,000 million tonne-miles). British-
registered ships carried 19 per cent by weight
and 36 per cent by value. Tanker cargo
accounted for 44 per cent of this trade by
weight, but only 7 per cent by value; dry
cargoes including foodstuffs and
manufactured goods accounted for 84 per
cent by value.
Virtually all the scheduled cargo-liner
services from Britain are containerised. The
British tonnage serving these trades is
dominated by a relatively small number of
private sector companies and, in deep-sea
trades, they usually operate in conjunction
with other companies on the same routes in
organisations known as ‘conferences’. The
object of these groupings is to ensure regular
and efficient services with stable freight rates,
to the benefit of both shipper and shipowner.
In addition to the carriage of freight by liner
and bulk services between Britain and the
rest of Europe, there are many roll-on, roll¬
off services to carry cars, passengers and
commercial vehicles.
Passenger Services
In 1993 there were 35 million international
sea passenger movements between Britain and
the rest of the world, compared with about
87 million international air movements.
Almost all the passengers who arrived at or
departed from British ports travelled to or
from the continent of Europe or the Irish
Republic. In 1993 about 96,000 people
embarked on pleasure cruises from British
ports. Traffic from the southern and south¬
eastern ports accounts for a substantial
proportion of traffic to the continent of
Europe. The main British operators are
Sealink Stena Line, P & O and Hoverspeed,
although not all their vessels are under the
British flag. Services are provided by roll-on,
roll-off ferries, hovercraft, hydrofoils and
high-speed catamarans. There has been a
trend towards larger vessels in recent years as
the ferry companies prepare for competition
from the Channel Tunnel.
Domestic passenger and freight ferry
services also run to many of the offshore
islands, such as the Isle of Wight, the Orkney
and Shetland islands, and the islands off the
west coast of Scotland. It is estimated that in
1992 there were about 36 million passengers
on such internal services.
Merchant Shipping Legislation and
Policy
The Government’s policy is one of minimum
intervention and the encouragement of free
and fair competition. However, regulations
administered by the Department of Transport
provide for marine safety and welfare, the
investigation of accidents and the prevention
and cleaning up of pollution from ships.
Britain also plays a significant role in the
formulation of shipping policy within the
EU. All international services and most
cabotage services within the EU have been
liberalised. Full cabotage liberalisation will be
achieved over the next ten years. Work is
progressing well to introduce the measures in
the programme to improve maritime safety
and prevent pollution.
Ports
There are about 80 ports of commercial
significance in Great Britain, and in addition
there are several hundred small harbours that
cater for local cargo, fishing vessels, island
ferries or recreation. There are three broad
types of ports—trust ports owned and run by
a board constituted as a trust, those owned
by local authorities and company-owned
ports. Most operate with statutory powers
under private Acts of Parliament. Major ports
controlled by trusts include Aberdeen, Dover,
Ipswich, Milford Haven and Tyne. Local
authorities own many small ports and a few
much larger ports, including Portsmouth and
the oil ports in Orkney and Shetland. The
Ports Act 1991 facilitates the transfer of trust
ports fully to the private sector; Clyde,
Forth, Medway, Tees and Hartlepool and the
Port of London Authority dock undertaking
at Tilbury have already moved to the
private sector.
Associated British Ports Holdings PLC (a
private sector company) operates 22 ports,
296
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
including Cardiff, Grimsby and Immingham,
Hull, Newport, Southampton and Swansea.
Together its ports handled 106 million
tonnes of cargo in 1993. Other major ports
owned by companies include Felixstowe,
Liverpool, Manchester and a group of ferry
ports, including Harwich (Parkeston Quay)
and Stranraer.
Port Traffic
In 1993 traffic through the ports of Britain
amounted provisionally to 507 million tonnes,
comprising 157 million tonnes of exports, 192
million tonnes of imports and 158 million
tonnes of domestic traffic (which included
offshore traffic and landings of sea-dredged
aggregates). About 54 per cent of the
traffic was in fuels, mainly petroleum and
petroleum products.
Britain’s main ports, in terms of total
tonnage handled, are given in Table 19.3.
Sullom Voe (Shetland), Milford Haven and
Forth mostly handle oil, while the main ports
for non-fuel traffic are Dover, Felixstowe,
Grimsby and Immingham, Liverpool,
London, and Tees and Hartlepool.
Container and roll-on, roll-off traffic in
Britain has increased sixfold since 1970 to 99
million tonnes in 1993 and now accounts for
over 77 per cent of non-bulk traffic. The
leading ports for container traffic are
Felixstowe, London and Southampton.
Those for roll-on, roll-off traffic are Dover
(Britain’s leading seaport in terms of the
value of trade handled), Felixstowe,
Portsmouth and Ramsgate.
Development
Most recent major port developments have
been at east- and south-coast ports. For
example, at Felixstowe a £50 million
extension to the terminal was completed in
1990; a new £100 million terminal on the
River Medway caters for deep-sea container
traffic; and Dover has started on a £100
million programme to develop its western
docks to meet the challenge of the opening of
the Channel Tunnel. A new cool store has
been opened at Tees and Hartlepool, and
there are plans for a new grain terminal. A
16-hectare (40-acre) car terminal has been
built at Tyne. Recent investment by
Associated British Ports includes:
• an £18 million third berth at the
Immingham oil terminal, opened in
August 1994;
• a £13 million roll-on, roll-off terminal at
Immingham due to be completed in
April 1995;
• an £11 million roll-on, roll-off facility
at Hull;
Table 19.3: Traffic Through the Principal Ports of Great Britain
million tonnes
1978
1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993a
London 53.0 53.7 54.0 54.5 52.8 48.9 53.0
Tees and Hartlepool 34.1 37.4 39.3 40.2 42.9 43.4 43.0
Grimsby and Immingham 25.9 35.0 38.1 38.9 40.2 40.8 41.0
Sullom Voe 1.1 50.6 40.7 30.6 35.9 41.4 39.0
Milford Haven 41.2 33.3 33.0 32.2 35.7 35.6 36.0
Southampton 24.0 31.4 26.1 28.8 31.5 29.6 31.0
Liverpool 16.5 19.6 20.2 23.2 24.8 27.8 29.0
Forth 28.8 29.0 22.9 25.4 22.9 23.3 26.0
Felixstowe 4.8 15.6 16.5 16.4 16.1 17.0 20.0
Dover 5.5 10.4 13.5 13.0 12.0 13.1 14.0
Medway 20.5 12.7 13.6 15.9 16.1 14.3 14.0
Orkneys 15.6 8.0 4.5 8.6 9.2 8.5 12.0
Port Talbot 5.1 7.8 8.7 8.9 9.4 9.4 10.0
Source: Department of Transport
‘"Provisional.
297
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
• a £2.6 million terminal at Goole,
inaugurated in March 1994; and
• two new cold-storage chambers at
Cardiff, costing £1 million.
Purpose-built terminals for oil from the
British sector of the North Sea have been
built at Hound Point on the Forth, on the
Tees, at Flotta and at Sullom Voe (one of the
largest oil terminals in the world). Supply
bases for offshore oil and gas installations
have been built at several ports, notably
Aberdeen, Great Yarmouth and Heysham.
Safety at Sea
The Department of Transport launched two
new executive agencies concerned with
marine safety in April 1994—the Coastguard
Agency and the Marine Safety Agency. The
former has taken over responsibility for HM
Coastguard and the Marine Pollution Control
Unit (see p. 360). The latter has taken over
the former Surveyor General’s Organisation
and the Register of Shipping and Seamen.
HM Coastguard is responsible for co¬
ordinating civil maritime search and rescue
operations around the coastline of Britain. In
a maritime emergency the coastguard calls on
and co-ordinates facilities such as:
• coastguard helicopters and cliff rescue
companies;
• lifeboats of the Royal National Lifeboat
Institution (a voluntary body);
• Ministry of Defence aeroplanes,
helicopters and ships; and
• merchant shipping and commercial
aircraft.
Some locations around Britain are
hazardous for shipping. A number of
measures are taken to reduce the risk of
collision, including the separation of ships in
internationally agreed shipping lanes. The
traffic separation scheme in the Dover Strait,
one of the busiest seaways in the world, is
one such scheme. It is monitored by radar
from the Channel Navigation Information
Service near Dover. Ships are encouraged to
report their movements and these are
tracked. Those found to be contravening the
regulations are identified and action taken.
Following the loss of the tanker MV Braer
off Sumburgh in the Shetland Islands in
January 1993, the British Chamber of
Shipping produced a voluntary code for the
routeing and operation of tankers around
Britain’s coast. An inquiry reported in May
1994 with a number of recommendations,
which the Government is considering.
Many of these can only be achieved
effectively by international action, and so the
report has also been presented to the
International Maritime Organization, the
United Nations agency concerned with
maritime matters.
In 1993 HM Coastguard co-ordinated
action in 9,611 incidents (including
cliff rescues), in which 17,106 people
were helped.
The lighthouse authorities, which between
them control about 370 lighthouses and other
lights and buoys, are:
• the Corporation of Trinity House, which
covers England, Wales and the Channel
Islands;
• the Northern Lighthouse Board, for
Scotland and the Isle of Man; and
• the Commissioners of Irish Lights for
Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic.
They are funded mainly by light dues
levied on shipping in Britain and Ireland.
The Ports Act 1991 provided for the transfer
of certain lights and buoys to harbour
authorities where these are used mainly for
local rather than general navigation.
Responsibility for pilotage within harbours
rests with harbour authorities under the
Pilotage Act 1987.
CIVIL AVIATION
Airlines are seeking opportunities for
modernisation, and this is complemented by
the work of the aviation authorities in
negotiating new international rights and
improving facilities such as air traffic
control. British airlines are entirely in the
private sector, as are a number of the
major airports.
298
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
Air Traffic
Total capacity offered on all services by
British airlines amounted to 25,100 million
tonne-km in 1993: 18,600 million tonne-km
on scheduled services and 6,500 million
tonne-km on non-scheduled services. The
airlines carried 40.1 million passengers on
scheduled services and 25.6 million on
charter flights; 87 million passengers
travelled by air (international terminal
passengers) to or from Britain, a 6 per cent
increase on 1992.
The value of Britain’s overseas trade
carried by air in 1992 was about £44,120
million—20 per cent of exports by value
and 18 per cent of imports. Air freight is
important for the carriage of goods with a
high value-to-weight ratio, especially where
speed is essential.
British Airways
British Airways pic is one of the world’s
leading airlines. In terms of international
scheduled services it is the largest in the
world. During 1993-94 British Airways’
turnover was £6,303 million (including
£5,785 million from airline operations),
and the British Airways group carried
30.5 million passengers on scheduled
and charter flights both domestically
and internationally.
The British Airways scheduled route
network serves 155 destinations in 72
countries. Its main operating base is
London’s Heathrow airport, but services
from Gatwick and regional centres such as
Manchester and Birmingham have been
expanding. Scheduled Concorde supersonic
services operate from London Heathrow to
New York, Washington and, in the
summer, Toronto, crossing the Atlantic in
about half the time taken by subsonic
aircraft. In March 1994 British Airways had
a fleet of 253 aircraft, the largest fleet in
Western Europe, including seven
Concordes and 59 Boeing 747s.
Other Airlines
Other major British airlines include:
• Air UK, which has 34 aircraft and is the
only British airline to operate from all
three main airports in the London area
(Heathrow, Gatwick and Stansted);
• Britannia Airways, the world’s largest
charter airline, which carried 7.6 million
passengers in 1993 and has 28 aircraft;
• British Midland, which operates a large
network of scheduled services, and has 34
aircraft; and
• Virgin Atlantic, which operates scheduled
services between Britain, seven North
American destinations, Athens, Dublin,
Hong Kong and Tokyo, with 12 aircraft.
Helicopters and Other Aerial Work
Helicopters are engaged on a variety of work,
especially operations connected with Britain’s
offshore oil and gas industry. The main
offshore operators in Britain are Bond
Helicopters, British International Helicopters
and Bristow Helicopters, with 43, 25 and 55
helicopters respectively. Light aircraft and
helicopters are also involved in other
important commercial activities, such as
charters, search and rescue services, load-
lifting, aerial surveying and photography, and
police and air ambulance operations.
Aviation Policy
The Government’s civil aviation policy aims to
maintain high standards of safety and security
and to achieve environmental improvements
through reduced noise and other emissions
from aircraft. It is concerned to promote the
interests of travellers by encouraging a
competitive British industry, and is committed
to encouraging more international services to
and from regional airports. The Government
has taken the lead in the EU and with bilateral
partners in negotiating freer arrangements
within which airline competition can flourish;
agreement was reached within the EU in 1992
on a further package of liberalisation measures,
including increased freedom for airlines to set
their own fares. New arrangements with an
increasing number of countries are resulting
in better provision of services at more
competitive fares.
299
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Civil Aviation Authority
The Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) is an
independent statutory body, responsible for
the economic and safety regulation of the
industry and, jointly with the Ministry of
Defence, for the provision of air navigation
services. Its board members are appointed by
the Secretary of State for Transport. The
CAA’s primary objectives are to ensure that
British airlines provide air services to satisfy
all substantial categories of public demand at
the lowest charges consistent with a high
standard of safety and to further the
reasonable interests of air transport users.
Air Safety
British airlines have a good safety record. In
all but three of the 11 years to 1992, there
were no passenger fatalities in accidents
involving fixed-wing commercially registered
British aircraft in British airspace. In only
one year in this period were there any
fatalities associated with British-registered
aircraft in foreign airspace.
Every company operating aircraft used for
commercial air transport purposes must
possess an Air Operator’s Certificate, which
the CAA grants when it is satisfied that the
operator is competent to conduct the safe
operation of its aircraft. The CAA’s flight
operations inspectors, who are experienced
civilian pilots, together with airworthiness
surveyors, check that satisfactory standards
are maintained. All aircraft registered in
Britain must be granted a Certificate of
Airworthiness by the CAA before being flown.
In this and many other aspects of its work,
the CAA is increasingly working to standards
developed with its European partners in the
Joint Airworthiness Authorities.
Each member of the flight crew of a British-
registered aircraft, every ground engineer who
certifies an aircraft fit to fly, and every air
traffic controller must hold the appropriate
official licence issued by the CAA. To qualify
for a first professional licence, a pilot must
undertake a full-time course of instruction
approved by the CAA—or have acceptable
military or civilian flying experience—and
pass ground examinations and flight tests.
Air Traffic Control and Navigation Services
Civil and military air traffic control over
Britain and the surrounding seas, including a
large part of the North Atlantic, is carried
out by the National Air Traffic Services
(NATS), jointly responsible to the CAA and
the Ministry of Defence. NATS also provides
air traffic control at most of the major British
airports. In May 1994 the Government
announced proposals for NATS to become a
private sector contractor to the CAA, which
would ensure continued high safety standards
through regulation. Such a change would
require legislation.
Britain plays a major role in European air
traffic control developments through
participation in a number of international
forums. Britain has put forward several
European initiatives, including the centralised
management of traffic flows throughout
Europe, which is being progressively
implemented over the period 1991-95. W ithin
Britain, NATS has an investment programme
running at around £90 million a year, which
includes the construction of a new air traffic
control centre for England and Whales, due to
be completed in 1996. The Government has
also approved a new centre for Scotland.
Airports
Of the 148 licensed civil aerodromes in
Britain, about one-fifth handle more than
100,000 passengers a year each. Of these, 13
handle over 1 million passengers a year each
(see Table 19.4). In 1993 Britain’s civil
airports handled a total of 113.9 million
passengers (112.3 million terminal
passengers and 1.6 million in transit), and
1.4 million tonnes of freight. Heathrow
airport is the world’s busiest airport for
international travel and is Britain’s most
important airport for passengers and air
freight, handling 48 million passengers
(including transit passengers) and 846,600
tonnes of freight in 1993. Proposals have
been put forward for a fifth terminal, which
will be the subject of a public inquiry and
could eventually handle 30 million passengers
a year. Gatwick is also one of the world’s
busiest international airports.
300
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
Ownership and Control
Seven airports—Heathrow, Gatwick, Stansted
and Southampton in south-east England, and
Glasgow, Edinburgh and Aberdeen in
Scotland—are owned and operated by BAA
pic. Together they handle about 71 per cent
of air passengers and 82 per cent of air cargo
traffic in Britain.
Many of the other airports are controlled
by local authorities, including Manchester,
which is the third largest airport in Britain. A
total of 14 major local authority airports now
operate as Companies Act companies. The
Government is encouraging their
privatisation. For example, East Midlands
International Airport was sold by its local
authority shareholders in August 1993. Belfast
International Airport was scheduled to be
sold in the second half of 1994.
The CAA has responsibility for the
economic regulation of the larger airports,
although the Government announced a review
of the mechanics of the system in January
1994. The CAA has powers to take action to
remedy practices considered to be
unreasonable or unfair, in particular any
abuse of an airport’s monopoly position, and
also to limit increases in charges to airlines at
certain airports. All airports used for public
transport and training flights must also be
licensed by the CAA for reasons of safety.
Stringent requirements, such as the provision
of adequate fire-fighting, medical and rescue
services, must be satisfied before a licence is
granted. Strict security measures are in force;
these were tightened in April 1994 by new
regulations requiring airlines to account for
and authorise for carriage every item of hold
baggage placed on board international flights
originating in Britain. This will not only
improve security but should also cut down on
misrouted baggage.
Communications
The telecommunications industry is one of
the most rapidly growing sectors of the
British economy. Postal services also continue
to be important, with the volume of mail in
Britain growing rather than declining despite
the growth in electronic means of
communication in recent years, partly as a
result of the growth in direct mail marketing.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Major changes have occurred since 1981,
with the progressive introduction of
competition into the markets for
telecommunications equipment and services.
In 1984 British Telecommunications (BT)
was privatised, and it faces increasing
competition in the provision of services over
fixed links. A principal feature of the
Table 19.4: Passenger Traffic at Britain’s Main Airports
1989
1990
1991
million passengers
1992 1993
London Heathrow
London Gatwick
Manchester
Glasgow
Birmingham
Edinburgh
London Stansted
Aberdeen
Belfast International
Newcastle
Luton
East Midlands
Bristol
39.6
21.1
10.1
3.9
3.3
2.4
1.3
1.7
2.2
1.5
2.8
1.5
0.8
42.6
21.0
10.1
4.3
3.5
2.5
1.2
1.9
2.3
1.6
2.7
1.3
0.8
40.2
18.7
10.1
4.2
3.2
2.3
1.7
2.0
2.2
1.5
2.0
1.1
0.8
45.2
20.0
12.0
4.8
3.8
2.7
2.4
2.2
2.3
2.0
2.0
1.3
1.0
47.9
20.2
13.1
5.2
4.2
2.9
2.7
2.3
2.2
2.1
1.9
1.4
1.1
Source: Civil Aviation Authority.
301
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
regulatory regime is an independent industry
regulator, the Director General of
Telecommunications.
Duopoly Review
In 1991 a major review of government
telecommunications policy resulted in the
publication of a White Paper, Competition and
Choice: Telecommunications Policy for the
1990s. This stated that the Government
would end the ‘duopoly policy’, under which
only two companies, BT and Mercury
Communications, were permitted to run
fixed-link telecommunications systems. Other
important points of the review were:
• greater freedom for existing mobile
telecommunications operators and the
ability of cable television operators to
provide telephone services in their own
right;
• more effective and streamlined
procedures for the interconnection of
systems;
• guidelines for the introduction of ‘equal
access’, by which customers can exercise
choice over the trunk operator that
carries their calls; and
• the establishment of a new regime for
national numbering, and the modification
of operators’ licences to allow for the
introduction of number portability.
Office of Telecommunications
The Office of Telecommunications
(OFTEL), a non-ministerial government
department, is the independent regulatory
body for the telecommunications industry. It
is headed by the Director General of
Telecommunications, among whose functions
are to:
• ensure that licensees comply with the
conditions of their licences;
• initiate the modification of licence
conditions by agreement or a reference to
the Monopolies and Mergers
Commission;
• promote effective competition in the
telecommunications industry;
• provide advice to the President of the
Board of Trade on telecommunications
matters; and
• investigate complaints.
The Director General also has a duty to
promote the interests of consumers in respect
of prices, quality and variety in
telecommunications services. Areas where
customers have benefited include price cuts
in BT’s charges resulting from the price
regulation formula, amounting to reductions
of £500 million during the year ended July
1994. Written complaints and enquiries to
OFTEL declined considerably in 1993. The
number of written representations over
disputed bills had decreased by more
than half.
OFTEL has taken over responsibility for
administering the national telephone
numbering scheme. A major change will take
place in April 1995 when an extra digit, 1,
will be introduced after the initial 0 to all
area dialling codes in Britain. Thus, for
example, the 071 code for inner London will
become 0171 and the 0232 code for Belfast
will become 01232. OFTEL will also oversee
the introduction of a limited ‘number
portability’ scheme, enabling someone who
wishes to change service provider at the
same address to retain their existing
number, rather than having to change it,
as at present.
BT
BT runs one of the world’s largest public
telecommunications networks, including:
• 20.1 million residential lines;
• 6 million business lines;
• about 58,000 telex connections;
• more than 104,000 public payphones; and
• a wide range of specialised voice, data,
text and visual services.
The inland telephone and telex networks
are fully automatic. International direct
dialling is available from Britain to 200
countries, representing 99 per cent of the
world’s telephones. Following the sale of its
shares in three tranches between 1984 and
1993, the Government has only a residual
302
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
stake in BT to enable it to meet outstanding
commitments under the bonus scheme which
accompanied the privatisation.
Network Modernisation
BT has invested more than £ 17,000 million
in the modernisation and expansion of its
network to meet the increasing demand for
basic telephone services and for more
specialised services. The company has more
than 2 million km (1.2 million miles) of
optical fibre laid in its network in Britain, a
higher proportion than any other world
operator. There are more than 3,650 digital
and modern electronic exchanges serving
about 80 per cent of telephone lines. The
combination of digital exchange switching and
digital transmission techniques, using optical
fibre cable and microwave radio links, is
substantially improving the quality of
telephone services. It also makes possible a
wider range of services through the
company’s main network.
General Services
BT’s services include:
• a free facility for emergency calls to the
police, fire, ambulance, coastguard,
lifeboat and air-sea rescue services;
• directory enquiries;
• various chargeable operator-connected
services, such as reversed-charge calls and
alarm calls;
• an operator-handled Freefone service and
automatic ‘LinkLine’ facilities that enable
callers to contact organisations anywhere in
Britain, either free or at local-call rates;
• Callstream, a premium-rate service which
allows callers to obtain information from
independent providers; and
• network services such as three-way
calling, call waiting and call diversion,
which are available to customers on
digital exchanges.
Under a public payphone service
modernisation programme, £165 million has
been spent on modernisation and additional
provision on sites convenient for travellers,
such as railway stations and motorway service
areas. A number of cashless call services are
available, including the Phonecard service
using prepaid cards and phones that accept
credit cards. Phonecard payphones account
for more than 19,000 of the total of 113,000
payphones. There are about 280,000 private
rented payphones on premises to which the
public has access and these are also being
upgraded with push-button equipment.
Close co-operation between BT and
the police has led to successes in the
struggle against payphone attacks,
usually by organised gangs. Between
April and September 1993, attacks on
payphones were down by 49 per cent
on the same period in 1992, while
the number of arrests was up by
58 per cent.
BT Electronic Information Services (an
electronic mail and information service) forms
part of the company’s portfolio of global
network services. Through links with other
databases, a wide range of other services,
such as company accounting and market
research information, banking services,
holiday booking and reservation facilities,
insurance and financial markets information,
and BT’s telephone directories, are available.
International Services
BT is the second largest shareholder in the
International Telecommunications Satellite
Organisation (INTELSAT), of which 125
countries are members, and in the European
Telecommunications Satellite Organisation
(EUTELSAT). It is also a leading
shareholder in the International Maritime
Satellite Organisation (INMARSAT), with
interests in a number of other consortia.
BT operates satellite earth stations in the
London Docklands and at Goonhilly Downs
(Cornwall), Madley (near Hereford) and
Aberdeen. Its range of digital transmission
services includes a number available overseas,
including ‘Satstream’ private-circuit digital
links covering North America and Western
Europe using small-dish aerials, and an
303
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
‘International Kilostream’ private-circuit
service available to the United States,
Australia and most major business centres in
Asia and the rest of Europe. Extensive
direct-dial maritime satellite services are
available for vessels worldwide. In-flight
operator-controlled telephone call facilities
are available via Portishead radio station
near Bristol. Digital transmission
techniques have been introduced for
services to the United States, Japan, Hong
Kong and Australia via the Madley and
Goonhilly stations.
Recent advances in submarine cable
design, with the use of optical fibre
technology, have significantly increased
capacity. A high-capacity transatlantic optical
fibre cable (TAT 9), which cost about £250
million and can carry about 75,000 telephone
calls simultaneously, came into operation in
1992 to supplement an earlier link.
Mercury Communications
Mercury Communications Ltd, which is part
of the Cable and Wireless group and is
20 per cent owned by Bell Canada
Enterprises, has constructed its own long¬
distance all-digital network comprising 6,600
km (4,100 miles) of optical fibre cables and
700 km (440 miles) of digital microwave links.
The network runs from the north of
Scotland to the south coast, linking over 100
cities and towns across Britain. Mercury now
offers a service to over 90 per cent of the
population, including both business and
residential customers.
Major customers can have a direct digital
link between their premises and the Mercury
network. A number of routeing devices have
also been developed to enable customers to
use Mercury indirectly via their existing
exchange lines. Businesses are also able to
take advantage of savings plans and
automatic discounts. There are Mercury-
compatible phones which connect the caller to
the network at the push of a button. In
addition, many customers are now able to
use the Mercury network by dialling an
access code. Mercurycard phones can be
found in city centres, airports and railway
stations nationwide.
International services are provided by
satellite communications centres in London’s
Docklands, in Oxfordshire and at Brechin in
Scotland, as well as by submarine cable links
to Europe and the United States.
Other Operators
Other operators include Kingston
Communications, which is the long-
established network operator for the
Kingston upon Hull area of Britain. The
duopoly review (see p. 302) allowed other
would-be operators to apply for licences to
provide telecommunications services over
fixed links. By June 1994, the Government
had received 87 applications, and 45 licences
had been granted. The licensees include:
• COLT, which is focusing on business
customers in the Greater London area;
• Energis, one of the first electricity
companies to expand its interests into
telecommunications, using its
infrastructure as a platform for installing
new optical fibre networks;
• lonica, which is installing a new national
network using radio to provide the final
connection to customers;
• Sprint, the third-largest long-distance
telephone company in the United States,
which is seeking to expand its domestic
and international services in Britain;
and
• Vodafone, the well-established mobile
operator, which was granted a licence for
fixed services in December 1993.
It was announced in February 1994 that
British satellite operators would be able to
buy capacity on INTELSAT direct without
having to go through BT.
Mobile Communications
The Government has encouraged the
expansion of mobile telecommunications
services. It has licensed Vodafone Ltd and
Telecom Securicor Cellular Radio Ltd to
run competing national cellular radio systems.
Considerable investment has been made in
establishing their networks to provide
304
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
increased capacity for the growing numbers
of cellular radio telephone users (over
2.2 million by May 1994). The two
companies will also run the new pan-
European mobile system, known as GSM,
in Britain.
Britain was the first country to offer
personal communications network (PCN)
services, which are intended to allow the
same telephone to be used at home, at work
and as a portable wherever there is network
capacity. PCNs operate in the frequency
range around 1.8 gigahertz. The Mercury
One-2-One service started in September
1993, and Hutchison MicrotePs Orange
service was launched in April 1994.
National Band Three Ltd is licensed to
offer a nationwide trunked radio service,
while 26 licences have now been awarded for
London and regional services. Four licences
to operate mobile data networks have also
been granted, and another five to run
nationwide paging networks.
Cable Television Franchises
The Government concluded in the duopoly
review that cable operators should be able to
offer voice telephony in their own right,
which they could previously provide only in
conjunction with BT or Mercury. All 65 local
franchises in operation by the beginning of
1994 provided television programmes, but 43
also offered voice telephony services. By then,
the cable operators had installed 314,000
telephone lines in Britain, compared with
2,200 lines in January 1991.
Cable & Wireless
Cable and Wireless pic provides a wide range
of telecommunications in over 50 countries
worldwide. Its main business is the provision
and operation, through the companies of the
Cable & Wireless federation, of public
telecommunications services in over 30
countries and territories, including Hong
Kong, the United States and Japan, under
franchises and licences granted by the
governments concerned. It also provides and
manages telecommunications services and
facilities for public and private sector
customers, and undertakes consultancy
work worldwide. It operates a fleet of ten
ships and three submersible vehicle systems
for laying and maintaining submarine
telecommunications cables. Its strategy is to
build on its regional hubs in Asia, Western
Europe and the Caribbean. It links these
hubs through its worldwide network of cable
and satellite communications.
POSTAL SERVICES
The Post Office, founded in 1635, pioneered
postal services and was the first to issue
adhesive postage stamps as proof of advance
payment for mail
The Royal Mail provides deliveries to
24.5 million addresses and handles over 64
million letters and parcels each working day,
which comes to over 15,900 million items a
year. About 750,000 parcels a day are""
handled. Mail is collected from over 100,000
posting boxes, as well as from post offices
and large postal users.
Mail sorting is increasingly done through
mechanised letter offices; about 80 are now in
operation. The British postcode system is one
of the most sophisticated in the world,
allowing mechanised sorting down to part of
a street on a postman’s round and, in some
cases, to an individual address.
Britain has good international postal
services, with prices among the cheapest.
Royal Mail International dispatches 691
million items a year, including 600 million
by air. It has its own mail handling centre
at Heathrow, which handles about four-fifths
of outward airmail. It uses 1,400 flights a
week to send mail direct to over 300
destinations worldwide.
Post Office Counters Ltd handles a
wide range of transactions; it acts as an
agent for the letters and parcels
businesses, government departments, local
authorities and Alliance & Leicester Giro—
formerly Girobank, which was transferred
to the private sector in 1990. There are
just under 20,000 post offices, of which 800
are operated directly by the Post Office.
The remainder are franchise offices or are
operated on an agency basis by
sub-postmasters.
305
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Post Office Specialist Services
The Post Office offers a range of specialist
services. Parcelforce ‘Datapost, a door-to-
door delivery service, provides overnight
delivery throughout Britain and an
international service to over 160 countries.
‘Datapost Sameday’ provides a rapid delivery
within or between more than 100 cities and
towns in Britain. The Philatelic Bureau in
Edinburgh is an important outlet for the Post
Office’s philatelic business, including sales to
overseas collectors or dealers. The British
Postal Consultancy Service offers advice and
assistance on all aspects of postal business to
overseas postal administrations, and over 50
countries have used its services since 1965.
Competition in Postal Services
The Post Office has a monopoly on the
conveyance of letters within Britain, but the
President of the Board of Trade has the power
to suspend the monopoly in certain areas or for
certain categories of mail and to license others
to provide competing services. He has
suspended the monopoly on letters subject to a
minimum fee of £1, and has issued general
licences enabling mail to be transferred between
document exchanges and allowing charitable
organisations to carry Christmas cards.
The Government has been considering
options for the future of the Post Office. In
June 1994 the Government published a
Green Paper, The Future of Postal Services,
on the future of the Post Office. This set out
options for the future of the Royal Mail, with
the aim of increasing its ability to respond to
new commercial challenges. One option was
the sale of a majority stake to the public,
employees and sub-postmasters; another was
retention in the public sector with greater
commercial freedom so far as was consistent
with public sector status. In November 1994
it was announced that privatisation of the
Royal Mail would not be pursued, although
the Government is still seeking ways to
improve its competitiveness.
Private Courier and Express Service
Operators
Private-sector couriers and express
operators are allowed to handle time-sensiti\ e
door-to-door deliveries, subject to a
minimum fee of £1. The courier/express
service industry has grown rapidly and the
revenue created by the carriage of these
items is estimated at over £3,000 million a
year. Britain is one of the main providers of
monitored express deliveries in Europe,
with London an important centre for air
courier/express traffic.
Further Reading
Competition and Choice: Telecommunications Pol,cy for the 1990s. Cm 1461. HMSO, 1991
The Future of Postal Services. Cm 2614. HMSO, 1994.
New Opportunities for the Railways. Cm 2012. HMSO, 1992.
Telecommunications. Aspects of Britain series, HMSO, 1994.
Transport and Communications. Aspects of Britain series, HM ,
Transport Statistics Great Britain, annual report. HMSO.
306
20
Science and Technology
Government Role 309 Research in Higher
Research Councils 311 Education Institutions 319
Government Departments 315 Other Organisations 320
International Collaboration 323
Britain has a long tradition of research and innovation in science,
technology and engineering in universities, research institutes and industry.
Its record of achievement is in many ways unsurpassed, from the
contributions of Isaac Newton to physics and astronomy in the 17th century
(theory of gravitation and three laws of motion) to advances in the 20th
century such as the discovery of the structure of DNA and the development
of the technique of in vitro fertilisation which led to the birth of the world’s
first ‘test-tube baby’ in 1978.
British achievements in science and
technology in the 20th century include
fundamental contributions to modern
molecular genetics through the discovery
of the three-dimensional molecular
structure of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) by
Francis Crick, Maurice Wilkins, James
Watson and Rosalind Franklin in 1953 and of
cholesterol, vitamin D, penicillin and insulin
by Dorothy Hodgkin.
Notable contributions in other areas over
the past 20 years have been made by Stephen
Hawking in improving the understanding of
the nature and origin of the universe; Brian
Josephson in superconductivity (abnormally
high electrical conductivity at low
temperatures); Martin Ryle and Anthony
Hewish in radio astrophysics; and Godfrey
Hounsfield in computer assisted tomography
(a form of radiography) for medical diagnosis.
Much pioneering work was done during
the 1980s. For example, in 1985 British
Antarctic Survey scientists discovered the
hole in the ozone layer over the Antarctic.
Also in 1985 Alec Jeffreys invented DNA
fingerprinting, a forensic technique which can
identify an individual from a small tissue
sample. More recently there have been
several British breakthroughs in genetics
research, including the identification of the
gene in the Y chromosome responsible for
determining sex, and the identification of
other genes linked to diseases, including
cystic fibrosis and a type of inherited heart
disease. Gene therapy has begun on the
treatment of cystic fibrosis. The world’s first
pig with a genetically modified heart has been
bred by scientists at Cambridge University,
an important milestone in breeding animals as
organ donors for people.
Nobel Prizes for Science have been won
by over 70 British citizens, more than any
other country except the United States. The
two most recent (1993) prizewinners were
Richard Roberts (medicine) and Michael
Smith (chemistry).
307
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Research and Development Expenditure
Total expenditure in Britain on scientific
research and development (R & D) in 1992
was £12,619 million, 2.1 per cent of gross
domestic product. About 50 per cent was
provided by industry and 35 per cent by
government. Significant contributions were
also made by private endowments, trusts
and charities. Industry also funds university
research and finances contract research at
government establishments. Some charities
have their own laboratories and offer grants
for outside research. Contract research
organisations carry out similar R & D for
companies and are playing an increasingly
important role in the transfer of technology to
British industry.
Total spending on R & D in industry
amounted to £7,930 million in 1992. Of
this total, British industry’s own
contribution was 71 per cent, with 14 per
cent from government and the rest from
overseas. The main areas of expenditure
were electronics (29 per cent of the total);
chemicals, including pharmaceuticals (26.5
per cent); and aerospace (12 per cent). Of
the ten companies with the largest
expenditure on R & D (see Table 20.1),
four—Glaxo, SmithKline Beecham, Zeneca
(formerly part of ICI) and Wellcome are
in pharmaceuticals.
Table 20.1: Company Expenditure on
R & D
R & D annual R & D
expenditure as %
 (£ million) of sales
Glaxo 739 15.0
SmithKline Beecham 575 9.3
Shell Transport and
Trading 529 0.6
Unilever 518 1-9
Zeneca 490 11.0
GEC 398 7.1
Wellcome 326 16.0
Rolls-Royce 253 7.2
British Petroleum 237 0.7
BT 233 E8^
Source: DTI R & D Scoreboard
Note: R & D expenditure includes expenditure overseas.
Some examples of recent notable R & D
projects in electronics, chemicals and
aerospace are given below.
Electronics
British firms and research organisations, with
government support, are leading in the
development and application of the family ot
‘three-five’ semiconductor materials (such as
gallium arsenide). These materials have a
wide variety of uses including lasers for
optical fibre communications, microwave
devices for satellite communications, and
high-efficiency solar cells.
BT (British Telecom) is in the forefront of
the development of optical fibre cable and
recently developed the first all-optical
repeater. Britain also has a world lead in the
transmission of computerised data along
telephone lines for reproduction on television
screens. Up to 800 R & D projects are
carried out by BT at any one time; a recent
example is the development of a video
handset with an optical telephone link.
Around two-thirds of its research is in
software engineering.
The transputer, a powerful ‘computer on a
chip’, was designed and built in Britain.
Several companies have developed powerful
machines based on the transputer.
Chemicals
Research performed by the chemicals
industry over the past few years has led to
significant technological and commercial
breakthroughs. ICI pioneered the microbial
production of a biodegradable plastic, Biopol,
and is at the forefront of global efforts to
develop substitutes for chlorofluorocarbons
(CFCs—see p. 362).
Pharmaceuticals is the most research
intensive sector of the chemicals industry
(see p. 232). Research conducted by Zeneca,
Glaxo, SmithKline Beecham and Fisons has
led to the development of the first successful
beta blockers, drugs used in the treatment of
cardiovascular conditions; semi-synthetic
penicillins; vaccines; and treatments for
cancer, asthma, migraine and arthritis. Glaxo
is Britain’s biggest pharmaceutical company,
.308
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
with a new £500 million research centre at
Stevenage (Hertfordshire). It manufactures
the world’s best selling pharmaceutical,
Zantac, which is used in the treatment of
gastric ulcers.
Among a host of other research projects
are the application of biotechnology to
pharmaceuticals, disease-resistant crops, new
forms of food, plant science, and the
development of advanced materials such as
engineering plastics. The biotechnology
sector continues to grow, with an increasing
number of companies engaged in the
development and manufacture of products
using genetic modification techniques.
Aerospace
Britain has led the world in many aspects of
aerospace R & D over the past 80 years.
Pioneering achievements include radar, jet
engines, Concorde, automatic landing, vertical
take-off and landing, flight simulators and
ejector seats. British Aerospace, with Marconi
and Dowty Boulton Paul, developed a system
known as ‘fly-by-wire’, in which flying
control surfaces are moved by electronic
rather than mechanical means. GEC-Marconi
developed the world’s first optically signalled
(‘fly-by-light’) system. The concept of head-
up display (HUD) was pioneered and
developed in Britain. This system
electronically projects symbols into the pilot’s
view, avoiding the need to look down at
instruments. GEC-Marconi has also
developed a holographic HUD, which enables
pilots to fly at high speeds at very low
altitude in darkness.
GOVERNMENT ROLE
Science and technology issues are the
responsibility of a Cabinet Minister, the
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, acting
on behalf of the Prime Minister. The
Minister is supported by the Office of
Science and Technology (OST)—part of the
Office of Public Service and Science within
the Cabinet Office; it is headed by the
Government’s Chief Scientific Adviser. The
OST provides a central focus for the
development of government policy on
science and technology, both nationally
and internationally, including strengthening
the science base and maximising its
contribution to economic performance and
the quality of life.
In addition to its role in overall science
policy and co-ordination, the OST is
responsible for the Science Budget and the
six government-financed research councils
(see pp. 311-15): the Engineering and
Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC),
the Particle Physics and Astronomy
Research Council (PPARC), the Medical
Research Council (MRC), the Natural
Environment Research Council (NERC), the
Biotechnology and Biological Sciences
Research Council (BBSRC) and the
Economic and Social Research Council
(ESRC). OST funding provides assistance for
research, through the research councils, in
the following ways:
• awarding grants and contracts to
universities and other higher education
establishments and to research units;
• funding research council establishments;
• supporting postgraduate study; and
• subscribing to international scientific
organisations.
The OST also provides support to
universities (whose main source of funding
is through the appropriate higher
education funding council) through
programmes administered through the Royal
Society and the Royal Academy of
Engineering (see p. 321).
Finance
Government finance for R & D goes to
research establishments, higher education
institutions and private industry, as well as to
collaborative research programmes. Total net
government R & D expenditure (both civil
and defence) in 1992-93 was £5,199 million,
of which £2,978 million was devoted to civil
science. The Science Budget (see Table 20.2)
totals £1,236.5 million for 1994-95.
Government funding through the Science
Budget has increased by over 20 per cent in
real terms since 1984-85.
309
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Table 20.2: Science Budget 1994-95
£ million %
EPSRC
MRC
PPARC
BBSRC
NERC
ESRC
Royal Society
Royal Academy of
Engineering, OST
initiatives and other
payments 
364.0
269.2
184.9
171.8
155.4
58.9
20.1
12.2
29.4
21.8
15.0
13.9
12.6
4.8
1.6
1.0
Source: Cabinet Office
Among government departments, the
Ministry of Defence (MoD—see p. 317) has
the largest research budget. The main civil
departments involved are the Department of
Trade and Industry (DTI—see p. 315), the
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food
(MAFF—see p. 318) and the Department of
the Environment (see p. 318).
Strategy
A White Paper, Realising Our Potential: A
Strategy for Science, Engineering and
Technology, published in 1993, contained the
first major policy review on science for over
20 years. The Government’s strategy,
following the White Paper, is to improve
Britain’s competitiveness and quality of life
by maintaining the excellence of science,
engineering and technology in Britain and by:
• developing stronger partnerships with
and between the science and
engineering communities, industry and
the research councils;
• supporting the science and engineering
base in order to advance knowledge,
increase understanding and produce
highly educated and trained scientists
and technologists;
• contributing to international research
efforts, particularly European research;
• promoting the public understanding of
science, technology and engineering; and
• ensuring government-funded research is
conducted efficiently and effectively.
A number of changes to the organisation
and direction of government-funded science,
engineering and technology have been made
following the White Paper:
• A new Council for Science and
Technology has been set up, chaired by
the Chancellor of the Duchy of
Lancaster. Its members include senior
people from industry and academic life.
It provides independent advice to
government on strategic issues of science
and technology, including expenditure
priorities.
• A new ‘Forward Look’, first published
in April 1994, will be published by
the Government each year. This
gives industrialists and researchers a
regular statement of the Government’s
strategy.
• A new Technology Foresight
Programme, intended to strengthen links
between industry, academia and
government, is being established. It will
influence private sector strategies; inform
the work of the Council for Science and
Technology, the Director-General of the
Research Councils, the higher education
funding councils and government
departments; and help in the preparation
of the annual Forward Look. The first
results are expected in spring 1995.
• The research council system was
restructured with effect from 1 April
1994 (see p. 311). Management structures
have been modified, and councils now
have part-time chairmen selected to bring
in industrial and commercial experience.
A Director-General of Research Councils
within OST advises ministers on the
performance and needs of the science and
engineering base.
• The customer-contractor principle has
been maintained and strengthened.
• The OST now plays the major role in
co-ordinating science and technology
issues involving more than one
department.
• Special importance is now attached to
co-ordination of European and other
international negotiations.
310
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
A major policy initiative in the White
Paper was the announcement of a campaign
to promote the public awareness of science,
engineering and technology. It has two aims:
• to make science and engineering more
attractive to the general public and, in
particular, young people; and
• in the longer term to boost the number of
scientifically literate young people.
It also has the wider objective of
improving the general public’s understanding
of scientific terms, concepts and issues. The
first major event of the campaign was the
national week of science, engineering and
technology, held in March 1994. About 1,200
events were held in 230 towns and cities
across Britain. These were organised, with
financial support from the Government, by
the British Association for the Advancement
of Science. A second week is planned for
March 1995. As part of the campaign, the
Government also supports organisations and
events such as the British Association’s
Annual Meeting and the Edinburgh
International Science Festival (see p. 323).
The LINK initiative, for which the OST
has lead responsibility, is designed to bridge
the gap between industry and the research
base for the benefit of the British economy. It
encourages collaboration on high quality,
commercially relevant research between
industry and higher education institutions and
other research base organisations. Under the
initiative, government departments and
research councils fund up to 50 per cent of
the cost of research projects, with industry
providing the remainder. The participating
industrial partners in LINK projects are
responsible for the commercial exploitation of
research outcomes.
RESEARCH COUNCILS
Each research council is an autonomous body
established under Royal Charter, with
members of its governing council drawn from
the universities, professions, industry and
government. Councils conduct research
through their own establishments and by
supporting selected research programmes and
projects, and training in universities and other
higher education institutions. Two new
councils—the EPSRC and the PPARC—were
created, dividing between them most of the
portfolio of the former Science and
Engineering Research Council (SERC). A
third new council, the Biotechnology and
Biological Sciences Research Council, took
over responsibility for the programme of the
former Agricultural and Food Research
Council and for the work of the SERC in
biology and biotechnology.
In addition to funding from the OST, the
research councils also receive income for
research commissioned by government
departments and from the private sector.
Income from commissioned research is
particularly important for the BBSRC and
NERC: in these councils receipts in 1994—95
are expected to offset over 20 per cent of
gross expenditure.
Engineering and Physical Sciences
Research Council
The EPSRC, the largest research council,
supports underpinning research in
engineering and the physical sciences for a
very wide range of industries, including
electronics, chemicals, pharmaceuticals,
transport, information technology,
communications, construction, manufacturing,
energy, aerospace, food, hotels and catering,
banking, finance, leisure and retailing. About
80 per cent of the Council’s research and
training investment is spent in higher
education institutions.
Priority areas on which the EPSRC is
working are:
• innovative manufacturing and clean
technology, underpinned by research in a
range of generic technologies—
information technology, materials, design,
systems and production engineering and
processing technology;
• high quality research and training in core
engineering and physical science
disciplines to maintain their health and to
aid the EPSRC’s initiatives and key
technologies; and
• continuing access to high-quality national
and international facilities for British
researchers.
311
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The EPSRC also has responsibility for the
Daresbury Rutherford Appleton Laboratories
(ORAL) at Chilton in Oxfordshire and
Warrington in Cheshire. Since April 1994
these centres of specialised research have
operated under common management. They
provide experimental facilities too large and
complex to be housed by individual academic
institutions, and undertake contract research.
For example, the ORAL at Chilton has one
of the most powerful lasers devoted to civil
research in Europe—Vulcan—which is
capable of simulating conditions inside stars.
The ISIS pulsed neutron source is used by
scientific teams from over 20 countries,
including those working on research on high-
temperature superconductors. In recent years
the Synchrotron Radiation Source at the
ORAL at Daresbury has been responsible for
establishing the structure of viruses that cause
foot and mouth disease and sleeping sickness.
The world’s first continuously variable
wavelength, ultraviolet microscope has been
installed at Daresbury. Funded by the EU, it
will be used to provide ‘optical slice’ images
through biological and other materials.
It is expected that the combined
Rutherford Appleton and Daresbury
laboratories will in due course form a self¬
standing institution independent of any single
research council in terms of formal ownership,
but with customers from five of the six
research councils; a review is in progress.
The objectives of the EPSRC commit it
to the industrial implementation of the
technologies developed with the aid of the
academic science base.
Particle Physics and Astronomy
Research Council
The major task of the PPARC is to ensure
continuity of the country’s long tradition of
excellence in research into fundamental
physical processes through studies in particle
physics, astronomy and astrophysics, and
solar system science. The PPARC maintains
four research establishments under common
management: the Royal Greenwich Observatory
at Cambridge, the Royal Observatory at
Edinburgh and two overseas observatories on
La Palma in the Canary Islands and on
Hawaii. The PPARC is a major source of
funding for many of the leading university
physics departments in Britain.
Specific research projects to be undertaken
over the next decade include:
• physics of the ‘Big Bang’: the origin of
mass and the nature of the fundamental
particles and forces;
• symmetry of matter and anti-matter;
• structure and evolution of the universe
since the ‘Big Bang’;
• the resolution of the ‘missing mass’ or
‘dark matter’ problem: the difference
between the visible mass of the universe
and that required to explain its physical
properties;
• star formation and evolution;
• coupling of the Sun’s emissions to the
Earth’s ionosphere and atmosphere; and
• the formation and evolution of the solar
system.
Through the PPARC Britain is to take
part in one of the most important
ground-based astronomical projects of
the 1990s: Gemini, an international
collaboration to build two 8-metre
telescopes that will give all-sky
coverage from sites in Hawaii and
Chile. Britain will be involved in the
design, construction and
instrumentation of the telescopes.
The Council’s work is in fields where
international co-operation is particularly
important; substantial contributions are made
to the European Space Agency (ESA) and the
European Laboratory for Particle Physics
(CERN—see p. 324), where the proposed Large
Hadron Collider is a major research interest.
Biotechnology and Biological Sciences
Research Council
BBSRC sustains a broad base of
interdisciplinary research and training to
underpin the biology-based
industries—agriculture, pharmaceuticals,
chemicals and food.
312
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
The Council operates underlying science-
led research programmes organised in areas
reflecting the different levels of biological
structure and directed research programmes
to develop further opportunities arising from
such research. Science-led programmes
include work on biomolecular science; genes;
cell biology and biochemistry; plant, animal
and microbial science; systems and engineering.
Directed programmes include work on
agricultural systems and on chemicals and
pharmaceuticals (including the design,
development and efficient manufacture of
bioproducts) and research of relevance to the
food industry. Research is carried out at eight
institutes, at Horticulture Research International
and in higher education institutions.
Recombinant DNA technologies have
helped to produce novel domestic
animal vaccines against economically
important diseases and these have
been successfully commercialised.
Advances in gene technologies have
led to the development of fruit with
improved storage capacity and hence
longer shelf life in supermarkets. It is
also possible to produce human
pharmaceutical proteins such as
blood clotting factors in animal milk,
from which these proteins are easily
extracted in a pure form. The use of
biotransformations has led to the
biosynthesis of industrially important
pure chemicals which are key building
blocks in some anti-viral agents.
BBSRC has an important role in the
training of scientists and engineers: it has
over 2,000 research studentships and 75
postdoctoral fellowships. Use is made of the
two main mechanisms for supporting
postgraduate training with an industrial
orientation: CASE awards and awards under
the Teaching Company Scheme (see p. 206).
Medical Research Council
The MRC is the main government agency
supporting medical research. Its total budget
in 1994—95 is £302 million. It promotes and
supports research and training aimed at
maintaining and improving human health,
advancing knowledge and technology, and
providing well-trained staff to meet the needs
of user communities, including the providers
of health care and the biotechnology, food,
health care, medical instrumentation,
pharmaceutical and other biomedical-
related industries.
The MRC is unusual among the
research councils in that about half its
research expenditure is spent in its own
institutes and units, which have close links
with universities and medical schools, the rest
being spent mainly in direct support of
research in higher education institutions. The
council has three large institutes—the
National Institute for Medical Research at
Mill Hill in London, the Laboratory of
Molecular Biology at Cambridge and the
Clinical Sciences Centre (opened in 1993) at
Hammersmith Hospital, London—and 40
research units and a number of smaller teams.
Areas in which the MRC is conducting
research include:
• Molecules and cells, and inheritance and
development—work in these areas is
contributing to the identification of novel
cellular targets for new pharmaceutical
agents and to the detection, prevention
and treatment of diseases with a genetic
component.
• Infections and immunity—these areas
include work on developing new vaccines
and identifying novel targets for antiviral
chemotherapy. The Council has a major
research programme on HIV infection
and AIDS.
• Environment—the Council’s strategy is
to determine the health impact of
particular environmental hazards; the
MRC has established a research centre in
Mechanisms of Human Toxicity in
Leicester and, with the Departments of
the Environment and Health, is
establishing an Institute for
Environmental Health.
• Cancer—the Council’s activity is aimed
at increasing basic understanding of
tumour biology, developing methods of
detecting cancer, identifying preventive
strategies, and developing and evaluating
313
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL. HANDBOOK
better methods of early detection and
treatment. The MRC’s work
complements that of the medical research
charities and involves important
international collaboration.
• Neurosciences and mental health—this is
an area to which the Council commits
very considerable expenditure in order to
extend understanding of the central
nervous system, explore diseases of the
nervous system, and develop new
methods of diagnosis, prevention and
treatment. Support is given to research
on psychoses (including schizophrenia),
neuroses, dementia, addictions, child
psychiatry and neurological disorders, all a
severe burden on sufferers, their families
and the National Health Service (NHS).
• Systems-oriented research—this concerns
main body systems; particular areas are
cardiovascular studies, haematology,
respiratory disease, reproduction, calcium
metabolism and bone disorders,
rheumatology, dental research, nutrition
and metabolism.
Scientists working at the MRC
Human Genetics Unit in Edinburgh
have succeeded in creating a strain of
laboratory mice carrying the
defective gene that causes cystic
fibrosis. The Edinburgh mouse, unlike
other models, closely mimics the
early stages of lung disease in
patients. The cystic fibrosis mouse
has already proved valuable in
developing and testing the safety and
effectiveness of new drug and gene
therapies before conducting clinical
tests on people. These trials are being
undertaken at the Royal Brompton
Hospital, London.
• Health services and public health
research—the Council’s work is focused
on implementing medical knowledge to
improve health and address needs for
which effective medical interventions exist
or could soon be developed. The MRC’s
work complements that of the Health
Departments, the NHS and the ESRC.
Natural Environment Research Council
NERC has an R & D provision of £155 million
for 1994-95 and its wide-ranging activities
fall into the following categories:
• Earth observation—advanced research
methodology for measuring the properties
of the Earth’s atmosphere, land, sea and
surface. Since April 1994 NERC’s
responsibilities cover support for the
whole area of Earth observation,
including instrument development;
• Earth sciences—structure, composition,
processes and mineral resources of the
Earth (geology, geophysics, geochemistry,
palaeontology and aspects of physical
geography);
• marine sciences—physical, chemical and
biological characteristics and processes of
the seas and sea floor;
• atmospheric sciences—physical and
chemical processes determining weather
and climate, atmospheric pollution and
air-surface interactions;
• terrestrial and freshwater sciences—
physical, chemical and biological
characteristics and processes of land and
freshwater;
• polar sciences—physical, chemical and
biological aspects of the Antarctic and
Arctic environments (atmospheric,
cryospheric, marine, earth and life sciences).
The Council supports research in 15
NERC institutes, units and research centres as
well as research and training in universities. It
also provides a range of facilities for use by
the environmental science community,
including a research fleet. NERC institutes
include the British Geological Survey, the
Institute of Terrestrial Ecology, the Institute
of Oceanographic Sciences Deacon Laboratory
and the British Antarctic Survey.
A new national centre for oceanographic
science and technology, the Southampton
Oceanography Centre, will be opened in
1995. It is intended to be a world-class centre
of excellence in this area and to be a national
focus for research, training and support in
oceanography, geology and aspects of marine
technology and engineering.
314
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
NERC has a substantial income from
commissioned research and other services
making use of its expertise. Programmes such
as those of the British Geological Survey are
important for environmental conservation; the
Land-Ocean Interaction Study is also
important, as are programmes in marine,
atmospheric and terrestrial and freshwater
sciences and in Antarctic research.
A comprehensive geological survey of
Britain’s inner continental shelf,
undertaken by the British Geological
Survey, has yielded a detailed picture
of the area and associated natural
resources. Britain is the first country
to have completely mapped its
offshore area in this way.
Economic and Social Research Council
ESRC, with an R & D provision of
£60 million for 1994—95, supports research to
increase understanding of social and economic
change in order to enhance industrial
competitiveness and the quality of life, and to
contribute to the effectiveness of public
services and policy. All research funded by
ESRC is conducted in higher education
institutions or independent research institutes.
The Council devotes a substantial part of
its expenditure (£17.5 million is available for
1994-95) to high quality training in research
to aid the development and maintenance of a
first-class research capacity in the social
sciences. Over 1,000 postgraduate students
are supported by the Council through
research training awards, advanced course
awards and fellowships. Through its
participation in the DTEs Teaching Company
Scheme (see p. 206), ESRC promotes
partnerships between social scientists and
business by placing graduates in companies
for short-term projects.
The main areas for the Council’s research
are economic performance, environmental
change, social cohesion, government and
public services, health and welfare, and
human development and learning. The
priority for the allocation of funds in the next
three years will be work on the study and
enhancement of innovation in the British
economy. ESRC is a joint sponsor of an
initiative, being managed by EPSRC, on
innovation in manufacturing.
GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS
Department of Trade and Industry
Direct government support for research in
industry is led by the Department of Trade
and Industry (DTI). Although most industrial
research and development is financed by
industry itself, the DTI provides assistance
where there is a sound case for doing so.
In 1993-94 it spent an estimated
£310 million on R & D, covering general
industrial innovation, aeronautics, space
(see p. 319), nuclear and non-nuclear energy
and support for statutory, regulatory and
policy responsibilities. A further £113 million
was allocated to technology transfer and
related activities.
The largest part of the DTFs R & D
expenditure on energy is on nuclear energy
(an estimated £54 million in 1993-94), most
of which is carried out by AEA Technology
(see p. 261). The DTI also funds research in
support of offshore oil and gas technology,
coal technology and renewable energy.
DTI Industrial Innovation Programmes
The DTFs policy on science and technology
builds on the commitment contained in the
1993 White Paper to improve the partnership
between government, industry and the
science base. Additional measures were set
out in the 1994 White Paper on
competitiveness (see p. 194). The balance of
the DTFs industrial innovation programmes
has shifted away from supporting technology
generation towards concentrating on the
exploitation and transfer of technology and
the promotion of innovation. In particular,
the DTI is:
• improving companies’ access to local
innovation services through Business
Links (see p. 197);
• encouraging industry to collaborate with
the science base in R & D projects under
the LINK initiative (see p. 311);
315
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
• putting more effort into helping firms of
all sizes work together to undertake
R & D projects, including those under
the EUREKA initiative (see p. 323);
• facilitating companies’ access to
technology from overseas and helping
small and medium-sized concerns to
identify technological opportunities and
potential partners, both in Britain and
overseas;
• continuing direct single-company support
to smaller firms under the SMART
competition and the SPUR scheme (see
p. 198) for the development of new
products and processes; and
• concentrating support from the DTEs
innovation budget for industry R & D
collaboration on those projects which
will result in exceptional economic
benefits.
To carry out these measures, the DTPs
budget allocation for industrial innovation is
£116.5 million in 1994-95.
Aeronautics
The DTEs Civil Aircraft Research and
Demonstration Programme (CARAD)
supports research and technology
demonstration in the aircraft and aeroengine
industry, helping it to compete effectively in
world markets. The programme is part of a
national aeronautics research effort, with over
half of the research work supported being
conducted in industry and the universities,
and the remainder at the Defence Research
Agency (see p. 317). Priority areas are aircraft
exhaust emissions, advanced materials, and
safety problems such as explosion hazards. In
1994-95 the provision for aeronautics is
£18.7 million.
Launch Aid is a means of providing
government assistance for specific development
projects in the aerospace industry. The civil
version of the EH101 British/Italian
multi-role helicopter is receiving Launch
Aid assistance, and a significant offer of
Launch Aid has been made to Short Brothers
for the Learjet 45 project for 1995-96 and
1996-97, while other Launch Aid projects are
under consideration.
Industrial Research Establishments
The DTI has three research establishments.
Their primary role is to provide the
Government with an effective source of
scientific and technological expertise. They
supply technological services to industry,
undertake research commissioned by
industry, and are involved in a variety of
international activities.
• The Laboratory of the Government
Chemist (LGC) is the focus for chemical
measurement within government. It
provides both public and private sectors
with a comprehensive service based on
analytical chemistry and promotes sound
chemical measurement in Britain in
support of the National Measurement
System.
• The National Engineering Laboratory
(NEL) carries out a range of technical
services, including R & D, testing and
consultancies in engineering and related
disciplines. It also maintains British
Standards of flow measurement, which
are of special importance in the oil and
gas industries. The NEL manages
technology transfer programmes for the
DTI in open systems, as well as
operating the National Wind Turbine
Centre.
• The National Physical Laboratory
(NPL) is Britain’s national standards
laboratory, with responsibility for
maintaining national measurements for
physical quantities. It supplies
essential calibration and technology
transfer services for industry, and
undertakes research on standards for
engineering materials and information
technology. The NPL is also the base
for the National Measurement
Accreditation Service, which provides
accreditation of calibration and testing
laboratories in both the public and
private sectors.
The three laboratories are now executive
agencies (see p. 69). The Government has
reviewed their operations and has decided
that their future lies in the private sector:
316
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
• the LGC is to be established as an
independent non-profit-making private
sector company by the end of 1995-96;
• the NEL is to be sold during summer
1995; and
• proposals are to be invited for a
management contractor to take over the
NPL—the Government is considering
possible alternative arrangements for the
National Measurement Accreditation
Service.
Technology Transfer
The DTI concentrates support on helping
firms gain access to, and assimilate,
technology; building up partnerships among
firms; working with higher education;
learning from overseas; and ensuring firms
have the facilities to enable them to innovate
and to do business better. It is significantly
improving companies’ access to science and
technology by making innovation services
available locally, for example, through
Business Links (see p. 197). Many local
innovation networks already exist which bring
together expertise in higher education
institutions, technical colleges, industrial
research organisations and other bodies. The
DTI intends to build on these networks and
improve access to them for small and
medium-sized establishments.
The DTI Innovation Unit works
predominantly through the use of secondees
from industry in six key areas, covering both
government and the private sector, to
stimulate wealth creation by encouraging a
climate for innovation:
• encouraging the spread of best practice
of innovation;
• commercial exploitation of the science
base;
• improving industry-investor relations;
• encouraging innovation in education;
• improving the public understanding of
innovation; and
• encouraging innovation in government.
DTI initiatives to enhance companies’
awareness of management best practice will
continue through the ‘Managing in the 90s’
programme (see p. 206). In addition, the
Environmental Technology Best Practice
Programme (see p. 356) aims to improve
industrial competitiveness and reduce
pollution. The DTI is developing a more
comprehensive information service about
technology overseas.
Ministry of Defence
Ministry of Defence provision for R & D
in 1994-95 is £2,315 million. About
£631 million of this is for medium and
long-term applied research relevant to
military needs, much of it carried out in
the MoD’s Defence Research Agency
(DRA) and other smaller establishments.
With the ending of the Cold War, the
Government is committed to achieving a
gradual reduction in real terms in spending
on defence R & D.
Several research establishments merged to
form the DRA in 1991. It is the largest single
scientific employer in Britain. Its role is to
provide scientific and technical services
primarily to the Ministry but also to other
government departments.
The DRA subcontracts about £200 million
of research to industry and universities,
ensuring that their know-how is harnessed to
meeting military requirements. It also works
closely with industry in order to ensure that
scientific and technological advances are
taken forward at an early stage into
development and production. This
technology transfer is not just confined to the
defence industry but has also led to
important ‘spin offs’ from defence into civil
markets, in fields ranging from new materials
and electronic devices to advanced
aerodynamics. The latter in particular has
been instrumental in giving Britain a leading
role in civil aircraft design.
Recent innovations by the DRA include
the development of an advanced composite
rotor blade for the Lynx helicopter; and the
invention of a special form of highly
porous silicon, which can be made to
emit light when irradiated with ultra-violet
light and opens up the technology of silicon
opto-microelectronics.
317
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Other Government Departments
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food
MAFF co-ordinates its research programme
with The Scottish Office Agriculture and
Fisheries Department, the Department of
Agriculture for Northern Ireland and the
research councils, particularly the
BBSRC (see p. 313). It also covers the
research interests of the Welsh Office
Agriculture Department.
Its research programme reflects the
Ministry’s wide-ranging responsibilities for
protecting and enhancing the rural and
marine environment; protecting the public,
especially in food safety and quality, flooding
and coastal defence, and animal health and
welfare; and improving the economic
performance of the agriculture, fishing and
food industries.
The budget for research expenditure in
1994-95 is £137 million. Research is
contracted with research councils, the
Ministry’s agencies, non-departmental public
bodies, higher education institutions and
other organisations.
Department of the Environment
The Department of the Environment funds
research in several policy areas:
environmental protection, including
radioactive substances; water; the countryside;
planning and inner cities; local government;
housing; building and construction; and
energy efficiency. The three largest sub-
programmes are those on pollution-related
climate change, regional and urban air
quality, and the safe disposal of radioactive
waste. Total research expenditure in 1994-95
is estimated at £93.4 million.
Department of Health
The Department of Health has developed an
R & D programme for the National Health
Service (NHS) which will provide a scientific
basis for the promotion of health and the
provision of health care. A key aim is to
increase the effectiveness of the NHS by
creating a sound base from which strategies
in health care, operational policy and
management can be defined and practice
improved. The Department also manages a
Health and Personal Social Service research
programme concerned with the needs of
ministers and policy-makers, with emphasis
on improving efficiency.
Overseas Development Administration
The Overseas Development Administration
(ODA) commissions and sponsors research on
topics relevant to those geographical regions
designated as the primary targets of the aid
programme and of benefit to the poorest
people in those countries. Provision for R &
D in 1994-95 is £85 million.
The ODA’s support for R & D is
organised into five main programmes,
covering renewable natural resources;
engineering-related sectors (water and
sanitation, energy efficiency and geoscience,
urbanisation and transport); health and
population; economic and social development;
and education.
R & D is also carried out as part of
Britain’s bilateral aid to particular countries.
It draws upon a range of professional
expertise in agencies such as the Transport
Research Laboratory, the British Geological
Survey and the Institute of Hydrology. The
ODA contributes towards international
centres and programmes undertaking R & D
aimed at solving problems faced by
developing countries. It also contributes to
science and technology through the
European Union. The EU’s Science and
Technology for Development programme
seeks to stimulate simultaneous study in
various parts of the world on specific
scientific issues in health, nutrition and
agriculture, which can contribute to progress
in all developing countries.
The Scottish Office
The Scottish Office both contracts and
itself undertakes a wide range of R & D
commissions. Total R & D planned
expenditure in 1994—95 is £73.3 million
in support of its policy responsibilities,
especially on agriculture, fisheries, health, the
318
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
environment, education and home affairs. In
some areas of work—medicine, agriculture
and biological sciences, fisheries and marine
science—research in Scotland is at the
forefront internationally.
Space Activities
Britain’s support for civil space research is
co-ordinated by the British National Space
Centre (BNSC), a partnership between
various government departments and research
councils. BNSC encourages industry to
exploit opportunities in space, based on
appraisal of project costs and potential
technological and commercial benefits.
Through BNSC, Britain spent around
£171 million on space activities in 1993-94,
mainly through DTI and research council
financing. Around 63 per cent—£108
million—was devoted to programmes shared
with the European Space Agency (ESA). The
remainder supported a programme of R & D
in industry, higher education institutions,
government establishments and industry.
The major part of Britain’s space
programme is concerned with satellite-based
Earth observation (remote sensing) for
commercial and environmental applications.
Britain has committed around £70 million to
the ESA’s ERS-1 satellite, which was
launched in 1991. ERS-2, to which Britain
has contributed £45 million, is due to be
launched in December 1994. Britain provided
two of the instruments on both satellites: a
synthetic aperture radar (SAR) and an along
track scanning radiometer (ATSR). The SAR
is capable of providing high resolution images
of the Earth with 24-hour coverage,
irrespective of cloud cover conditions. The
ATSR measures global sea surface
temperature to a very high degree of
accuracy. British remote sensing instruments
are also being flown on other satellites,
including the Upper Atmosphere Research
Satellite, operated by the United States
National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA).
The Earth Observation Data Centre at
Farnborough (Hampshire), operated by the
National Remote Sensing Centre Ltd,
processes the data output from ERS-1 and
other remote sensing spacecraft, and will do
so for successor missions. It is also one of the
ESA’s four processing and archiving
facilities which store and distribute remotely
sensed data for both scientific and
commercial purposes.
Britain is also contributing £284 million to
the Polar Platform and ENVISAT-1
programmes. The ENVISAT payload,
carrying a new generation of ESA
environmental instruments, will fly on the
British-led Polar Platform. For ENVISAT
Britain is leading the development of an
advanced action microwave instrument, and
an advanced version of the precision
instrument that measures infra-red emissions
over land and sea.
In space science, Britain participates in all
of the ESA’s missions. These range from the
Hubble Space Telescope, for which British
Aerospace built the solar panels, to the
Ulysses solar polar probe, which is the first
spacecraft to overfly the poles of the sun.
Britain is contributing substantially to the
Cluster and SOHO missions to study the
sun, the Earth’s magnetosphere and the solar
wind, and to the Infrared Space Observatory,
all due for launch in 1995. It is also
participating in the ESA’s X-ray spectroscopy
mission, due for launch in 1999.
There are bilateral agreements for space
research between Britain and other countries,
such as the United States through NASA,
and Japan. British groups have been involved
in developing, for example, the widefield
camera for Germany’s X-ray satellite
ROSAT, a spectrometer for the Japanese-
built Yohkoh satellite and an X-ray telescope
for the Russian Spectrum-X mission.
In Europe, Britain is both a leading
producer and user of satellite communications
technology, exploiting commercially the
expertise developed within the ESA’s satellite
communications programmes.
RESEARCH IN HIGHER EDUCATION
INSTITUTIONS
The higher education funding councils in
England, Scotland and Wales (see p. 426) are
the largest single source of finance for higher
education institutions in Great Britain. About
319
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
40 per cent of research carried out in higher
education institutions is financed from
resources allocated by these bodies. These
funds pay for the salaries of permanent
academic staff, who usually teach as well as
carry out research, and contribute to the
cost of support services. In Northern Ireland
the institutions are funded by the
Department of Education for Northern
Ireland. The quality of research performance
of departments is a key element in the
allocation of funding.
The research councils also support
research in higher education institutions in
two main ways. First, they provide
postgraduate awards to over 25 per cent of
postgraduate students in science and
technology. Secondly, they give grants and
contracts to institutions for projects,
particularly in new or developing areas of
research, and for support units and facilities
for research. The research councils have
become responsible for meeting all the costs
of the research projects they support in
higher education institutions, except for
costs associated with the salaries of
permanent academic staff and the costs of
premises and infrastructure.
The other main channels of support for
scientific research in higher education
institutions are government departments,
charities and industry. The European Union
also provides substantial funding. Institutions
are expected to recover the full cost of short¬
term commissioned research from the
Government and industry.
The high quality of research in higher
education institutions, and their marketing
skills, have enabled them to attract more
funding from a larger range of external
sources, especially in contract income from
industry. Co-operation continues between the
higher education institutions, industry and
the Government in joint projects.
Institutions undertaking research with the
support of research council grants have the
rights over the commercial exploitation of
their research, subject to the prior agreement
of the sponsoring research council. They may
make use of the expertise of the British
Technology Group (see below) to patent and
license their inventions.
Science Parks
Science parks are partnerships between
higher education institutions and industry to
promote commercially focused research and
advanced technology. At the end of 1993
there were 45 such parks in operation,
generally at or near universities, accommodating
nearly 1,200 companies. Most are engaged in
work on computing, electronics,
instrumentation, robotics, electrical
engineering, chemicals and biotechnology.
Research, development and training activities
are the most common activities, rather than
large-scale manufacturing. The biggest
science park is at Cambridge, with about 85
companies on site. Recently opened parks are
situated at Oxford, Cranfield, Westlakes
(Cumbria) and York.
A growing number of universities offer
industry interdisciplinary research centres
with exploitable resources. These include
access to analytical equipment, library
facilities and worldwide databases as well as
academic expertise.
OTHER ORGANISATIONS
Charitable Foundations
Medical research charities provide a major
source of funds for biomedical research in
Britain. Their combined contribution in
1992-93 was about £320 million. The three
largest contributors were the Wellcome
Trust—the world’s largest medical
charity—with a contribution of £77 million,
the Imperial Cancer Research Fund (£50
million) and the Cancer Research Campaign
(£44 million).
British Technology Group
British Technology Group (BTG) is among
the world’s leading technology transfer
companies. It promotes the profitable
commercialisation of technology by:
• developing and protecting technology
arising from research carried out by
individuals, higher education institutions
and other research organisations which it
considers will be commercially viable;
320
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
• licensing the resulting intellectual
property rights to companies throughout
the world; and
• assessing the commercial potential of
companies’ proprietary technology and
licensing this technology to other
companies worldwide.
BTG administers about 10,000 patents
covering around 1,400 technologies. In
1993-94 the Group’s turnover was
£29 million. The company is owned by a
consortium consisting of BTG management,
employees and financial institutions.
Professional Institutions and Learned
Societies
There are numerous technical institutions and
professional associations in Britain, many of
which promote their own disciplines or the
education and professional well-being of
their members.
The Council of Science and Technology
Institutes has seven member institutes
representing biology, chemical engineering,
chemistry, food science and technology,
geology, hospital physics and physics. The
Engineering Council promotes the study of
all types of engineering in schools and other
organisations, in co-operation with its 210
industry affiliates, which include large private
sector companies and government departments.
Together with 41 professional engineering
institutions, the Council accredits courses in
higher education institutions. It also advises
the Government on a range of academic,
industrial and professional issues.
More than 300 learned societies play an
important part in promoting science and
technology through meetings, publications
and sponsorship.
Royal Society
The most prestigious learned society is the
Royal Society, founded in 1660. It has over
1,100 Fellows and more than 100 Foreign
Members. Many of its Fellows serve on
governmental advisory councils and committees
concerned with research. The Society’s
estimated net expenditure on science and
technology in 1994—95 is about £22 million.
Almost 80 per cent of funding is derived
from the Government, the remainder coming
from private sources.
The Society encourages scientific research
and its application through a programme of
meetings and lectures, publications, and by
awarding grants, fellowships and other
funding. It recognises scientific and
technological achievements through election
to the Fellowship and the award of medals
and endowed lectureships. As the national
academy of sciences, it represents Britain in
international non-governmental organisations
and participates in a variety of international
scientific programmes. It also facilitates
collaborative projects and the exchange of
scientists through bilateral agreements with
academies and research councils throughout
the world. It gives independent advice on
scientific matters, notably to government, and
represents and supports the scientific
community as a whole.
The Society is increasingly active in
promoting science understanding and
awareness among the general public, as well
as science education. It also supports research
into the history of scientific endeavour.
Royal Academy of Engineering
The national academy of engineering in
Britain is the Royal Academy of Engineering,
founded in 1976. The Academy, which has
about 970 Fellows, 57 Foreign Members and
12 Honorary Fellows, promotes the
advancement of engineering for the benefit of
the public. It receives a grant from the OST
amounting to £2.2 million in 1994—95 and
plans to raise over £5 million from other
sources. Among the objectives of its
programmes are the attraction of first-class
students into engineering, raising awareness
of the importance of engineering design among
undergraduates, developing links between
industry and higher education institutions, and
increasing industrial investment in engineering
research in higher education institutions.
Other Societies
In Scotland the Royal Society of Edinburgh,
321
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
established in 1783, promotes science by
awarding scholarships, organising meetings
and symposia, publishing journals and
awarding prizes. It also administers
fellowship schemes for post-doctoral
research workers.
Three other major institutions publicise
scientific developments through lectures and
publications for specialists and
schoolchildren. Of these, the British
Association for the Advancement of Science
(BAAS), founded in 1831, is mainly
concerned with science, while the Royal
Society of Arts, dating from 1754, deals with
the arts and commerce as well as science.
The Royal Institution, founded in 1799, also
performs these functions and runs its own
research laboratories.
The Committee on the Public
Understanding of Science (COPUS), set up
in 1986 by the Royal Society, the BAAS and
the Royal Institution, acts as a focus for a
wide-ranging programme in Britain to
improve public awareness of science and
technology. It recommends initiatives to its
sponsoring bodies and promotes the activities
of other organisations and institutions.
Zoological Gardens
The Zoological Society of London, an
independent scientific body founded in 1826,
runs London Zoo, which occupies about 15
hectares (36 acres) of Regent’s Park, London.
The Society is responsible for the Institute of
Zoology, which carries out research in
support of conservation. The Institute’s work
covers a wide range of topics, including
ecology, behaviour, reproductive biology and
conservation genetics.
Many zoos play a vital role in
programmes for reintroducing species
of international importance, and
some have a wider role in
management plans for areas and
species of conservation interest. For
example, London Zoo is involved in
52 co-ordinated captive breeding
programmes for exotic species and
manages 29 such programmes.
Whipsnade Wild Animal Park near
Dunstable (Bedfordshire) is also managed by
the Society. Other well-known zoos include
those at Edinburgh, Bristol, Chester, Dudley
and Marwell (near Winchester).
Botanic Gardens
The Royal Botanic Gardens, founded in 1759,
cover 121 hectares (300 acres) at Kew in west
London and a 187-hectare (462-acre) estate at
Wakehurst Place, Ardingly, in West Sussex.
They contain the largest collections of living
and dried plants in the world. Research is
conducted into all aspects of plant life,
including physiology, biochemistry, genetics,
economic botany and the conservation of
habitats and species. Kew has the world’s
largest seed bank for wild origin species and is
active in programmes to return endangered
plant species to the wild. It participates in
joint research programmes in 52 countries.
The Royal Botanic Garden in Edinburgh,
founded in 1670, is a centre for research into
taxonomy (classification of species), for the
conservation and study of living plants and
for horticultural education.
Scientific Museums
The Natural History Museum, which
includes the Geological Museum, has 60
million specimens ranging in size from a blue
whale skeleton to minute insects. It is one of
the world’s principal centres for research into
natural history, offering an advisory service to
institutions all over the world. The museum
is keen to promote public appreciation of
nature conservation and in 1991 opened a
major exhibition on ecology, illustrating the
diversity of living species.
The Science Museum promotes
understanding of the history of science,
technology, industry and medicine. Its
extensive collection of scientific instruments
and machinery is complemented by interactive
computer games and audio-visual equipment
for visitors to use. In this way the museum
explains scientific principles to the general
public and documents the history of science,
from early discoveries to space age technology.
These two museums are in South Kensington,
322
HOUSING
The Community Self Build
Agency helps people in
housing need to build their
own homes and at the same
time to acquire new skills.
Pictured here is the St John’s
Self Build Group, Newham,
London, which hopes to have
family accommodation ready
for occupation by May 1995.
Clarion House, a development of
24 flats and houses in central London,
built by Soho Housing Association
in partnership with a commercial
developer. Housing associations
provide low cost housing for rent and
for sale to those on low incomes and
in the greatest housing need.
EDUCATION IN SCHOOLS
The United World College of
the Atlantic, founded in 1962 on
the South Wales coast, was the
first international sixth form
college in the world, and aims
to promote international
understanding through
education.
Science is one of the core
subjects of the National
Curriculum. Here five
year olds at Bewbush
County First School in
Crawley learn about
weighing.
A gym lesson at Bushy
Hill County Middle
School, Guildford.
Physical education is part
of the curriculum of all
state schools in Britain.
Secondary schools must
offer at least one
language of the European
Union, usually French,
German or Spanish.
MEDICINE
Leading British molecular geneticist
Professor Bob Williamson of St
Mary’s Hospital Medical School,
Imperial College, London, who has
been jointly awarded the King Faisal
International Prize for Medicine.
Professor Williamson has pioneered
new treatments for sufferers of
inherited diseases, including muscular
dystrophy and cystic fibrosis.
ECHO International Health Services,
a non profit-making organisation,
provides a complete range of medical
supplies, including infant incubators,
respirators, anaesthetic machines and
wheelchairs, to areas in need around
the world.
i
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
London. Other important collections include
those of the Museum of Science and Industry
in Birmingham, the Museum of Science and
Industry in Manchester, the Museum of the
History of Science in Oxford, and the Royal
Scottish Museum, Edinburgh.
Science Festivals
Science festivals are a growing feature of local
co-operative efforts to provide improved
public understanding of the contribution
made by science to everyday life. Schools,
museums, laboratories, higher education
institutions and industry contribute to a wide
range of special events. The oldest and most
widely publicised science festival is the
British Association Annual Festival of
Science, held at the end of summer at a
British university.
The largest science festival in a single
city in the world is the Edinburgh
International Science Festival. In 1994
the Festival included 16 exhibitions,
36 workshops and over 200 lectures;
more than 200,000 people attended.
INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION
Britain plays a key role in a wide range of
major international scientific facilities and
research programmes.
European Union
Since 1984 the EU has run a series of R & D
framework programmes in several strategic
sectors, with the aim of strengthening the
scientific and technological basis of European
industry and improving its international
competitiveness. The Third Framework
Programme lasted from 1990 to 1994, with a
budget of 6,600 million ECUs (£5,079 million).
The Fourth Framework Programme,
which is to run from 1994 to 1998, has an
agreed expenditure ceiling of about £9,500
million, and Britain played a significant part
in shaping its structure and priorities.
Britain helped to secure agreement that the
EU should develop ‘generic’ technologies
with a wide range of industrial applications,
rather than just funding research projects to
meet the needs of specific industrial sectors.
The EU has also agreed that more resources
should be devoted to disseminating
technology from research projects to small
and medium-sized enterprises.
Examples of the many EU research
activities involving British organisations
include the following programmes:
• Britain contributes to the EU Nuclear
Fusion Programme, both by supporting a
programme of research into fusion
carried out by AEA at Culham,
Oxfordshire, and by hosting the Joint
European Torus (JET) project, also
based at Culham. Countries participating
in JET include the 12 members of the
EU, Sweden and Switzerland.
• The EU’s Information Technology
Programme, formerly known as ESPRIT
(European Strategic Programme for
Research in Information Technology), is
part of the Fourth Framework
Programme. It is a shared-cost
collaborative programme, designed to
help build the services and technologies
that underpin the information society,
with a high emphasis on the needs and
users of the market. The programme is
open to companies, academic institutions
and research bodies. Britain is currently
involved in 369 projects.
Other International Activities
Over 500 British organisations participate in
EUREKA, an industry-led scheme to
encourage European co-operation in
developing and producing advanced
technology products with worldwide sales
potential. Britain is currently involved in 257
projects. Major projects include research into
a European standard for high-definition
television and into semi-conductors. There are
23 members of EUREKA, including the 12
EU countries and the European Commission.
The COST (European Co-operation in the
Field of Scientific and Technical Research)
programme encourages the co-operation of
national research activities across Europe,
with participants coming from industry,
323
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
academia and research laboratories. Transport,
telecommunications and materials have
traditionally been the largest areas supported.
New areas include physics, neuroscience and
forests and forestry products. There are
currently 25 member states, including the 12
EU countries. Britain takes part in 84 of 102
current COST actions.
Britain is a member of CERN, the European
Laboratory for Particle Physics, based in
Geneva. Scientific programmes at CERN aim
to test, verify and develop the ‘standard
model’ of the origins and structure of the
universe. There are 19 member states. The
subscription to CERN is paid by the PPARC.
Similar arrangements apply to other
international collaborations. Contributions to
the high-flux neutron source at the Institut
Laue-Langevin and the European
Synchrotron Radiation Facility, both in
Grenoble, are paid by the EPSRC. The
PPARC is a partner in the European
Incoherent Scatter Radar Facility within the
Arctic Circle, which conducts research on the
middle and upper atmosphere.
Through the MRC, Britain participates in
the European Molecular Biology Laboratory
(EMBL), based in Heidelberg, Germany.
Britain has been chosen as the location for
the European Bioinformatics Institute, an
outstation of the EMBL. The Institute, to be
based in Cambridge, will provide up-to-date
information on molecular biology and genome
sequencing for researchers throughout
Europe. It will be funded jointly by the
Wellcome Trust and the MRC, and will be
fully operational by 1995.
The MRC pays Britain’s contribution to
the Human Frontier Science programme on
behalf of all the research councils. The
programme supports international collaborative
research into brain function and biological
function through molecular level approaches.
NERC’s James Rennell Centre in
Southampton is a focal point for Britain’s
contributions to the World Ocean Circulation
Experiment, one of the major components of
the World Climate Research Programme.
NERC also supports Britain’s subscription to
the Ocean Drilling Program (ODP). In 1993
Britain was chosen as the location for the
scientific planning office of the OOP’s Joint
Oceanographic Institute for Deep Earth
Sampling. The office will be based at the
University of Wales, Cardiff, for two years
from October 1994.
Britain is a member of the science and
technology committees of international
organisations such as the OECD and NATO,
for example, taking part in the OECD’s
Megascience Forum set up to look at global
planning of large facilities and programmes,
and of various specialised agencies of the
United Nations.
Among non-governmental organisations,
the research councils, the Royal Society and
the British Academy were founder members
of the European Science Foundation in 1974
and play a full part in its activities. The
research councils also maintain, with the
British Council, a joint office in Brussels to
promote European co-operation in research.
Staff in British Embassies and High
Commissions promote contacts in science
and technology between Britain and overseas
countries and help to inform a wide range of
organisations in Britain about science and
technology developments overseas. There are
science and technology sections in Paris,
Bonn, Washington, Tokyo and Moscow.
The British Council (see p. 130)
promotes better understanding and
knowledge of Britain and its scientific and
technological achievements. It encourages
exchange of specialists, supplies specialised
information, and fosters co-operation in
research, training and education. The Council
also identifies and manages technological,
scientific and educational projects in
developing countries.
Further Reading
Competitiveness: Helping Business to Win. Cm 2563. HMSO, 1994.
Forward Look of Government-funded Science, Engineering and Technology 1994. HMSO, 1994.
Realising Our Potential: A Strategy for Science, Engineering and Technology. Cm 2250. HMSO, 1993.
324
The
Environment
21 Housing and
Regeneration
Housing 327
Administration 327
Home Ownership 328
Social Housing 329
Privately Rented Housing 332
Improving Existing Housing 332
Homelessness 334
Regeneration 334
Single Regeneration Budget 335
Other Measures 337
Rural Development 338
Enterprise and Simplified
Planning Zones 338
Public Sector Land 339
Wales, Scotland and
Northern Ireland 339
The promotion of home ownership is central to government housing policy;
owner-occupation in Great Britain rose from 49 per cent in 1971 to 67 per cent
in 1994. There are many strategies in Britain to enhance the urban and rural
environments and ensure the availability and diversity of suitable tenure.
These include job creation, training, right-to-buy schemes, and improvements
to security and lighting on estates. A new Single Regeneration Budget brings
together many existing regeneration programmes in England. A total of
£1,447 million will be spent from this in 1994—95, in addition to schemes
outside this budget and regeneration programmes in Wales, Scotland and
Northern Ireland.
Housing
The pattern of housing tenure has changed
considerably in recent years, with a
substantial increase in owner-occupation and
some moderate growth in the private rented
sector. Both public and private sectors build
housing, but most dwellings are now built by
the private sector for sale to owner-occupiers.
Local authorities are being encouraged to see
their housing role as more of an enabling one,
working with housing associations and the
private sector to increase the supply of low-
cost housing for sale or rent without
necessarily providing it themselves. Housing
associations are now the main providers of
new ‘social housing’. This allows local
authorities to concentrate their resources on
improving the management of their own
stock. To stimulate the private rented sector,
which has been declining for most of this
century, rents on new private sector lettings
in Great Britain were deregulated in 1988.
This has helped to stop the decline, and the
sector has grown to nearly 10 per cent of
households.
Administration
The Secretary of State for the Environment
in England and the Secretaries of State for
Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland are
responsible for formulating housing policy
and supervising the housing programme.
The construction or structural alteration of
housing is subject to building regulations laid
down by the Government. In addition,
warranty arrangements provided by the
327
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
National House-Building Council cover many
new houses. It sets standards and enforces
them by inspection, and provides cover against
major structural defects for at least ten years.
Home Ownership
Over the last 40 years the proportion of
people owning their own homes has risen
from 29 per cent to 67 per cent. The number
of owner-occupied dwellings in Great Britain
amounted to over 15.4 million at the end of
1992, compared with 4.1 million in 1950. Most
council tenants have the right to buy the
homes they occupy. With a few exceptions,
secure public tenants with at least two years
standing are entitled to buy their house or flat
at a discount dependent upon the length of
the tenancy. Similar provisions are made for
Scotland and Northern Ireland. A total of 1.5
million council, housing association and New
Town houses were sold in Great Britain
between April 1979 and the end of 1993.
Local authorities have been asked to
Type of Accommodation Occupied
All households
With business
encourage low-cost home ownership in a
variety of ways. Scottish Homes has a scheme
to encourage private developers to build for
owner-occupation or market rents in areas
they would not normally consider. In
1994—95 the planned investment in the
scheme is about £33.5 million. The Northern
Ireland Co-ownership Housing Association
has developed shared ownership there. In
Wales, detailed guidance for local authorities
and housing associations on the range of low-
cost home ownership initiatives available was
issued at the end of 1993.
The Government has made
million available for cash incentive
schemes in England in 1994-95. In
such schemes, local authority and
housing association tenants are given
grants to help them purchase housing
in the private sector. The homes
released by these tenants moving out
are then available to be re-let to those
families in greatest housing need.
Local authority tenants
With business
Converted flat or premises 0% Detached
maisonette/rooms house
Source: General Household Survey 1992
328
HOUSING AND REGENERATION
Mortgage Loans
Most people buy their homes with a
mortgage loan, with the property as security.
Building societies are the largest source of
such loans, although banks and other financial
institutions also take a significant share of the
mortgage market, while some companies make
loans for house purchase available to their
own employees. The amount that lenders are
prepared to advance to a would-be house
purchaser is generally calculated as a multiple
of his or her annual income, typically up to
two-and-a-half times earnings, and the term
of the loan is commonly 25 years. Owner-
occupiers get tax relief on interest payments
on mortgages of up to £30,000 on their main
home; since April 1994 this has been assessed
at 20 per cent rather than the basic rate of 25
per cent, and from April 1995 will be
assessed at 15 per cent.
High interest rates and problems of
‘negative equity’ caused by falling house
prices in some regions created difficulties for
many homebuyers in the late 1980s and early
1990s. A package of measures to protect
homeowners from unnecessary repossession
owing to arrears was announced by the
Government in 1991. These include provision
for benefits covering mortgage interest to be
paid directly to lenders, and agreement with
the mortgage lenders on the introduction of
schemes to help borrowers in difficulty
Table 21.1: Average House Prices in
Britain (£)
New dwellings All dwellings
1981 28,119 24,188
1982 28,205 23,644
1983 30,817 26,471
1984 33,080 29,106
1985 36,103 31,103
1986 43,562 36,276
1987 49,692 40,391
1988 61,873 49,355
1989 73,544 54,846
1990 75,037 59,785
1991 73,507 62,455
1992 73,190 60,821
Source: Housing and Construction Statistics
remain in their homes. Government figures
show that mortgage possession orders in the
first half of 1994 were 52 per cent down on
the peak in the second half of 1991; figures
from the Council of Mortgage Lenders show
that the number of properties actually
repossessed in the first half of 1994—at
25,000 less than 0.3 per cent of the number
of mortgages—was 36 per cent lower than in
the second half of 1991.
Social Housing
Public Sector Housing
Most of the public housing in Great Britain
is provided by 460 local housing authorities.
These are:
• the district councils in England and
Wales, outside London;
• the London borough councils; and
• the district and islands councils in
Scotland.
Public housing is also provided by the new
town authorities, Scottish Homes (which has
a stock of about 53,000 houses) and the
Development Board for Rural Wales,
although the latter is to transfer all its 1,200
houses to other social landlords by March
1996. The Northern Ireland Housing
Executive is responsible for the provision and
management of public housing in Northern
Ireland. Public housing authorities in Great
Britain own about 5 million houses and flats;
the Northern Ireland Housing Executive owns
155,000 homes. Several local authorities have
transferred all their housing stock to housing
associations—involving 133,000 properties—
and others are considering doing so.
Local authorities meet the capital costs of
modernising their stock by:
• raising loans on the open market;
• borrowing from the Public Works Loan
Board (an independent statutory body set
up to make loans to local authorities);
• using part of the proceeds from the sale
of local authority houses and other assets;
or
• drawing on their revenue accounts.
329
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Councils must maintain housing revenue
accounts on a ‘ring-fenced’ basis to keep
them separate from other council funds.
Compulsory competitive tendering for local
authority housing management is being
phased in from April 1996 in England.1 The
Government provides local authorities in
England and Wales with Housing Revenue
Account Subsidy, worth nearly £4,400
million in England alone in 1994—95, mainly
to cover the cost of rent rebates. Local
authority housing investment programmes
total over £1,500 million in England for
1994-95, and £295 million in Wales. In
Scotland, Housing Support Grant of nearly
£26 million is available for 1994—95; local
authorities have been given £426 million in
capital allocations to build new homes or
improve existing ones. In Northern Ireland,
the Housing Executive’s capital programme is
financed mainly by borrowing from
government and receipts from house sales. In
1994—95 borrowing will total £86 million.
Revenue expenditure is financed by rental
income and by a government grant, which in
1994—95 is about £120 million.
Housing Associations
Housing associations, which are non-profit-
making, are now the main providers of
additional low-cost housing for rent and for
sale to those on low incomes and in the
greatest housing need. Many associations
specialise in providing accommodation to
meet the special needs of the elderly, disabled
people and the mentally ill. The housing
association sector is expanding rapidly;
associations own, manage and maintain over
750,000 homes and about 65,000 hostel
bed-spaces in England alone, providing
homes for well over 1 million people; about
56,000 new homes for rent or shared
ownership were provided in 1993—94.
People in housing need with insufficient
income to obtain a mortgage for outright
purchase may be able to buy a share in a
house which a housing association has
developed, or which they themselves have
1 This will come later in Scotland and Wales, following local
government reorganisation.
chosen on the open market. They pay rent on
the share retained by the association and may
purchase it later if they wish. In Wales, the
Government is also preparing to make
available an assisted ownership scheme, under
which the remaining share is provided by an
interest-free loan from the housing
association.
In Great Britain new housing schemes
carried out by associations qualify for
Housing Association Grant if the association
concerned is one of about 2,800 registered
with the Housing Corporation (in England),
Scottish Homes or Housing for Wales. These
three organisations are statutory bodies which
supervise and pay grant to housing
associations in their respective parts of Great
Britain. Broadly similar assistance is available
to associations in Northern Ireland.
The Government has increased the
resources distributed to housing associations
through the Housing Corporation’s capital
programme from £1,062 million in 1990—91
to about £1,500 million in 1994-95. The
Government also aims to increase the
amount of private finance being used by
housing associations. This will allow more
homes to be built with the available public
resources than would otherwise be the case.
It is anticipated that over 150,000 homes
will be provided over the three years
1994-95 to 1996-97.
In 1994-95 Scottish Homes’ approved
development programme expenditure is
£325 million, while it is expected that about
£160 million of private finance will also be
generated. Housing for Wales is managing a
programme of £121 million in 1994—95,
with a target of providing at least 3,900
new homes. On current plans, government
provision to the housing association
movement in Wales will be almost
£500 million between 1991-92 and 1994—95.
Private sector finance generated over the
same period is forecast to reach almost
£250 million. Northern Ireland’s registered
housing associations started 1,200 units of
accommodation in 1993—94, and now have
a stock of about 14,000 units for rent.
They have a 1994-95 budget of £45 million,
which, with an additional £9 million of
private finance, is planned to provide
330
HOUSING AND REGENERATION
1,000 new units of rented accommodation.
Government plans provided for total funding
of about £195 million over the period
1992-93 to 1995-96.
In England and Wales the rights of
housing association tenants are protected
under Tenants’ Guarantees, which are
issued by the Housing Corporation and
Housing for Wales. They cover matters such
as tenancy terms, principles for setting rent
levels and the allocation of tenancies. Under
these guarantees, tenants receive contractual
rights in addition to their basic statutory
rights, and associations are required to set
and maintain rents at levels affordable by
those in low-paid employment. In Scotland,
similar non-statutory guidance, in the form of
a model tenancy agreement, has been
implemented as proposed jointly by Scottish
Homes and the Scottish Federation of
Housing Associations.
Following a Citizen’s Charter
commitment, the Government
launched a Housing Association
Tenants’ Ombudsman Service in
December 1993. The scheme, which
covers England, allows independent
investigation of tenants’ complaints
against their housing association,
giving them a right similar to that for
council tenants through the local
government ombudsman. A similar
scheme has been launched in
Scotland, and one is being considered
for Northern Ireland.
Other Voluntary Sector Bodies
As well as housing associations, other
voluntary sector bodies have a role to play in
housing matters. Such groups undertake a
number of roles, for example advising people
about their rights under housing law or
encouraging energy efficiency in the home. To
assist the work of such bodies the Government
makes grants available. In England in 1994-95
a total of £306,000 is being made available to
nine housing groups; in Scotland aid of nearly
£852,000 in 1994—95 is being given to 17
voluntary bodies for work on homelessness
and other housing matters.
Tenants’ Rights
Legislation gives council tenants in England
and Wales statutory rights, including security
of tenure. Under the Tenants’ Choice
provisions, council tenants have the right to
change their landlord. The effect of this is to
increase choice for tenants, expose local
authority housing to competition, and so raise
service standards. Better management is also
being provided through the new right to
manage. This allows properly constituted
tenants’ associations the right to take over the
management of their estates; 84 tenants’
management organisations have been set up.
The Leasehold Reform, Housing and Urban
Development Act 1993 introduced a new right
to improve, under which tenants can get
compensation for improvements they carry out.
Government support is focused on
tenants, through the housing benefit system,
rather than on property. Depending on their
personal circumstances, occupiers may qualify
for housing benefit to help them pay their
rent, whether their tenancy is public or
private sector (see p. 332).
Housing for the Elderly
Sheltered housing, which comprises
accommodation with an alarm system and the
services of a resident warden, may be
provided for elderly people who need
support. Increasing emphasis is being placed
on schemes to help elderly people to continue
to live in their own homes, such as
adaptations to existing housing to meet their
needs. Home improvement agencies can help
the elderly, people with disabilities and those
on low incomes to carry out repairs and
improvements to their properties. In England
alone, over £4 million of government help in
1994—95 will go to support 125 home
improvement agencies and a national
co-ordinating body.
Rural Housing
Where there is an identified need for low-
cost housing in rural areas, local authorities
can exceptionally allow housing in areas where
development would not normally be allowed,
331
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
provided that the new housing can be reserved
to meet those needs. The Housing Corporation
has also funded a special rural programme to
build houses in small villages: between
1989-90 and 1993-94 it approved the
building of about 8,500 such homes. Housing
for Wales has a major role in rural housing
provision, targeting at least 25 per cent of its
programme in rural areas. The Welsh Office
also supports local authority schemes for
rural housing undertaken in partnership with
housing associations and others, for example,
it announced £2.5 million of help for 15
schemes in April 1994. In Scotland,
considerable progress is being made through
the range of initiatives launched in 1990 as
part of the Scottish Homes Rural Strategy.
The Northern Ireland Housing Executive
operates a rural strategy which directs special
action both in public housing and also on the
house renovation grant scheme for private
housing, which it administers.
Privately Rented Housing
The number of households renting from
private landlords declined to a low point
of 8.6 per cent in the 1980s, but has now
increased to 9.9 per cent. The
Government’s policy is to increase the
availability of privately rented
accommodation by removing disincentives
to letting. To accomplish this, from January
1989 new private sector lettings were
deregulated, and two new forms of tenancy
were introduced:
• the assured tenancy, which gives the
tenant long-term security in return for a
freely negotiated market rent; and
• the assured shorthold tenancy (short
assured tenancy in Scotland), which is for
a fixed term of at least six months, again
at a free market rent.
Tenants and most other residential
occupiers may not be evicted without a
court order. A ‘Rent a Room’ scheme
encourages homeowners to let rooms to
lodgers without having to pay tax on the rent
they receive; rents of up to about £62 a week
are now tax-free.
In Northern Ireland only certain pre-1956
properties subject to rent restriction come
under statutory control. Rent levels are linked
to those of the Northern Ireland Housing
Executive. Both landlords and tenants may
apply to a rent assessment committee for rent
determination in cases where the current rent
is considered to be inappropriate. Rent
increases are allowed only for properties
which meet a prescribed standard. The only
assured tenancies in Northern Ireland are
those on properties made available under the
former Business Expansion Scheme;
shorthold tenancies are available.
Improving Existing Housing
In urban areas of Britain slum clearance and
redevelopment used to be major features of
housing policy, but there has been a trend in
recent years towards the retention of existing
communities, accompanied by the
modernisation and conversion of sub-standard
homes. Housing conditions have improved
considerably, but problems remain in some
areas where there are concentrations of
dwellings lacking basic amenities or requiring
substantial repairs, and there are still some
pockets of unfit housing for which demolition
is the best solution. The emphasis now is on
area renewal, with an integrated approach to
renewal and renovation.
Estate Action Programme
The Estate Action programme, now part
of the new Single Regeneration Budget
(SRB—see p. 335), provides local
authorities in England with additional
resources to regenerate their run-down
housing estates. These funds enable
authorities to carry out an agreed package
of measures on an estate, including
physical refurbishment and improved
management. By March 1993, Estate
Action had made available £1,245 million
to about 170 local authorities for over
1,000 schemes, improving about 400,000
homes. As part of this, the private sector
has taken over and improved 24,000 homes
and worked in partnership with local
authorities in 300 schemes. The Estate
Action budget in 1993-94 was £358 million,
332
HOUSING AND REGENERATION
and £373 million has been earmarked
within the SRB for Estate Action schemes
in 1994—95.
In Wales, Estate Partnership funding is
available to tackle the problems of selected
estates; £8.4 million of central government
money has been allocated for this in 1994—95
to supplement local authority and private
sector contributions.
Housing Action Trusts
Housing Action Trusts (HATs) focus
resources on some of the most run-down
areas of predominantly local authority
housing. The Government can designate a
HAT for a particular area or estate in
England or Wales, subject to a tenants’ vote.
The HAT takes over responsibility for the
housing in its designated area in order to
renovate it, improve the housing
management, the environment and living
and social conditions, and stimulate local
enterprise. The tenants participate fully in
the work of a HAT. On completion of its
work, the Trust is wound up and its
property transferred to other owners and
managers, such as housing associations or
tenants’ co-operatives, or back to the local
authority. Tenants are consulted on their
future landlords. Tenants as well as local
authorities may apply for the establishment
of a HAT. By August 1994 six HATs
had been established. Like Estate Action,
the HAT programme now forms part of
the SRB.
House Renovation Grants
About 1.6 million home renovation grants,
worth about £5,303 million, were paid in
respect of privately owned dwellings in
England and Wales between 1983 and 1993.
In England and Wales, local authorities give
mandatory renovation grants to enable unfit
dwellings to be brought up to the fitness
standard, with discretionary grants available
for a wider range of works. Grants of up to
100 per cent may be available, subject to a
test of the applicant’s resources. Grants are
also available in certain circumstances for the
provision of facilities for disabled people and
for the repair of houses in multiple
occupation and of the common parts of
blocks of flats. Minor works assistance is also
available to help people in receipt of income-
related benefits, particularly the elderly, with
small-scale works.
In Scotland, local authorities give grants
for improvement and repair. Scottish Homes
also has the power to provide grants to
complement the role of local authorities in
private house renewal. In Northern Ireland,
grants are provided on a similar basis to that
in England and Wales through the House
Renovation Grants scheme, administered by
the Northern Ireland Housing Executive. In
isolated rural areas, a grant to replace
dwellings which cannot be restored is also
available through this scheme.
Renewal Areas
Renewal areas in England and Wales are
intended to provide a sharper focus to area
action, covering both renovation and selective
redevelopment and taking account of a range
of issues wider than just housing. Local
authorities can declare renewal areas where
certain conditions are met, such as the
phy sical condition of privately-owned houses
and the financial circumstances of their
owners. Authorities have additional powers to
buy land in renewal areas and to carry out
improvement works for which extra
government support is available.
In Scotland housing action area powers are
available for the improvement of areas in
which at least half the houses fail to meet a
statutory tolerable standard. Since 1975,
1,875 housing action areas have been
declared. Outside such areas in Scotland local
authorities have powers to apply
improvement orders to houses below the
statutory tolerable standard or lacking certain
basic amenities. Local authorities may also
give grants towards improving the
environment of mainly residential areas.
Considerable progress has been made in
improving housing conditions in Northern
Ireland. In total, 97 per cent of its dwellings
have all amenities, 91 per cent are classified
as fit and 89 per cent are in a good state of
repair. Urban renewal has been promoted
333
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
through redevelopment and housing action
area activity. Since 1977, 53 housing action
areas have been declared.
Homelessness
By law, local authorities have a duty to
secure permanent accommodation for
households which they accept as
unintentionally homeless and in priority
need. The latter category includes pregnant
women, people with dependent children,
and those who are vulnerable because of old
age, mental or physical handicap or other
special reasons. The number of homeless
households in England has been falling since
1991 (see Table 21.2). In July 1994 the
Government announced plans to reform the
legislation on access to local authority and
housing association tenancies, which would
limit the duty of authorities to the
provision of accommodation for a period of
one year.
Over the period 1991-94, extra capital
allocations have been given to housing
authorities in Scotland for homelessness
projects. In January 1994 the Government
announced £4 million of additional funding
to tackle homelessness in Wales. Local
authorities were invited to present bids.
Table 21.2: Households in England
Accepted as Homeless
1989“
1990“
1991“
1992
1993
Source: Department of the Environment
"1989, 1990 and first quarter 1991 figures are based on
estimates in line with a new definition introduced in the
second quarter of 1991.
Most homeless people have some form of
accommodation, even though this may be
temporary, overcrowded or otherwise
unsatisfactory, and those entitled to
rehousing are found accommodation by local
authorities. Only a small proportion of the
homeless are ‘roofless’—that is, literally
without accommodation and therefore forced
to sleep rough. However, because there
122,180
140,350
144,780
142,890
134,190
remains a number of people sleeping rough,
especially in central London, the Government
established the Rough Sleepers Initiative to
tackle the problem in central London, with
resources of £96 million. This has provided
about 950 new places in short-term hostels
and about 2,200 permanent and 700 leased
places in accommodation for hostel dwellers
to move on into. About £86 million has been
made available to continue the Initiative until
1996, which will provide at least 1,500
more permanent homes, together with the
professional help necessary to assist people
to settle into a new life. Since 1990 more than
£20 million has been spent by the
Department of Health on the Homeless
Mentally 111 Initiative, a programme to
provide accommodation and psychiatric care
for mentally-ill people who have been sleeping
rough in central London. The Department
has a three-year commitment to help with the
running costs of the accommodation provided.
A voluntary sector count, held in May
1994, found that fewer than 270 people
were sleeping rough in central
London, compared with estimates of
over 1,000 before the Rough Sleepers
Initiative began.
Grants totalling £6.8 million are being
made available to voluntary organisations
which provide direct assistance to single
people in need of accommodation. This
includes £1.9 million to the National
Homelessness Advice Service.
Regeneration
Economic trends in recent decades have
altered the traditional locations and patterns
of employment and brought profound
changes to local economies. Many inner city
areas have suffered from long-established
industries moving out or closing, leaving
problems of dereliction and unemployment.
A report commissioned by the Government,
Assessing the Impact oj Urban Policy, was
published in June 1994. It concluded that
the gap between 57 urban priority areas and
other places in England had narrowed in the
period 1979—80 to 1990—91. Despite this
334
HOUSING AND REGENERATION
progress, however, areas of deprivation still
exist. Likewise, rural areas have had to adapt
to declining employment in agriculture and
the need in recent years to diversify away
from farm production.
The Government is tackling urban
problems in England with the new Single
Regeneration Budget (SRB), announced in
November 1993, which brings together 20
programmes from five government
departments. Urban problems in Scotland,
Wales and Northern Ireland are being
tackled by Partnerships, the Programme
for the Valleys and Belfast Action Teams
respectively, as well as by many other
government programmes. Other
programmes and policies are addressing
the needs of rural areas.
Single Regeneration Budget
The Secretary of State for the Environment
has overall responsibility for the SRB. It is
intended to promote more flexible and locally
responsive forms of regeneration, building on
the approach pioneered with the City
Challenge initiative (see below). It came into
operation in April 1994, with a budget of
about £1,400 million in the first year.
Existing commitments from the constituent
programmes are being met, but as these
commitments expire the money released will
be allocated through a bidding procedure.
There is about £100 million available for
these bids in 1995-96.
As part of the same reforms, integrated
Government Offices for the Regions (GORs)
have been set up, combining the former
regional offices of the Departments of the
Environment, Employment, Trade and
Industry, and Transport. There are also
senior headquarters representatives in each
office. The main programmes funded by the
SRB are administered by the GORs. The
work of the eight City Action Teams was
subsumed within the GORs in April 1994.
These teams were established to bring
together officials of three government
departments—Employment, Environment,
and Trade and Industry—to ensure that
their main programmes worked together
effectively.
City Challenge
Under the City Challenge initiative, launched
in 1991, local authorities were invited, in
partnership with the private and voluntary
sectors, local communities and government
agencies, to submit imaginative and
comprehensive plans for regenerating key
neighbourhoods by tackling the problems of
physical decay, lack of opportunity and poor
quality of life. The best of these proposals are
receiving government funding of £37.5
million over five years, subject to satisfactory
progress being made towards achieving
agreed targets and objectives.
There have been two rounds of the City
Challenge competition. In the first pilot
round, 11 of the 15 local authorities in
England invited to submit bids were selected
to draw up detailed plans for action, which
commenced in April 1992. The 20 authorities
successful in the second round competition
began work on their five-year programmes in
April 1993.
Over the five-year period to 1997-98,
£1,162 million of City Challenge money is
expected to attract over £3,000 million of
private sector investment. A national
evaluation of City Challenge is under way to
measure the effectiveness of the initiative.
Task Forces
Task Forces were first set up in 1986 and are
small teams which operate in the most
deprived urban areas. They consist primarily
of civil servants, but include secondees from
local authorities and the private and voluntary
sectors. Task Forces concentrate on the
economic regeneration of designated inner
city areas, by improving local people’s
employment prospects, by supporting training
and education initiatives, and by identifying
and removing barriers to their employment.
They also aim to stimulate enterprise
development and strengthen the capacity of
communities to meet local needs. Once a
Task Force area has improved prospects for
continued regeneration and local organisations
have been strengthened, the Task Force is
closed. By March 1994 they had committed
£148 million in support of 5,759 projects.
335
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Urban Development Corporations
Twelve urban development corporations
(UDCs) have been set up in England by the
Government to reverse large-scale urban
decline. The first two of these, London
Docklands and Merseyside, were established
in 1981. Ten others have since been set up:
Birmingham Heartlands, Black Country
(West Midlands), Bristol, Leeds, Central
Manchester, Plymouth, Sheffield, Frafford
Park (Greater Manchester), Teesside, and
Tyne and Wear. These UDCs cover about
16,000 hectares (about 40,000 acres), and
public expenditure on the programme will be
.£252 million in 1994-95.
By March 1994, the 12 English UDCs
had led to the reclamation of 2,457
hectares (6,071 acres) of land, the
construction of 27,500 homes, the
construction of 5.4 million sq m
(58.1 million sq ft) of industrial or
commercial floorspace, and the
creation of 152,300 permanent jobs.
Private sector investment of £10,200
million had been attracted.
English Partnerships
English Partnerships, a new government
regeneration agency, was launched in
November 1993 and came fully into operation
in April 1994. It was set up to promote the
development of vacant, derelict and
contaminated land throughout England. Its
key objectives are to:
• stimulate local enterprise;
• create job opportunities; and
• improve the environment.
It will work in partnership with the public,
private and voluntary sectors, and will be
heavily involved in the Private Finance Initiative
(see p. 153). It is funded within the SRB.
English Partnerships has taken over the
work of English Estates and the Derelict
Land Grant and City Grant programmes. For
1994-95, it has a budget of about £250 million,
made up of grants from the Department of
the Environment and receipts from its own
activities. It is also eligible for assistance from
the European Regional Development Fund
(see p. 118). It has a land reclamation
programme costing £102 million in 199L-95,
including all the Derelict Land Grant
commitments and more than 100 new
schemes. The new schemes alone will reclaim
1,100 hectares (2,700 acres) of land by the
end of the century.
English Partnerships will have a series of
key output measures to ensure it meets its
objectives. These will include the number of
jobs created, the amount of private finance
attracted and the area of land reclaimed.
Safer Cities
Higher than average crime rates, and the fear
of crime, are particular problems in inner city
areas. Safer Cities projects bring together all
sections of the local community to tackle
crime and the fear of crime. Since the
programme’s launch in 1988 over 3,600 crime
prevention and community safety measures
have been initiated, with funding of more
than £22 million. The Government’s
objective is to double the number of Safer
Cities projects established within the lifetime
of the present Parliament. Nine new projects
in England were announced in December
1993, and a further 20 projects are expected
to be set up before the end of 1994.
Examples of help include providing activities
for young people otherwise likely to commit
crime and fitting good quality locks to houses
on estates with a high burglary rate.
Successes include a 40 per cent reduction in
burglaries on a Wolverhampton estate and a
60 per cent reduction in car crime in a
Bradford car park.
Compacts
A number of schools/industry ‘Compacts’
have been introduced since August 1988 in
many urban areas in England. Employers
work with schools to guarantee a job with
training for all school-leavers aged 16 to 18
who meet agreed targets for motivation and
achievement. There are 50 Compacts in
operation in inner city areas in England, with
over 100,000 young people, 10,000 employers
and 700 schools involved.
336
HOUSING AND REGENERATION
Regional Enterprise Grants
The Regional Enterprise Grant programme
(see p. 200) has also been brought within the
SRB. This supports investment and innovation
projects in small firms in designated areas.
Other Measures
The first of a network of City Technology
Colleges was opened near Birmingham in
1988; 15 are currently in operation. Intended
to raise educational standards, the colleges are
established jointly by government and
industry. Although teaching the full National
Curriculum (see p. 418), they emphasise science,
technology and business understanding.
Training programmes such as Youth
Training (see p. 180) and Training for Work
(see p. 179) are helping many people in the
inner cities. About one-third of the young
people participating in Youth Training are
from inner cities. There are about 110
Employment Service ‘outreach’ staff based in
or visiting inner city areas, helping
unemployed people look for jobs and
encouraging them to participate in
employment and training programmes. In
1992-93 there were about 500 inner city
Jobclubs, many catering for people with
literacy and numeracy or language difficulties.
In addition, Employment Service regional
directors have funds for innovative projects to
help unemployed people in inner cities and
other deprived areas back into work or
training. Many of the independent Training
and Enterprise Councils (see p. 195) are
working in Task Force areas, City Challenge
areas or other pockets of deprivation, and
often play an important part in partnership
approaches to regeneration.
The Government encourages tourism as a
force for the improvement of inner city areas.
Several major projects which create a cultural
and artistic focus for inner city regeneration
have been undertaken. Examples include the
development of the Museum of Science and
Technology in the Castlefields area of
Manchester and the International Convention
Centre in Birmingham. The English Tourist
Board and regional tourist boards encourage
promotional activities in inner city areas
through local initiatives which bring together
the tourist boards, local authorities, the
private sector and other agencies.
In March 1994 the Government launched
the Urban Forum, a new national body that
brings together voluntary organisations
involved in urban policy and regeneration. Its
aim is to act as a communication channel
between the voluntary sector and the
Government, develop new ideas, and
encourage local communities and voluntary
groups to engage in regeneration partnerships.
City Pride
The Government announced its City Pride
initiative in November 1993, at the same time
as the establishment of the SRB. Civic and
business leaders in three pilot cities—
Birmingham, London and Manchester—have
been invited to come forward with proposals
for building on the strength of their areas.
The GORs will work closely with the
representatives of these cities.
European Union Programmes
Run-down areas in Britain benefit from the
EU Structural Funds (see p. 118). These
mainly come from the European Regional
Development Fund (ERDF), which finances
infrastructure projects and support for
industry, among other things. Objectives for
the Funds include regenerating areas
affected by industrial decline and
combating long-term unemployment, both
problems common in inner city areas. The
Department of the Environment is
responsible for the co-ordination of ERDF
programmes in the English regions. About
£1,195 million has been allocated to
declining industrial regions in England over
the period 1994 to 1996.
Following a review of the Structural
Funds, which took effect in January 1994,
Merseyside qualifies for ‘Objective F
support—to promote economic
development in underdeveloped regions. This
justifies the highest level of Structural Funds
support, and Merseyside stands to receive
about £690 million from the Funds over the
period 1994 to 1999.
337
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Coalfield Areas Fund
The Coalfield Areas Fund was set up with
the aim of alleviating the economic effects of
colliery closures on local communities. A
total of £5 million is being made available
through the Fund in 1993-94 and 1994-95.
This is supporting 36 projects put forward
by 18 local authorities. It is estimated that
about 1,700 jobs were created in 1993-94 and
that about 46,000 sq m (494,000 sq ft) of
new or improved business and commercial
floorspace were provided.
Groundwork Trusts
Groundwork trusts, which work in
partnership with public bodies, the private
sector, voluntary organisations and
individuals, aim to tackle environmental
problems arising from dereliction and
vandalism and to increase public awareness
of the opportunities to change and improve
local environments. Traditionally, such
trusts have tended to concentrate on fringe
urban or suburban areas, but increasingly
they are also becoming involved in inner
city areas. For example, a trust has recentK
been set up in the Hackney area of inner
London. The Groundwork Foundation is a
national body providing the trusts with
advice and support.
Government funding for Groundwork
in 1994-95 is £6 million in England;
£401,000 is available in Wales. A target
has been set of establishing 50 trusts in
England and Wales by 1995, compared with
22 trusts in 1990-91.
Rural Development
The economy of the countryside has come
under great pressure in recent years.
Changes have included a greater tendency
for commuters to live in rural areas, thus
creating ‘dormitory1 villages, and the need
for agricultural diversification following
reform of the Common Agricultural Policy
(see p. 275).
The Rural Development Commission
(RDC) is the government agency set up
to assist the economic and social
development of the English countryside. It
ensures that the needs and special
circumstances of rural communities and
businesses are taken into account when
government policy is made. It has a local
advisory role (particularly on planning
matters), provides support for voluntary
activity and assists selected activities in
rural areas, such as housing, transport
and village shops. The RDC
spent £35.4 million in 1992-93 and its
budget has been increased to £43 million
for 1994—95.
A wide range of programmes is
available, including:
• grants for the conversion of redundant
buildings to workspace;
• business loans to top up funding for
viable projects which cannot be
completely financed by the private
sector;
• measures to support the provision of
affordable housing in the countryside;
• measures to support the provision of
out-of-school childcare; and
• grants and loans for village halls.
The RDC’s main economic programmes
are concentrated in priority rural
development areas (RDAs), which cover
about 35 per cent of the area of England
and take in over 2.7 million people. The
Rural Challenge initiative, launched in
February 1994, offers six awards, worth an
extra £1 million a year, to these RDAs.
Some rural areas are also eligible for help
from the ERDF; a total of £381 million
has been allocated to England over the
period 1994 to 1999. The Government has
put forward plans for the six English
regions designated for this support.
Enterprise and Simplified Planning
Zones
Since 1981 the Government has set up
33 enterprise zones. Each zone runs for a
period of ten years from designation; most
of the zones have therefore already reached
the end of their lives. Benefits in the zones
include:
338
HOUSING AND REGENERATION
• exemption from the national non-domestic
rate (the local property tax payable by
non-domestic property owners);
• 100 per cent allowances for corporation
and income tax purposes for capital
expenditure on industrial and commercial
buildings; and
• a much simplified planning system.
In January 1995 there will be five zones
operating, including two extensions. Three
further zones are expected to be designated
shortly afterwards in the East Midlands, East
Durham and the Dearne Valley, South
Yorkshire, in response to job losses in the
mining industry. At present there is no
intention to extend the enterprise zone
scheme generally, although new zones may
be created in exceptional circumstances.
Simplified planning zones (SPZs) can
help local authorities to secure development
in parts of their areas. An SPZ scheme,
which also lasts for ten years, provides full
planning permission for specified types of
development. Like enterprise zones, from
which the concept was derived, SPZs are
useful as part of an overall package to
generate private sector interest in an area.
The procedures for establishing an SPZ
were recently streamlined to encourage
their use. By March 1993, there were six
zones in operation.
Public Sector Land
The Department of the Environment is
currently increasing its efforts to promote the
sale and development of vacant and under¬
used public sector land. Information is being
assembled on key sites with development
potential, and where there are no firm plans
to market or develop land, action will be
taken to encourage and promote the sale of
sites. Since 1989, registers of unused or
under-used public sector land have been
maintained by the owners. Under the ‘Public
Request to Order Disposal’ scheme, members
of the public are encouraged to request the
Secretary of State to order public bodies to
dispose of such land on the open market.
In January 1994 the rules governing the
way local authorities can spend the proceeds
of asset sales were altered to encourage the
sale of surplus land. This has the effect of
increasing the proportion of the proceeds that
councils can spend on new capital projects in
those cases where they have had to spend
money preparing the land for sale.
Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland
Wales
A new Strategic Development Scheme was
launched in Wales in April 1994, into which
the previous Urban Programme was
subsumed. Funding is £55.5 million in
1994—95, and economic and environmental
projects will receive priority. In addition,
Urban Investment Grant encourages
private-sector developments on derelict and
run-down sites in urban areas; the 1994—95
budget is almost £8.7 million.
The Government announced Urban
Investment Grant for 11 development
projects in the first six months
of 1994. Public support of nearly
£8 million will secure more than
£45 million of private investment and
create about 950 permanent jobs.
The Government aims to remove much of
the remaining major industrial dereliction in
Wales by the end of the 1990s. The Welsh
Development Agency (see p. 200) may
acquire and reclaim derelict land or make
grants to local authorities for that purpose.
Land use is also encouraged by the Land
Authority for Wales, a statutory body with
powers to make land available for development
in circumstances where the private sector
would find this difficult or impossible.
The first Programme for the Valleys,
which ran from 1988 to 1993, was an
extensive scheme of economic and urban
regeneration, covering an area of about 2,200
sq km (860 sq miles) in the south Wales
valleys. In April 1993 the Secretary of State
for Wales launched a new five-year
Programme. It builds on the success of the
first Programme by continuing many of its
measures, and also introducing new initiatives
339
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
for the social, economic and environmental
regeneration of the Valleys. The five aims of
the new Programme are to:
• create more, better-quality jobs;
• improve training, education and transport,
so that local people can benefit;
• improve the quality of the environment;
• improve the quality and choice of
housing; and
• improve the health of local people.
The Cardiff Bay Development Corporation
was set up in 1987 to bring forward
redevelopment in an area of south Cardiff,
once its commercial centre. By August 1994
the Corporation had received £220 million
in government grant. Government support
for the Corporation in 1994—95 will be
£48 million. The Corporation’s regeneration
strategy includes the construction of a
£147 million barrage across Cardiff harbour
mouth, which will create a large freshwater
lake and 12 km (7 miles) of waterside
frontage. Work commenced on the barrage
in May 1994 and is scheduled to be
completed in 1998. It is expected that with
the barrage more than 23,000 new jobs will
be created in the Cardiff Bay area, 4,400 new
homes built and over £1,200 million of
private investment attracted.
Scotland
In 1988 the Government set out in the White
Paper New Life for Urban Scotland its
strategy for improving the quality of life for
people living on peripheral estates in
Scotland. Building on the experience gained
from inner city regeneration schemes such as
the Glasgow Eastern Area Renewal, the main
aim of the strategy was to encourage residents
to take more responsibility for the
improvement of their own communities. A
review of urban regeneration policy in
Scotland was launched in October 1993, and
decisions on the outcome are scheduled to be
announced in late 1994.
The focus of regeneration effort is four
Partnerships in areas of Dundee, Edinburgh,
Glasgow and Paisley. These are led by The
Scottish Office and involve other bodies and
groups, including Scottish Enterprise (see
p. 200), Scottish Homes (see p. 330), the
local authorities, the private sector and the
local communities. Their objectives include
plans to:
• improve the quality and tenure mix of
housing available to local people;
• improve employment prospects by
providing increased avenues for training
and further education; and
• tackle social and environmental problems
on the estates.
Almost 30 per cent of the housing
stock in the Partnership areas has
now been renovated, wdth over 6,500
homes refurbished and 1,300 new
homes built. Local authority ownership
has declined from 97 per cent to
73 per cent, with owner-occupation
increasing from 2.5 per cent to 10 per
cent and community ownership from
less than 1 per cent to 12 per cent.
Other peripheral estates and inner city
areas continue to receive substantial support
through such sources as the Urban Programme,
Scottish Homes and Scottish Enterprise.
Scottish Homes is leading 11 Smaller Urban
Renewal Initiatives, in which it is investing
£24 million in 1994-95. The Government is
committed to seeking ways to improve the
Partnerships and to strengthening the Urban
Programme in Scotland by emphasising those
projects which form part of a concerted effort
to assist a deprived area.
The Urban Programme has grown from
£44 million in 1988-89 to £85 million in
1994—95. About 1,200 projects will be
supported in 1994—95. Five Safer Cities
programmes have been launched in Scotland,
including schemes in Aberdeen, Edinburgh,
Glasgow and Dundee. Four are still in
existence, and £855,000 will be invested in
them by central government in 1994—95.
The Local Enterprise Companies (LECs—
see p. 195), working under contract to
Scottish Enterprise, have substantial budgets
and a flexible range of powers and functions
to improve the environment and encourage
business and employment in their areas. In
340
HOUSING AND REGENERATION
particular, Scottish Enterprise operates a Local
Enterprise Grants for Urban Projects scheme,
which aims to encourage private sector
investment for projects in deprived areas. The
areas of need in which the scheme operates
include the four Partnership areas, and other
areas showing similar characteristics of
deprivation. LECs can also support projects in
their areas. Responsibility for derelict land
reclamation rests with Scottish Enterprise, the
LECs and Highlands and Islands Enterprise.
They may acquire and reclaim land either by
agreement or compulsorily; increasingly they
seek to work with the private sector to bring
land back into use.
The Compact scheme (see p. 337) has
been introduced in Scotland, with 12
Compacts in operation. In all, 7,400 young
people are involved with the Compacts, as
are many of the 10,500 employers and
business organisations in Education
Business Partnerships in Scotland. The
Training and Employment Grants scheme is
designed to increase access to employment
opportunities for young and long-term
unemployed people.
Northern Ireland
Urban Development Grant is the principal
urban regeneration measure in Northern Ireland,
with projected expenditure of £3.6 million in
1994—95. It is targeted at the most run-down
parts of Belfast and Londonderry. Grants
may also be paid to landowners who restore
or improve derelict sites in Northern Ireland.
A comprehensive development programme
aims to revitalise the commercial areas of
Belfast. In 1993-94 regeneration programmes
have a combined allocation of over
£34 million. Nine Action Teams have been
established to tackle the problems of
particularly deprived areas of the city. The
‘Making Belfast Work’ initiative, launched in
1988, is designed to reinforce the efforts to
alleviate the economic, educational, social and
environmental problems in the most
disadvantaged areas of Belfast. In addition to
extensive funding already allocated to
mainstream departmental programmes,
Making Belfast Work has provided a further
£144 million approximately for the period
1988-89 to 1994-95. The Laganside
Corporation was established in 1989 to
regenerate Belfast’s riverside area. Its
government grant in 1993-94 is £5.3 million.
The Community Regeneration and
Improvement Special Programme aims to
regenerate disadvantaged smaller towns. It is
jointly funded by the Department of the
Environment for Northern Ireland and the
International Fund for Ireland. A total of 33
small towns have been assisted since the
programme was started in 1990.
Further Reading
Assessing the Impact of Urban Policy. HMSO, 1994.
Housing. Aspects of Britain series. HMSO, 1993.
New Life for Urban Scotland. HMSO, 1988.
Annual Reports
Building Societies Commission. IIMSO.
Housing and Construction Statistics. HMSO.
The Housing Corporation. Housing Corporation.
The Rural Development Commission. RDC.
341
22 Planning and
Conservation
Planning 342
Development Plans 342
Development Control 344
Architectural Standards 345
Conservation 345
Administrative Arrangements 346
Buildings and Monuments 346
The Countryside and Nature
Conservation 348
Environmental Improvement 354
World Heritage Sites 354
Britain seeks to balance the demands for land from business, housing,
transport, farming and leisure, and to protect the environment by means of a
statutory system of land-use planning and development control. Government
agencies and voluntary bodies work to conserve Britain’s natural heritage and
historic monuments; over 500,000 important buildings and 6,700 sites of
special scientific interest receive statutory protection.
PLANNING
Direct responsibility for land-use planning in
Great Britain lies with local authorities. The
Secretaries of State for the Environment,
Wales and Scotland have overall
responsibility for the operation of the system.
The Department of the Environment brings
together the major responsibilities in England
for land-use planning, housing and
construction, countryside policy and
environmental protection. The Welsh Office
and The Scottish Office have broadly
equivalent responsibilities. In Northern
Ireland the Department of the Environment
for Northern Ireland is responsible for
planning matters through six divisional
planning offices, which work closely with the
district councils.
In England and Wales the departments
provide national and regional guidance on
planning matters, while strategic planning at
the county level is the responsibility of the
county councils. District councils are
responsible for local plans and development
control, except with regard to minerals and
waste, which are ‘county matters’.1 In
London and the former metropolitan
counties, there is a unitary planning system.
The boroughs and metropolitan districts
prepare unitary development plans and are
responsible for development control.
In Scotland, The Scottish Office provides
national planning guidance. Planning
functions are undertaken by regional and
district councils, whose responsibilities are
divided on a basis broadly similar to that in
England and Wales. In the more rural regions
and the islands, the regional and islands
councils respectively have responsibility for
all planning functions.
Development Plans
The Government is committed to a ‘plan-led
svstem of development control. This has been
1 Local government reorganisation (see p. 74) is likely to affect
the division of responsibility for planning matters in many parts
of the country.
342
PLANNING AND CONSERVATION
reflected in recent legislation. The
preparation of district-wide development
plans is mandatory, and planning
applications have to be determined in
accordance with the statutory development
plan, unless other material considerations
indicate otherwise. This has, in effect,
introduced a presumption in favour of
proposals that accord with the
development plan.
The present development plan system
in England and Wales involves structure,
local and unitary development plans:
• structure plans, setting out broad
policies for the development and
use of land, are adopted by
county councils, which also draw up
local plans for minerals and, in
England, waste;
• local plans, prepared in general
conformity with the adopted structure
plan, and providing detailed guidance
for development expected to start
within about ten years, are adopted by
district councils and National Park
authorities; and
• unitary development plans, setting
out both strategic and detailed land
use and development policies, are
adopted by metropolitan districts or
London boroughs.
Members of the public are encouraged
to become involved in the formulation of
plan policies and proposals. They can
formally object and make their case in
public to an independent inspector.
In Scotland structure plans are prepared
by regional or islands authorities, and local
plans by those districts with planning
responsibilities, and in some rural areas by
regional planning and islands authorities.
Under Northern Ireland’s single-tier
system, plans are prepared by the
Department of the Environment for
Northern Ireland.
When formulating their plans, planning
authorities must take account of any
strategic or regional guidance issued by the
Secretary of State and any statements of
government planning policy.
The Government’s aim is for full use—
having regard to the quality of the urban
environment—to be made of urban land in
existing towns and cities, so avoiding the
need to develop ‘green field’ sites and
reducing transport demands. In 1987, the
most recent year for which reliable
figures are available, virtually half of all new
urban land uses involved land that was
already urban.
The Department of the Environment’s
Planning Policy Guidance note on
transport, published in March 1994,
aims to reduce the need to travel and
to maximise the development
potential of existing centres. The
careful selection by local planning
authorities of locations for new
development, close to existing
facilities and readily served by public
transport, will reduce journey lengths
and maximise the choice of means of
transport other than the car.
Green Belts
‘Green Belts’ are areas intended to be left
open and free from inappropriate
development. Their purposes are to:
• restrict the sprawl of large built-up
areas;
• safeguard the surrounding countryside;
• prevent neighbouring towns merging;
• preserve the special character of historic
towns; and
• assist in urban regeneration.
They also have a recreational role. Green
Belts have been established around major
cities, including London, Aberdeen,
Dundee, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Merseyside,
Greater Manchester and the West Midlands,
as well as several smaller towns. Some 1.5
million hectares (3.8 million acres) are
designated as Green Belt in England and
150,000 hectares (370,000 acres) in Scotland.
The Government attaches great importance
to the protection of Green Belts and expects
local planning authorities to do likewise
when considering planning applications.
343
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Development Control
Most development requires specific planning
permission, apart from certain minor
proposals. Applications are dealt with in the
light of development plans and other material
planning considerations, including national
and regional guidance. In 1993 about 470,000
applications for planning permission were
received in England alone; in total, about
370,000 applications were granted in this
period. The Government has set local
authorities a target of determining 80 per cent
of applications within eight weeks. In recent
years there has been steady progress towards
this target (see Table 22.1).
Local planning authorities in England and
Wales are required to publicise planning
applications locally. Methods commonly used
include site notices, newspaper advertising
and notifying neighbours. In Scotland the
applicant is required to notify the owners,
occupiers and, in some cases, lessees of land
and buildings adjoining the site of a proposed
development when the application is
submitted to the planning authority.
Newspaper advertisement is required for
certain types of development.
The applicant has a right of appeal to the
Secretary of State if the local authority
refuses planning permission, grants it with
conditions attached, or fails to decide an
application within eight weeks (or whatever
longer period is agreed with the applicant).
The great majority of appeals are decided on
the basis of written submissions. However,
either party has the right to be heard by an
inspector (or ‘reporter’ in Scotland) at a
public local inquiry or, where a less formal
arrangement is appropriate, at a hearing. A
local inquiry is usually held for more
complicated or controversial applications.
Similar provision is made in Northern
Ireland for the hearing of representations at
public inquiries; for planning applications
which do not give rise to public inquiries, the
applicant has a right of appeal to the
independent Planning Appeals Commission.
The Secretaries of State can direct that a
planning application be referred to them for
decision. This power to ‘call in’ is generally
exercised only for proposals which raise
planning issues of national or regional
importance. The applicant and the local
planning authority have the right to be heard
by a person appointed by the Secretary of
State, and a public inquiry will normally be
held. In Northern Ireland, major planning
applications are dealt with under the
Planning (NI) Order 1991, which allows for a
public inquiry in certain circumstances.
Environmental Impact Assessment
Planning applications for certain types of
development must be accompanied by an
environmental impact assessment. This
should describe the likely environmental
effects and measures to minimise them.
These statements are made available to the
public and to statutory bodies such as the
Countryside Commission and English Nature
(see p. 348). The planning authority must
take into consideration the environmental
statement, and any representations received
on it, before granting planning permission.
Table 22.1: Planning Applications and Decisions, England
Total applications
determined (thousands)
Percentage
within
eight weeks
1988- 89
1989- 90
1990- 91
1991- 92
1992- 93
1993- 94
620
595
518
483
441
448
52
46
53
60
63
65
Source: Department of the Environment
344
PLANNING AND CONSERVATION
Recent legislation requires that local
authorities take account of
environmental considerations when
drawing up their development plans.
To assist them in this, in November
1993 the Government published a
good practice guide on the
environmental appraisal of
development plans.
Architectural Standards
High standards in new building are
encouraged by the Government, although it
advises local planning authorities not to
impose their architectural tastes on
developers. The Department of the
Environment, in collaboration with the
independent Royal Institute of British
Architects (RIBA) and the National
House-Building Council, sponsors the
biennial Housing Design Awards Scheme
for England and Northern Ireland, with
categories for renovation and new
building. Scotland and Wales have similar
award schemes. Royal Fine Art
Commissions for England and Wales and
for Scotland advise government
departments, planning authorities and other
public bodies on questions of public amenity
or artistic importance.
The RIBA, the principal professional
body for architects, together with the
Architects Registration Council of the
United Kingdom, exercises control over
standards in architectural education and
encourages high architectural standards in
the profession. The Royal Incorporation of
Architects in Scotland is allied to it, as is
the Royal Society of Ulster Architects.
CONSERVATION
Britain has a long tradition of conservation,
and for many years has had policies and
laws designed to protect both its natural
environment and built heritage. For
example, the first Act of Parliament to
protect old buildings, the Ancient
Monuments Protection Act, was passed in
1882 and the Protection of Wild Birds Act
in 1880. A wide variety of designations are
used to protect areas, sites and monuments
that are of special interest to conservationists,
and various organisations work towards the
conservation of differing aspects of Britain’s
national heritage.
Britain participated fully in the United
Nations Conference on Environment and
Development (UNCED), popularly known as
the ‘Earth Summit’, held in Rio de Janeiro in
June 1992, and is committed to carrying the
process forward. Among the agreements
reached was a framework convention on
climate change (see p. 361), a convention on
biodiversity (see p. 353), ‘Agenda 21’ (an
action framework for the 21st century), a
declaration setting out clear principles for
sustainable development, and a declaration
for the management of forests.
In January 1994, Britain published
its national strategies for sustainable
development, climate change (see p. 361),
biodiversity (see p. 353) and forestry. The
sustainable development strategy describes
the likely state of the British environment
over the next 20 years, the pressures on it
and the ways in which various sectors of the
economy might develop more sustainably.
Britain’s impact on the world environment is
also described. The plan builds on the White
Paper This Common Inheritance (see p. 346),
but does not replace it, looking much more
fundamentally at the rationale of different
sectoral policies and opportunities that may
be worth pursuing. The strategy includes the
establishment of three bodies to assist policy
on sustainable development:
• an independent advisory panel, which
will be consulted on issues of major
strategic importance to sustainable
development;
• a ‘round table’, which will bring
together interests such as business,
local government and academics to
discuss these matters with ministers;
and
• a Citizens’ Environment Initiative, an
independent committee which will seek
to persuade individuals and groups to
commit themselves to sustainable
development.
345
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Administrative Arrangements
The Department of the Environment is
responsible for countryside policy and
environmental protection in England; the
Department of National Heritage has
responsibility for the listing of buildings and
for scheduled ancient monuments. The Welsh
Office, The Scottish Office and the
Department of the Environment for Northern
Ireland have broadly equivalent responsibilities.
Agencies such as English Nature, English
Heritage, the Countryside Commission and
their equivalents carry out many functions on
behalf of the Government. In addition, the
local authorities and a wide range of
voluntary organisations are actively involved
in environmental conservation and protection.
This Common Inheritance
The environment White Paper This Common
Inheritance, published in September 1990, was
the first comprehensive statement by the
Government of its policy on issues affecting
the environment. It summarised more than
350 proposals for tackling such diverse issues
as global warming, pollution control, the
regulation of land use and planning, the rural
economy, the countryside and wildlife. Three
progress reports have been published. The
most recent, published in May 1994, set out
over 100 new commitments and listed
progress on over 500 commitments from
previous years.
Buildings and Monuments
Lists of buildings of special architectural or
historical interest are compiled by the
Government, in England with the advice of
English Heritage. It is against the law to
demolish, extend or alter the character of any
‘listed’ building without prior consent from
the local planning authority or the appropriate
Secretary of State. The local planning
authority can issue temporary ‘building
preservation notices’ to protect unlisted
buildings that are at risk, allowing
consideration to be given to listing. The
Department of the Environment for Northern
Ireland is directly responsible for the listing
of buildings there.
Ancient monuments are similarly
protected through a system of scheduling.
English Heritage, the government agency
responsible for the conservation of historic
remains in England, has embarked upon a
programme to evaluate all known
archaeological remains in England. This is
expected to result in a significant increase in
the number of scheduled monuments. A
similar effort is being made to increase the
number of listed buildings and scheduled
monuments in Wales.
Many of the royal palaces and parks are
open to the public; their maintenance is the
responsibility of the Secretaries of State for
National Heritage and for Scotland. English
Heritage manages about 400 properties on
behalf of the Secretary of State for National
Heritage, advises him on applications for
consent to alter or demolish scheduled
monuments and listed buildings, and gives
grants for the repair of ancient monuments,
historic buildings and buildings in
conservation areas in England. Most of its
monuments are open to the public.
Government funding for English Heritage is
£104 million in 1994—95.
In Scotland and Wales similar functions
are performed by Historic Scotland, which
Table 22.2: Scheduled Monuments and Listed Buildings
Listed Scheduled
buildings monuments
14,500
2,700
6,000
1,100
24,300
Source: Department of National Heritage
443,000
16,000
41,000
8,000
508,000
England
Wales
Scotland
Northern Ireland
Britain
346
PLANNING AND CONSERVATION
cares for 330 monuments, and by Cadw:
Welsh Historic Monuments, which manages
129, with advice from an Ancient
Monuments Board and Historic Buildings
Council for each country. Historic Scotland
and Cadw are executive agencies within The
Scottish Office and the Welsh Office
respectively. The Department of the
Environment for Northern Ireland has 173
historic monuments in its care, and is advised
by a Historic Buildings Council and a
Historic Monuments Council.
Local planning authorities have designated
more than 8,000 ‘conservation areas’ of
special architectural or historic interest in
England; there are over 400 in Wales, 674 in
Scotland and 40 in Northern Ireland. These
areas receive special protection through the
planning system. Grants and loans are
available from the appropriate historic
buildings and monuments body for works
which make a significant contribution towards
the preservation or enhancement of a
conservation area.
The National Heritage Memorial Fund
helps towards the cost of acquiring,
maintaining or preserving land, buildings,
works of art and other items of outstanding
interest which are also of importance to the
national heritage. Government funding totals
£8.7 million in 1994—95. It will also act as
the distributing body for the heritage share of
the proceeds from the National Lottery (see
p. 493). In 1993-94 the Fund assisted in the
preservation of 61 heritage items.
Industrial, Transport and Maritime Heritage
Britain was the first country in the world to
industrialise on a large scale, and many
advances in manufacturing and transport
were pioneered in Britain. This has resulted
in a large industrial heritage, the importance
of which is being increasingly recognised.
Key sites are scheduled or listed; one of the
most important, the Ironbridge Gorge, where
Abraham Darby (1677-1717) first smelted
iron using coke instead of charcoal, has
been designated a World Heritage Site
(see p. 354). Other museums have also been
set up, devoted to the preservation of
industrial buildings and equipment.
Britain, which pioneered railways, has a
fine heritage of railway buildings and
structures, and there is an active
movement to preserve it. Volunteers are very
active in this. A large number of disused
railway lines have been bought by railway
preservation societies and returned to
operation, often using preserved steam
locomotives, and several railway museums
have been established.
Reminders of Britain’s maritime past are
also preserved. The historic naval dockyard at
Chatham has been opened to the public; at
Portsmouth HMS Victory, Nelson’s flagship,
HMS Warrior, the world’s first iron
battleship, and the remains of Mary Rose, an
early 16th-century warship, raised from the
seabed in 1982, are open to the public. The
Imperial War Museum has preserved the
cruiser HMS Belfast, which is open to the
public in the Pool of London. Isambard
Kingdom Brunei’s SS Great Britain, the
world’s first large screw-driven ship, is
preserved in Bristol. A voluntary body, the
Maritime Trust, has been established to
preserve vessels and other maritime items
of historic or technical interest. The
Trust’s vessels include the clipper Cutty Sark
at Greenwich.
Voluntary Sector
Among the organisations which campaign
for the preservation and appreciation of
buildings are:
• the Society for the Protection of Ancient
Buildings;
• the Ancient Monuments Society;
• the Georgian Group;
• the Victorian Society;
• the Twentieth Century Society;
• the Architectural Heritage Society of
Scotland;
• the Ulster Architectural Heritage Society;
• the Architectural Heritage Fund; and
• the Council for British Archaeology.
While funded largely by private donations,
the amenity societies have paid professional
staff and statutory responsibilities, in
347
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
recognition of which they receive
government support.
The National Trust (for Places of Historic
Interest or Natural Beauty), a charity with
over 2 million members, owns and protects
230 historic houses open to the public, in
addition to over 235,000 hectares (580,000
acres) of land in England, Wales and
Northern Ireland. Scotland has its own
National Trust. The Civic Trust makes
awards for development and restoration work
which enhances its surroundings. It
undertakes urban regeneration projects and
acts as an ‘umbrella’ organisation for nearly
1,000 local amenity societies. There are
associate trusts in Scotland, Wales and
north-east England.
The Countryside and Nature
Conservation
Four government agencies are currently
responsible for countryside policy and nature
conservation in Great Britain:
• the Countryside Commission and English
Nature, which both act in England;
• the Countryside Council for Wales
(CCW); and
• Scottish Natural Heritage (SNH).
The Joint Nature Conservation Committee
(JNCC) is the mechanism through which the
three nature conservation agencies in
England, Wales and Scotland fulfil their
responsibilities for international nature
conservation matters and those affecting
Great Britain as a whole. The JNCC also
undertakes research and sets standards for
data, monitoring and other matters. It
includes representatives from Northern
Ireland and independent members, and has a
supporting specialist staff.
Countryside Agencies
The Countryside Commission, the CCW and
SNH are responsible for enhancing the
natural beauty and amenity of the
countryside and encouraging the provision of
facilities for open-air recreation. They are
expected to respect the needs of those who
live and work in the countryside. Activities
aided by these bodies include the provision
by local authorities (sometimes in association
with other bodies) and private individuals of
country parks and picnic sites, often within
easy reach of towns; the provision or
improvement of recreational paths; and the
encouragement of amenity tree-planting
schemes. The countryside agencies
undertake research projects and experimental
schemes, often working in consultation with
local authorities and voluntary organisations.
They give financial assistance to public,
private and voluntary organisations, and
individuals carrying out countryside
conservation, recreation and amenity
projects.
The Countryside Commission runs the
Countryside Stewardship scheme, which
offers incentives to farmers and other land
managers to enhance valuable landscapes
and habitats and improve access to the
countryside. It now incorporates the
Hedgerow Incentive Scheme. A total of
3,900 agreements have been made, covering
80,000 hectares (198,000 acres) and
programmes involving 1,640 km (1,025
miles) of hedge restoration. The scheme is to
transfer to the Ministry of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food in April 1996. In Wales
an equivalent scheme is being run on a pilot
basis by the CCW. Called Tir Cymen, it
adopts a slightly different approach in that it
applies to entire farms.
Total funding for the countryside
agencies in 1994—95 is £46 million for
the Countryside Commission, £20.6
million for the CCW and £39.9
million for SNH. SNH’s budget
represents an increase of more than
10 per cent in cash terms.
The Countryside Commission recognises
over 210 country parks and over 230 picnic
sites in England. A further 35 country parks
and about 30 picnic sites in Wales are
recognised by the CCW. In Scotland there
are 36 country parks, and many local
authority and private sector schemes for a
variety of countryside facilities have been
approved for grant aid by SNH.
348
PLANNING AND CONSERVATION
Nature Conservation Agencies
English Nature, the CCW and SNH are
responsible for nature conservation in their
areas. This includes:
• establishing and managing nature reserves;
• advising the Government;
• identifying and notifying Sites of Special
Scientific Interest (SSSIs);
• providing general nature conservation
information and advice;
• giving grants; and
• supporting and conducting research.
English Nature’s funding for 1994-95 is
£42 million.
There are over 300 national nature
reserves covering some 190,000 hectares
(468,000 acres) in Great Britain, and two
statutory marine nature reserves, surrounding
the islands of Lundy, off the Devon coast,
and Skomer, off the coast of Dyfed. About
6,700 SSSIs have been notified in Great
Britain for their plant, animal, geological or
physiographical features. Local authorities
have declared about 340 local nature reserves
in England and 21 in Wales. The
Environmentally Sensitive Areas scheme (see
p. 277) also helps to protect wildlife.
In England, to assist those who have an
interest or involvement in environmental
planning and conservation action, English
Nature has mapped and is describing
‘Natural Areas’. These have a distinctive
character that derives from the underlying
geology, land forms, flora and fauna, and the
land uses and settlement patterns of the area.
The Natural Areas framework, which has
been subject to public consultation, will
underpin all of English Nature’s work
in future.
County wildlife trusts, urban wildlife
trusts and the Royal Society for the
Protection of Birds (RSPB) play an important
part in protecting wildlife, having established
between them over 2,000 reserves. The
county and urban trusts are affiliated to a
parent organisation, the Royal Society for
Nature Conservation. The RSPB is the
largest voluntary wildlife conservation body
in Europe.
English Nature enters into land
management agreements with owners and
occupiers of SSSI land, increasingly to
support management that is beneficial for its
wildlife and natural features. Overall, English
Nature’s grant schemes provide more than
£2 million to assist local action to sustain
biodiversity and geodiversity.
In Northern Ireland both nature and
countryside conservation are the
responsibility of the Environment Service.
In 1994—95 funding for its conservation
measures is some £6.5 million. The Council
for Nature Conservation and the Countryside
advises the Department on nature
conservation matters, including the
establishment and management of land and
marine nature reserves and the declaration of
Areas of Special Scientific Interest. About 44
national nature reserves have been established
and 40 Areas of Special Scientific Interest
declared.
Wildlife Protection
Wildlife in Great Britain is protected
principally by the Wildlife and Countryside
Act 1981. This has:
• extended the list of protected species;
• restricted the introduction into the
countryside of animals not normally
found in the wild in Britain; and
• afforded greater protection for SSSIs and
introduced provision for marine nature
reserves.
There is also provision for reviews of the
list of protected species to be conducted by
the three official nature conservation
agencies, acting jointly through the JNCC,
every five years and for the revised list to be
submitted to the Secretary of State for the
Environment. In Northern Ireland separate
legislation on species and habitat protection is
in line with the rest of Britain.
Species Recovery and Reintroduction
Extensive research and management are
carried out to encourage the recovery of
populations of species threatened with
extinction. The three nature conservation
349
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
agencies have also set up recovery
programmes for a number of threatened
species of plants and animals. English
Nature’s programme covers 25 species,
including the dormouse, the Plymouth pear
and the fen raft spider. The aim is to ensure
the survival of self-sustaining populations of
these species in the wild.
Schemes have been devised to reintroduce
species into areas in which they used to be
found. For example, the red kite had died out
in England and Scotland, although it was still
found in Wales and mainland Europe. An
international project was co-ordinated by the
JNCC and the RSPB to bring adult
birds from Sweden and Spain and release
them into the wild in areas which the species
no longer inhabited. Other species
reintroduced in recent years include the
white-tailed sea eagle and the Large Blue
butterfly. The Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew
holds seeds from about 3,000 plant species
which are extinct or under severe threat in
the wild, and has had some success with
reintroduction projects.
Tree Preservation and Planting
Tree preservation orders enable local
authorities to protect trees and woodlands in
the interests of amenity. Once a tree is
protected, it is in general an offence to cut
down, reshape or generally wilfully destroy it
without permission. The courts can impose
substantial fines for breaches of such orders.
Where protected trees are felled in
contravention of an order or are removed
because they are dying, dead or dangerous, a
replacement tree must be planted. Local
authorities have powers to enforce this.
Tree planting is encouraged through
various grant schemes. The planting of
broadleaved trees has increased tenfold
since 1985. Major new initiatives include a
project to create a new national forest in
the Midlands and 12 community forests near
large towns and cities.
The Coast
Local planning authorities are responsible for
planning land use at the coast; they also
attempt to safeguard and enhance the coast’s
natural attractions and preserve areas of
scientific interest. The protection of the
coastline against erosion and flooding is
administered centrally by the Ministry of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, the Welsh
Office and The Scottish Office. Operational
responsibility lies with local authorities and
the National Rivers Authority (see p. 266).
Certain stretches of undeveloped coast of
particular scenic beauty in England and
Wales are designated as heritage coast;
jointly with local authorities, the countryside
agencies have designated 45 heritage coasts,
protecting 1,525 km (948 miles). English
Nature, through its Campaign for a Living
Coast, provides funds for groups setting up
voluntary marine nature reserves or
producing management plans for England’s
estuaries. So far, seven voluntary marine
nature reserves have been grant-aided and
21 estuary management plans produced,
covering 70 per cent of England’s total
estuarine area. There are 29 marine
consultation areas in Scotland. Statutory
bodies taking decisions that affect these
areas will be asked to consult SNH.
The National Trust, through its
Enterprise Neptune campaign, raises funds
to acquire stretches of coastline of great
natural beauty and recreational value. About
£18 million has been raised so far and the
Trust now protects 850 km (528 miles) of
coastline in England, Wales and Northern
Ireland. The National Trust for Scotland
also owns large parts of the Scottish
coastline and protects others through
conservation agreements.
National Parks, Areas of Outstanding Natural
Beauty and National Scenic Areas
The Countryside Commission and the CCW
can designate National Parks and areas of
outstanding natural beauty (AONBs),
subject to confirmation by the Secretaries of
State for the Environment and for Wales
respectively.
Ten National Parks have been established
in England and Wales. Their aim is first to
provide protection for the outstanding
countryside they contain and secondly to
350
PLANNING AND CONSF;RVATION
provide opportunities for access and outdoor
recreation. They are ‘national’ in the sense
that they are of value to the nation as a
whole. However, most of the land remains in
private hands. Special National Park
authorities have been set up, one for each
park. Among other things, they:
• act as the development control authority
for their areas;
• negotiate land management agreements
and encourage farmers to manage their
land in the traditional way;
• look after footpaths and negotiate
agreements for public access; and
• set up information centres and employ
rangers.
At present, most of these authorities are
committees of county councils for the
relevant areas. However, the Government has
announced its intention to establish new
independent authorities to run all the parks.
This is designed to allow better protection
and management of the park areas. The
Norfolk and Suffolk Broads have their own
independent authority and enjoy protection
equivalent to that of a National Park. It is
intended that the New Forest in Hampshire
should enjoy similar protection.
A total of 40 AONBs have been
designated, covering around 19,600 sq km
(7,600 sq miles) in England and 830 sq km
(320 sq miles) in Wales. They comprise parts
of the countryside which lack extensive areas
of open country suitable for recreation and
hence National Park status, but which
nevertheless have an important landscape
quality. Local authorities are encouraged to
give special attention to AONBs in their
planning and countryside conservation work.
In Scotland there are four regional parks
and 40 National Scenic Areas, covering more
than 10,000 sq km (4,000 sq miles), where
certain kinds of development are subject to
consultation with SNH and, in the event of a
disagreement, with the Secretary of State for
Scotland. Working parties have made
Broadleaved Tree-planting 1970-71 to 1991-92
Thousands of hectares
Source: Forestry Commission
351
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
recommendations for the management of the
Cairngorms and for Loch Lomond and the
Trossachs, two areas of outstanding natural
importance in Scotland. The Government
intends to announce decisions on these during
1994-95^ and the increased funding for SNH
(see p. 348) will enable the agreed
recommendations to be implemented. In the
wider countryside SNH provides grants for a
range of countryside projects.
In Northern Ireland the Council for
Nature Conservation and the Countryside
advises the Department of the Environment
for Northern Ireland on the preservation of
amenities and the designation of areas of
outstanding natural beauty. Nine such areas
have been designated, covering 2,850 sq km
(1,100 sq miles); seven areas are being
managed as country parks and one as a
regional park.
There are 11 forest parks in Great Britain,
covering some 2,400 sq km (950 sq miles) and
administered by the Forestry Commission.
There are nine in Northern Ireland, where
they are administered by the Forest Service
of the Department of Agriculture.
Public Rights of Way and Open Country
County and metropolitan district councils in
England and Wales are responsible for
keeping public rights of way signposted and
free from obstruction. Public paths are
usually maintained by these highway
authorities, which also supervise landowners’
duties to repair stiles and gates. In Scotland,
planning authorities are responsible for
asserting and protecting rights of way. Local
authorities in Great Britain can create paths,
close paths no longer needed for public use
and divert paths to meet the needs of either
the public or landowners. Farmers in
England and Wales are required by law
rapidly to restore public paths damaged by
agricultural operations. In England and Wales
there are some 225,000 km (140,000 miles) of
rights of way. There are 11 approved national
trails in England and Wales, covering over
3,100 km (1,900 miles), and three approved
long-distance routes in Scotland, covering
about 580 km (360 miles). The Countryside
Commission intends to help authorities bring
all rights of way in England into good order
by the end of the century, and a Parish Path
Partnership scheme has been introduced,
which is designed to stimulate local
involvement and improvement. By early
1994, 27 local authorities had joined the
scheme, which is receiving £3.8 million of
government funding. The CCW is also
establishing a network of public rights of
way, and a Public Paths Campaign has been
introduced.
There is no automatic right of public
access to open country, although many
landowners allow it more or less freely. Local
planning authorities in England and Wales
can secure access by means of agreements
with landowners. If agreements cannot be
reached, authorities may acquire land or
make orders for public access. Similar
powers cover Scotland and Northern Ireland;
in Northern Ireland the primary
responsibility lies with district councils. In
Scotland there is a tradition of freedom to
roam, based on tolerance between landowners
Table 22.3: National Parks and Other Designated Areas, December 1993
Areas of
Outstanding
National Percentage Natural Percentage
Parks area of total Beauty" of total
(sq km) area (sq km) area
England
Wales
Scotland
Northern Ireland
9,631
4,098
7
20
19,595
833
10,173
2,849
15
4
13
20
Sources: Countryside Commission, Scottish Natural Heritage, Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland
'‘National Scenic Areas in Scotland.
352
PLANNING AND CONSERVATION
and those seeking reasonable recreational
access to the hills.
Common land totals an estimated 600,000
hectares (1.5 million acres) in England and
Wales, but a legal right of public access exists
to only one-fifth of this area. Common land
is usually privately owned, but people other
than the owner may have various rights over
it, for example, as pasture land. Commons
are protected by law and cannot be built on
or enclosed without the consent of the
Secretaries of State for the Environment or
Wales. There is no common land in Scotland
or Northern Ireland.
Voluntary Sector
Many voluntary organisations are concerned
to preserve the amenities of the countryside,
including the Council for the Protection of
Rural England, the Campaign for the
Protection of Rural Wales, the Association
for the Protection of Rural Scotland and
the Ulster Society for the Preservation of
the Countryside.
International Action
Britain plays a full part in international action
to conserve wildlife. Its international
obligations include the Berne Convention on
the conservation of European wildlife and
natural habitats, and EC directives on the
conservation of wild birds (the Birds
Directive) and of natural habitats and wild
fauna and flora. The implementation of the
latter directive, which came into force in
1994, entails the designation of Special Areas
of Conservation (SACs). Together with
Special Protection Areas (SPAs) designated
under the Birds Directive, the SACs will
contribute to a Community-wide network of
protected sites to be known as ‘Natura 2000’.
Some 91 SPAs have already been designated.
Britain is also party to the Ramsar
Convention on wetlands of international
importance. A total of 86 sites in Britain have
been designated under this convention,
together with a further site in one of Britain’s
dependent territories. Other conservation
measures promoted by the Government have
included a ban (in conjunction with other EU
countries) on the import of whale products
and harp and hooded seal pup skins, and
stricter controls for the protection of wild
birds. Britain is a party to the Convention on
International Trade in Endangered Species of
Wild Fauna and Flora, which prohibits
commercial trade in highly endangered
species and regulates trade in less threatened
species by means of a permit system.
The Convention on Biological Diversity
was signed by over 150 countries, including
Britain, at the June 1992 ‘Earth Summit’. It
requires countries to develop national
strategies for the conservation and sustainable
use of biological diversity. Britain’s action
plan for implementing this was published in
January 1994. Drawn up after extensive
consultation, it provides a strategy for the
protection of biodiversity in Britain in the
next 10-20 years. The key objectives of
this are to conserve and, where practicable,
enhance:
• the overall population and natural ranges
of native species and the quality and
range of wildlife habitats and ecosystems;
• internationally important and threatened
species, habitats and ecosystems;
• species, habitats and natural and managed
ecosystems that are characteristic of local
areas; and
• the biodiversity of natural and semi¬
natural habitats where this has been
diminished over recent decades.
The plan commits the Government to
increasing public awareness of the
conservation of biodiversity and to
contributing to biodiversity conservation on a
European and global scale. A steering group
which is taking forward these commitments
will be responsible for developing a range of
targets for key species and habitats for 2000
and 2010; these will be published in 1995.
The Darwin Initiative forms part of the
measures announced by Britain at the
UNCED meeting. It is intended to make
British experience available to developing
countries with important biological resources.
Some 0 million will be made available over
the first four years of the Initiative. By
December 1993, 31 projects, totalling
£3.7 million, had been approved.
353
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Environmental Improvement
The Government assists local voluntary
organisations to promote projects such as
creating parks, footpaths and other areas of
greenery in cities; conserving the industrial
heritage and the natural environment; and
recycling waste. The Department of the
Environment makes grants through the
Environmental Action Fund, managed by the
Civic Trust, worth about £850,000 in
1994-95, to support projects with either
direct or indirect environmental gains. The
Civic Trust also manages a Local Projects
Fund, from which some £300,000 will be
available in 1994-95.
The Welsh Office has made £556,000
available in 1994-95 to voluntary
organisations under its Environment Wales
initiative. The Scottish Office Environment
Department is making £400,000 available in
1994-95 to environmental organisations under
its Special Grants (Environmental)
Programme, and a further £435,000 to
UK2000 Scotland, a partnership between
central and local government, voluntary
bodies and the private sector, which carries
out practical environmental improvements.
Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and
Islands Enterprise (see p. 200) are responsible
for environmental improvement and land
reclamation in Scotland. The Government’s
programme of Environmentally Sensitive
Areas (see p. 277) supports environmentally
sensitive practices that protect and enhance
the countryside.
World Heritage Sites
Britain is well represented in the World
Heritage List, which was established under
the World Heritage Convention to identify
and secure lasting protection for those parts
of the world heritage of outstanding universal
value. So far 13 sites in Britain have been
listed. These are:
• Canterbury Cathedral, with St
Augustine’s Abbey and St Martin’s
Church, in Kent;
• Durham Cathedral and Castle;
• Studley Royal Gardens and Fountains
Abbey, in North Yorkshire;
• Ironbridge Gorge, with the world’s first
iron bridge and other early industrial
sites, in Shropshire;
• the prehistoric stone circles at
Stonehenge and Avebury, in Wiltshire;
• Blenheim Palace, in Oxfordshire;
• the city of Bath, in Avon;
• Hadrian’s Wall;
• the Tower of London;
• the Palace of Westminster, Westminster
Abbey and St Margaret’s, Westminster,
also in London;
• the islands of St Kilda, in Scotland;
• the castles and town walls of King
Edward I, in north Wales; and
• the Giant’s Causeway and Causeway
Coast, in Northern Ireland.
Support for these sites under various
programmes can be considerable. For
example, projects assisted by the Welsh
Office are under way to regenerate the town
centres of both Caernarfon and Conwy in
north Wales. Likewise, Durham Cathedral
will receive £95,000 in government repair
grant in 1994—95.
Further Reading
Conservation. Aspects of Britain series, HMSO, 1993.
Environmental Appraisal of Development Plans: a Good Practice Guide. HMSO, 1993.
Environmental Protection and Water Statistics. Annual report. HMSO.
Planning. Aspects of Britain series, HMSO, 1992.
This Common Inheritance: the Third Year Report. HMSO, 1994.
354
23 Control of Pollution
Introduction 355
Administration 355
Business and Consumer
Involvement 356
Integrated Pollution
Control 357
Land 358
Water 359
Air 360
Noise 364
Radioactivity 365
Genetically Modified
Organisms 366
Environmental Research 366
For more than a century Britain has been developing policies to protect the
environment against pollution from industry and other sources. Laws were
introduced at an early stage to control air and water pollution—for example,
the Alkali Act 1863 and, more recently, the Clean Air Acts 1956 and 1968.
Legislation, revised regularly to meet changing circumstances, sets out a wide
range of powers and duties for central and local government, covering all
types of pollution, from greenhouse gases to litter. Successes include a 69 per
cent reduction in mercury inputs to coastal waters between 1985 and 1992, and
a fall of over 40 per cent in sulphur dioxide emissions since 1970.
Introduction
Britain supports international co-operation on
matters of environmental protection.
Increasingly, much of Britain’s legislation on
pollution control is being developed in
collaboration with other member states of the
European Union and organisations such as
the Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development and the United Nations
and its agencies. Britain is taking a leading
position in the development of a European
ecolabelling scheme. Recently, with increasing
scientific understanding of global pollution
problems, the Government has been
considering how its own policies and actions
can be further guided by the principle of
‘sustainable development’, the theme of a
major United Nations conference in June
1992 (see p. 361). Assistance is also given to
developing countries for environmental
projects, while an Environmental Know How
Fund was set up in 1992 to help Central and
Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.
Britain has pledged £89 million to
replenish the Global Environment
Facility, a United Nations fund set up
to help developing countries tackle
global environmental problems. This
includes a voluntary contribution to
ensure that the Facility’s target of
$2,000 million is reached.
Administration
Executive responsibility for pollution control
is divided between local authorities and
central government agencies. Central
355
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
government makes policy, exercises general
budgetary control, promotes legislation and
advises pollution control authorities on policy
implementation. The Secretary of State for
the Environment has general responsibility
for co-ordinating the work of the
Government on environmental protection. In
Scotland and Wales the respective Secretaries
of State are responsible for pollution control
co-ordination within their countries. In
Northern Ireland, this responsibility rests
with the Department of the Environment for
Northern Ireland. Local authorities also have
important duties and powers. They are
responsible for matters such as:
• collection and disposal of domestic
wastes;
• keeping the streets clean from litter;
• control of air pollution from domestic
and from many industrial premises; and
• noise and general nuisance abatement.
The National Rivers Authority (NRA) is
responsible for monitoring water quality and
the control of water pollution in England and
Wales, on which it is expected to spend
£88 million in 1994-95. In Scotland, the
river purification authorities have statutory
responsibility for water pollution control;
the seven mainland authorities forecast
expenditure of over £13 million in 1994—95.
In Northern Ireland, water quality is
monitored by the Environment Service of
the Department of the Environment for
Northern Ireland. In England and Wales
Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Pollution
(HMIP) has an important role in the
control of emissions to land, air and
water from certain industrial processes
through the mechanism of ‘integrated
pollution control’ (see p. 357). Her
Majesty’s Industrial Pollution
Inspectorate (HMIPI) is the Scottish
equivalent of HMIP.
The Government intends to introduce
legislation to bring together the functions of
HMIP and the NRA, together with those
presently exercised by waste regulation
authorities, into a single Environment
Agency. Likewise, subject to legislation, a
Scottish Environment Protection Agency
would be set up to combine the functions of
HMIPI, the river purification authorities
and the waste regulation and some of the air
pollution functions of the district and
islands councils.
An independent standing Royal
Commission on Environmental Pollution
advises the Government on national and
international matters concerning the
pollution of the environment, on the
adequacy of research and on the future
possibilities of danger to the
environment. So far it has produced
18 reports.
Business and Consumer Involvement
The Government has launched a number of
initiatives to help business improve its
environmental performance, ensure
business concerns are taken into account
when policy is made, and help
consumers assess firms’ environmental
credentials. For example, the Government
launched a new Environmental Technology
Best Practice Programme in June 1994. It
will concentrate on providing information to
business about the cost-effective reduction
of pollution and waste. Priority areas for the
programme will be chosen in consultation
with industry.
Advisory Committee on Business and the
Environment
The Advisory Committee on Business and
the Environment comprises 26 business
leaders, appointed by the Government and
serving in a personal capacity. Its roles are:
• advising the Government on
environmental issues of concern to
business;
• providing a link with international
business initiatives on the environment;
and
• helping to mobilise the business
community through demonstrating good
environmental practice.
356
CONTROL OF POLLUTION
Much of the Committee’s work is carried
on through working groups which
concentrate on a particular area, for example
transport or waste management.
British Standard on Environmental
Management
In January 1994 the British Standards
Institution (see p. 207) published BS7750,
the world’s first standard for environmental
management systems. Having been tested in
a wide range of businesses and other bodies,
the standard can be used by any organisation.
BS7750 shares many features of the widely-
used BS EN ISO 9000—formerly BS5750—
quality management standard.
Eco-management and Audit
In 1993 the European Union adopted a
regulation setting up a voluntary EU-wide
scheme of eco-management and audit,
which will become fully operational
throughout the EU in April 1995.
Although it is intended primarily for the
manufacturing, power and waste disposal
sectors, Britain is extending its use to other
sectors. An adaptation has been published
for use by local government. Registration
will be of individual sites1 rather than
companies’ entire operations. A company
or council must have an environmental
policy before any of its sites or units can
be registered. An essential component is
an environmental management scheme,
such as BS7750, which has been designed
to be fully compatible with the scheme.
Those seeking registration must have
prepared and published an environmental
statement which, together with the
management system, needs to have been
verified by an accredited independent body.
A full cycle of review, verification and
published statement must be conducted at
least once every three years.
Each EU member state is required to
have a competent body to maintain a register
of sites. In Britain, the Department of the
Environment is responsible.
1 Or of operational units in the case of local authorities.
Ecolabelling
Increasingly consumers wish to take
environmental considerations into account
when buying goods. Britain has played a
leading role in developing the EU ecolabelling
scheme. This voluntary scheme aims to help
consumers identify those products which are
less harmful to the environment over their
whole lifecycle. Member states are developing
criteria for awarding ecolabels on a wide
spectrum of consumer goods—apart from
food, drink and pharmaceuticals, which
have been excluded from the scheme. In
1993 Britain’s ecolabelling board awarded
the first European ecolabels to Hoover Ltd for
washing machines in its ‘New Wave’ range.
Integrated Pollution Control
Under the Environmental Protection Act
1990, a system of ‘integrated pollution
control’ (IPC) is being phased in to
control certain categories of industrial
pollution. The potentially most harmful
processes are specified for IPC, and
require authorisation from HMIP. The
NRA is responsible for monitoring waters
receiving discharges authorised under IPC.
Emissions to air from more minor
processes are controlled under a parallel
system of local authority air pollution
control In granting authorisation for
releases under IPC, HMIP requires the
use of the best available techniques not
entailing excessive cost to prevent or
minimise polluting emissions and to ensure
that any releases are made harmless. The
staff of the Inspectorate has been
increased considerably to allow the full
implementation of IPC.
In Scotland, IPC is administered by
HMIPI jointly with the river purification
authorities. In Northern Ireland broadly
similar controls are exercised by the
Environment Service, and proposals are
being formulated for the introduction of
a system of air pollution control similar
to IPC.
The Government is pressing for the
introduction of IPC on the British model
within the EU.
357
BRITAIN 1995. AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Land
Certain local authorities are designated as
waste collection, waste disposal or waste
regulation authorities, responsible for different
parts of the process of dealing with controlled
wastes. Legislation has also established a
licensing system for waste disposal sites,
treatment plants and storage facilities
receiving controlled wastes. It provides for a
more intensive control system for special
wastes, namely those which contain or consist
of substances dangerous to life. HMIP, the
NRA and the Hazardous Waste Inspectorate
for Scotland may advise local authorities on
how to improve their control of waste
management and on how to work towards
environmentally acceptable standards for
dealing with hazardous wastes. In Northern
Ireland, similar advice is offered to district
councils by the Environment Service.
Part II of the Environmental Protection Act,
which came into force in May 1994, strengthened
existing controls on waste disposal. Responsibility
for proper handling of waste falls on everyone
who has control of it from production to final
disposal or reclamation. Authorities are able to
refuse licences if the applicant is not a fit and
proper person. Operators now remain responsible
for their sites until the waste regulation authority
is satisfied that no future hazard is likely to arise.
In England and Wales local authorities’ waste
disposal operations are being transferred to ‘arm’s
length’ companies or private contractors so as to
separate them from the authorities’ other jobs of
setting policies and standards, and enforcement.
The proposed Environment Agency would take
over local authority waste regulation functions.
In Scotland, responsibility for the
collection and disposal of refuse and the
regulation of waste management activities
remains with the district and islands councils,
whose waste management function is
examined by the Hazardous Waste
Inspectorate. The proposed Scottish
Environment Protection Agency would take
over waste regulation. In Northern Ireland,
responsibility for the collection, disposal and
regulation of waste rests with the district
councils.
In November 1993 the Government
published a consultation paper on its
proposals for dealing with polychlorinated
biphenyls (PCBs), environmentally harmful
chemicals whose main remaining use is in
electrical transformers and capacitors. It is
proposed that PCB stocks would have to be
registered by the end of 1995 and destroyed
by the end of 1999.
Litter
It is a criminal offence to leave litter in any
public place in the open air or to dump
rubbish except in designated places. The
maximum penalty was raised in 1992 to
£2,500. The Act also introduced new duties
on local authorities to keep their public land
as free of litter and refuse (including dog
faeces) as practicable and new powers for the
public to take action against those who fail to
comply with their responsibilities.
To help counteract the problem of litter,
financial support—totalling £2.9 million in
1994—95—is given to the Tidy Britain Group,
which is recognised as the national agency for
litter abatement. It provides a comprehensive
litter abatement programme in collaboration
with local authorities and the private sector.
The Group secures sponsorship from
industry to undertake litter abatement
promotions and programmes such as its
Neighbourhood Care Scheme.
London came out best in a recent
litter survey carried out in nine
European cities. The survey, which
looked at four key types of central
area, awarded London 77 points out
of a possible total of 100, just ahead
of Berne with 76 points.
Recycling and Materials Reclamation
The Government encourages the reclamation
and recycling of waste materials whenever this
is practicable; its target is for half of all
recyclable household waste to be recycled by
2000. Under the Environmental Protection
Act 1990, local authorities have to make plans
for the recycling of waste. The Act also
requires waste disposal authorities in
England to pay ‘recycling credits’ to waste
collection authorities to pass on the equivalent
358
CONTROL OF POLLUTION
in disposal costs where waste is recycled. From
April 1994 the credits were increased so that
the full amount saved must be passed on. In
Wales and Scotland, the same authorities
handle waste collection and disposal. The
Government has supported pilot recycling
initiatives in Sheffield, Cardiff, Dundee and
the county of Devon, which have tested a
variety of collection and sorting methods.
Members of the public can deposit used
glass containers for recycling in bottle banks.
There are nearly 15,000 such sites in Britain,
and over 1,000 can banks. There are also
nearly 3,000 paper banks and, in some places,
plastics or textiles banks. In addition,
voluntary organisations arrange collections of
waste material, and can be paid a recycling
credit by the local authority for doing so.
Water
In general, it is against the law to allow any
polluting matter to enter water in Britain
except in accordance with a legal
authorisation. In England and Wales the
NRA’s principal method of controlling water
pollution is through the regulation of all
effluent discharges into groundwaters, inland
and coastal waters (except those releases
subject to IPC, which are controlled by
HMIP). Discharge consents issued by the
NRA specify what may be discharged and set
limits on the volume and content of effluent,
in order to achieve appropriate water quality
standards. The NRA maintains public
registers containing information about
discharge consents, authorisations from
HMIP and water quality. HMIP maintains
registers of authorisations and associated
monitoring. Similar arrangements apply in
Scotland, where control is exercised by the
river purification authorities. In Northern
Ireland the Environment Service is
responsible for controlling water pollution.
Government regulations for a new system
of classifying water quality in England and
Wales came into force in May 1994. This
system will provide the basis for setting water
quality objectives. The objectives, which will
be phased in gradually, will specify for each
individual stretch of water the standards that
should be reached and the target date for
achieving them. The system of statutory
water quality objectives will provide the
framework for the NRA to set discharge
consents. Once objectives are set, the NRA
will be under a duty to use its powers to
ensure that they are met.
Over the past 30 years, notable progress
has been made in cleaning up the previously
heavily polluted major estuaries of the east
coast of England and Scotland—the Thames,
Humber, Tees, Tyne and Forth—which now
support varied populations of fish and other
wildlife. A 25-year scheme, supported by the
Government and the EU, aims to reduce
river pollution and improve water quality
throughout the Mersey river basin and
estuary. Other major schemes in progress
include programmes to improve water quality
in the Clyde in Scotland and the Lagan in
Northern Ireland.
More than 95 per cent of the population
in Britain live in properties connected to a
sewer, and sewage treatment works serve
over 80 per cent of the population. In
England and Wales the water industry is
planning to spend about £14,000 million (at
1989 prices) up to the year 2000 on
improving sewerage, sewage treatment and
disposal, and a further £10,000 million
within the period 2000-2005. Progressively
higher treatment standards for industrial
waste effluents and new measures to
combat pollution from agriculture are
expected to bring further improvements in
water quality. In Scotland, sewage
treatment and disposal come within the
water and sewerage programme, which will
total more than £728 million in the three
years to 1995-96.
The Government is committed to meeting
the requirements of a number of EC
directives for the protection and improvement
of water quality, for example on drinking
water, bathing water (see p. 360), urban waste
water, freshwater fisheries, and dangerous
substances and groundwater.
Bathing Waters and Coastal Sewage Discharges
The Government has announced investment
of around £2,200 million by the water
industry to provide treatment of coastal
359
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
sewage discharges and improve the quality of
Britain’s bathing waters. All but a handful of
schemes in the bathing water improvement
programme should be largely complete by the
end of 1995. In the 1993 tests of bathing
water quality, it was found that 80 per cent
of identified bathing waters (365 out of 457)
in Britain met the mandatory coliform
bacteria standards of the EC bathing water
directive, compared with 66 per cent of
beaches in 1988. The Government expects
virtually all bathing waters to meet the
directive’s standards by the end of 1995. Sea
dumping of sewage sludge will be terminated
by the end of 1998.
Marine Environment
In 1992 a new Convention for the Protection
of the Marine Environment of the North East
Atlantic was agreed in Paris. It covers both
land and sea, sets targets for the introduction
of additional safeguards for the area, and
requires contracting parties to take all
possible steps to prevent or eliminate
pollution through an action plan subject to
annual review. Britain is also a leading
participant in the series of North Sea
Conferences, an international forum of
countries bordering the North Sea. Good
progress is being made in meeting North Sea
Conference targets for reducing the input of
dangerous substances into the sea. For
example, direct and riverine inputs of
cadmium and mercury to coastal waters were
more than halved between 1985 and 1992.
International action on the prevention of
pollution from ships is taken through the
International Maritime Organization (IMO).
Britain applies international requirements to
all ships in British waters and to British
ships wherever they are. Enforcement is
undertaken by the Department of Transport.
Work is continuing within the IMO on
further measures.
The Marine Pollution Control Unit
(MPCU), part of the Coastguard Agency, is
responsible for dealing with spillages of oil or
other hazardous substances from ships at sea.
The arrangements for dealing with pollution
are set out in the Government’s national
contingency plan, developed and maintained
by the MPCU. The Unit has at its disposal
various counter-pollution facilities, including:
• remote sensing surveillance aircraft;
• aerial and seaborne spraying equipment;
• stocks of oil dispersants;
• mechanical recovery and cargo transfer
equipment; and
• specialised beach cleaning equipment.
In order to minimise the environmental
effect of offshore oil and gas operations,
special conditions designed to protect the
environment are included in licences for oil
and gas exploration. These conditions are set
in consultation with a number of bodies with
environmental interests, including the
relevant government departments and the
Joint Nature Conservation Committee
(see p. 348). Applicants for licences in
sensitive areas are required to demonstrate
that they have addressed the environmental
concerns when developing their work
programme. Before commencing offshore
operations, the operators are required to have
oil spill contingency plans. In addition, all
discharges that contain oil are controlled
under the Prevention of Oil Pollution Act
1971, and limits are set for the permissible
level of oil discharged. In response to
requests from the North Sea Conference,
progressively tighter limits on oil discharged
with drill cuttings have been set. This has
resulted in the quantity of oil discharges from
this source from installations in British waters
falling from 18,500 tonnes in 1988 to 3,900
tonnes in 1993.
Britain ended the dumping of industrial
waste at sea in 1992. Waste has not been
licensed for incineration at sea since 1990.
Under the North East Atlantic Convention,
and the earlier convention it replaces, the
dumping at sea of most types of waste will be
phased out over the next few years. In
February 1994 Britain announced that it was
accepting an internationally-agreed ban on
the sea dumping of low and intermediate
level radioactive waste.
Air
Air quality in Britain has improved
considerably in the last 30 years. Total
360
CONTROL OF POLLUTION
emissions of smoke in the air have fallen by
over 85 per cent since 1960. London and
other major cities no longer have the dense
smoke-laden ‘smogs’ of the 1950s and in
central London winter sunshine has increased
by about 70 per cent since 1958. However,
new concerns have arisen, especially over the
emissions from the growing number of motor
vehicles and the possible impact on health.
Measures have consequently been adopted to
reduce substantially emissions from new
vehicles (see p. 363).
Responsibility for clean air rests primarily
with local authorities. Under the Clean Air
Act 19932 and the Clean Air (Northern
Ireland) Order 1981 they may declare ‘smoke
control areas’ within which the emission of
smoke from chimneys is an offence. About
two-thirds of the dwellings in conurbations
are covered by smoke control orders—around
6,340 are in force. Those industrial processes
with the greatest potential for harmful
emissions are controlled under the
Environmental Protection Act 1990, in
England and Wales by HMIP, and are
becoming subject to IPC. Processes with a
significant but lesser potential for air
pollution require approval from local
authorities. Also, under the Clean Air Act,
local authorities control emissions of dark
smoke from trade and industrial premises.
The 1990 Act also provides local authorities
in England and Wales with streamlined
powers to deal with statutory nuisances,
including smoke, dust and smells.
Britain’s automatic air quality monitoring
network is being extended and upgraded at a
cost of £10 million. The target is for all
major cities to be covered by the end of
1997. Since 1990, daily air pollution data
from the monitoring network has been made
available to the public by the Department of
the Environment’s Air Quality Bulletins.
These give the concentrations of three main
pollutants—ozone, nitrogen dioxide and
sulphur dioxide—and grade air quality on a
scale between ‘very poor’ and ‘very good’.
The information features in television and
radio weather reports, and appears in many
" This Act consolidated earlier legislation on air pollution,
including the Clean Air Acts 1956 and 1968.
national and local newspapers. The data are
also available on a special free telephone
number and on videotext systems.
A comprehensive government review of
urban air quality is being undertaken. Three
independent committees of experts are
advising on different aspects of the problem,
and are setting guidelines and targets for air
quality. For example, in spring 1994 the
introduction of air quality standards for
benzene and ozone were recommended.
Climate Change
The greenhouse effect is a natural
phenomenon keeping the earth at a
temperature which can sustain life. But
increasing man-made emissions of
‘greenhouse gases’, such as carbon dioxide
(C02), methane and nitrous oxide (N20), are
leading to greater concentrations of these
gases in the atmosphere. In 1988 the United
Nations Environment Programme and the
World Meteorological Organisation
established the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) to consider climate
change and possible responses to it. Britain
chairs the working group which assesses the
scientific evidence on climate change. In its
first report, the IPCC concluded that man¬
made emissions would lead to additional
warming of the earth, and that, without any
change in emissions, global average
temperature would increase by about 0.3°C a
decade, which would be faster than at any
time over the past 10,000 years. Such
changes could have major effects on the
world. The IPCC is currently preparing an
update of this assessment.
Britain played a leading role in the
negotiations towards the United Nations
framework convention on climate change,
which was opened for signature at the Earth
Summit in Rio de Janeiro in June 1992.
This commits parties to the convention to
devising and reporting on proposed
measures to combat climate change. Chief
among its obligations for developed
countries is a commitment to prepare
programmes aimed at returning emissions of
greenhouse gases to 1990 levels by 2000.
There is also a commitment to help
361
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
developing countries take measures to deal
with the problem. The convention came into
force in March 1994.
In January 1994 Britain published its
national programme for combating the threat
of global climate change. It is estimated that
the measures in the programme will reduce
emissions of C02 by 6 per cent, of methane
by 10 per cent and of N20 by 75 per cent by
2000. The programme includes:
• the introduction of VAT on domestic
fuel and higher duties on road vehicle
fuel;
• the creation of an Energy Saving Trust,
which aims to promote the efficient use
of energy, particularly in the home;
• tighter building regulations to promote
the energy efficiency of new houses and
business premises;
• government publicity on energy
conservation in homes and businesses;
and
• targets for energy saving in central and
local government offices.
Government funding for the Home
Energy Efficiency Scheme is to be
nearly doubled. The extra £35 million
will enable the scheme to be extended
to all pensioners and disabled people.
Britain is also conducting extensive
research into global warming. The
Department of the Environment’s
expenditure on research related to climate
change will be ^16 million in 1994—95. The
research programme includes the work of the
Hadley Centre for Climate Prediction and
Research, which was opened in 1990 to build
on the Meteorological Office climate
modelling programme, and the construction
of an advanced climate change detection
instrument for launch on a satellite towards
the end of the 1990s.
Ozone Layer
The Government is committed to the
earliest possible phasing out of all ozone-
depleting substances. Britain was one of the
first 25 signatories to the Montreal
Protocol, which deals with the protection of
the ozone layer, and hosted the second
meeting of the parties in 1990, which
substantially strengthened the protocol. The
protocol was further strengthened in 1992,
and now requires chlorofluorocarbons
(CFCs), 1,1,1 trichloroethane and carbon
tetrachloride to be phased out by the end
of 1995. The supply of halons was phased
out by the end of 1993. There is provision
for exemptions for any essential uses.
Controls were also introduced on methyl
bromide and on hydrochlorofluorocarbons
(HCFCs—transitional substances with less
ozone-depleting capacity than CFCs),
which are needed in a number of areas if
industry is to move away from CFCs
quickly but which will themselves be
phased out by 2030. European Community
regulations require CFCs and carbon
tetrachloride to be phased out by the end of
1994, again with exemptions for any essential
uses, and are likely to impose controls on
HCFCs and methyl bromide tighter than
those in the protocol.
Emissions of Sulphur Dioxide and Oxides of
Nitrogen
Sulphur dioxide (S02) and oxides of
nitrogen (NOx) are the main gases that lead
to acid rain. The principal sources are
combustion plants that burn fossil fuels, such
as coal-fired power stations, and, for NOx,
road transport. National S02 emissions have
fallen by over 40 per cent since 1970 and the
Government has initiated a substantial
programme to ensure that this fall continues.
For example, under the EC directive on the
control of emissions from large combustion
plants, the Government has published a
national plan setting out phased reductions in
emissions from existing plants of NOx to
1998 and of S02 to 2003. Negotiations on a
new United Nations agreement on acid rain
were expected to have reached a conclusion
by mid-1994; Britain indicated its willingness
to reduce sulphur emissions by 2005 by
70 per cent compared with 1980.
The damaging effect of acid depositions
362
CONTROL OF POLLUTION
from combustion processes on freshwaters
and soils has been demonstrated by scientific
research. The Government is spending about
.£10 million a year on an extensive research
programme into the causes and effects of acid
rain, and the likely results of possible abatement
technologies. Lower emissions of S02 over
the past 20 years (see graph) have led to the
first signs of a decrease in acidification in
some lochs in south-west Scotland.
Vehicle Emissions
There are about 25 million vehicles on
Britain’s roads, contributing substantially to
Britain’s total emissions of carbon
monoxide (CO), hydrocarbons, NOx and C02.
A wide range of measures has been
introduced by the Government to tackle
vehicle emissions; these are expected to lead
to a marked and progressive decline in
pollutants from motor vehicles.
Britain has continued to be at the forefront
of discussions within the EU on tightening up
regulations on pollution from motor vehicles.
Strict new emissions requirements came into
force at the end of 1992, requiring new cars
to be fitted with catalytic converters. As a
result, there are now about 2.5 million cars on
Britain’s roads fitted with catalytic converters;
this figure will progressively increase as new
cars are bought. Tests show that catalytic
converters can reduce emissions of CO,
hydrocarbons and NOx by 70 per cent in
good conditions. By the end of the 1990s, it
is expected that NOx emissions from cars
will be back below their 1980 level.
Equally stringent controls on emissions from
vans and off-road vehicles will apply to
vehicles first used from October 1994
onwards. Diesel-engined cars are subject to
the same controls as petrol-engined cars and
must also comply with a strict limit on
particulates (smoke).
Britain has also pressed the EU to
introduce stricter emission standards for
heavy goods vehicles and buses. New
emission limits came into force in October
1993 for new diesel-engined trucks and buses
over 3.5 tonnes, reducing limits for CO,
hydrocarbons and NOx by 60, 50 and 45 per
cent respectively and setting a limit on
particulates. A further stage, to be
implemented in 1996, will halve the
particulate level.
A recently agreed EC directive, to be
applied to cars from January 1997, will secure
further reductions in CO, hydrocarbons, NOx
and particulates. These new standards
represent a very substantial reduction from
Emissions of Sulphur Dioxide and Nitrogen Oxides
million tonnes
Source: Department of the Environment.
363
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the 1991 levels. The directive also lays out a
framework within which the European
Commission will make further proposals for
reducing car emissions from the year 2000.
The amount of lead in the air in Britain
has fallen by 70 per cent since the permitted
lead content in petrol was reduced in 1986
from 0.4 to 0.15 grammes a litre and
unleaded petrol was introduced. Practically
all petrol stations in Britain now sell
unleaded petrol, and since 1990 new cars
must be capable of running on it. The
Government has encouraged the use of
cleaner fuel by introducing a substantial tax
differential in favour of unleaded petrol.
Demand has risen rapidly, and unleaded
petrol now accounts for over half of all
petrol sold in Britain. By the year 2003
leaded petrol sales will be negligible.
To tackle C02 emissions, the Chancellor
of the Exchequer in the November 1993
budget increased road fuel duties by 8 to
10 per cent and announced a long-term
strategy of future annual increases
averaging at least 5 per cent in real terms.
This should save about 2.5 million tonnes of
carbon in the year 2000, representing a
quarter of the C02 emissions from all
sources that Britain is required to save under
the climate change convention.
Internationally developed standards
have also been implemented in Britain to
control the emission of smoke, vented fuel
and unburned hydrocarbons from civil
aircraft. International standards to control
NOx and CO will be incorporated into
domestic legislation.
Noise
Local authorities have a duty to inspect
their areas for noise nuisance from
premises and vehicles, machinery or
equipment in the street, and to investigate
complaints. They must serve a noise
abatement notice where the noise is judged
to be a statutory nuisance. They can also
designate ‘noise abatement zones’ within
which registered levels of noise from certain
premises may not be increased without their
permission. There are also specific
provisions in law to:
• control noise from construction and
demolition sites;
• control the use of loudspeakers in the
streets; and
• enable individuals to take independent
action through the courts against noise
amounting to a nuisance.
The majority of complaints relate to
neighbour noise.
Tougher measures against noise were
proposed in the environment White Paper
(see p. 346). Many of its commitments were
endorsed by an independent working party. It
reported in 1990 with 33 recommendations,
many of which have now been implemented.
The Noise and Statutory Nuisance Act 1993
gave local authorities in Great Britain extra
powers and duties to deal with noise nuisance
in the street. The Government encourages
the use of informal means of solving
neighbour disputes, such as mediation. The
Government also has an environmental noise
research programme, spending on which is
expected to be about £600,000 in 1994—95.
Regulations set out the permissible noise
levels for various classes of new vehicle.
Compensation may be payable for loss in
property values caused by physical factors,
including noise from new or improved
public works such as roads, railways and
airports. Regulations also require highway
authorities to make grants available for
insulation of homes that would be subject
to specified levels of increased noise caused
by new or improved roads. Noise insulation
may also be provided where construction
work for new roads will seriously affect
nearby homes for a substantial period of time.
Equivalent regulations for new railways are
being introduced.
Britain has played a leading role in
negotiations aimed at phasing out older,
noisier subsonic jet aircraft. Flying non-noise
certificated aircraft has been banned in
Britain, and since 1990 British operators have
no longer been allowed to add to their fleets
further ‘Chapter 2’ aircraft (noisier planes, as
classified by international agreement). A
complete ban on the operation of Chapter 2
aircraft will begin to be implemented in April
1995, and it is intended to phase out all these
364
CONTROL OF POLLUTION
types by April 2002. Various operational
restrictions have been introduced to reduce
noise disturbance further at Heathrow,
Gatwick and Stansted, where the Secretary of
State for Transport has assumed
responsibility for noise abatement. These
measures include:
• restrictions on the type and number of
aircraft operating at night;
• the routeing of departing aircraft on
noise-preferential routes; and
• quieter take-off and landing procedures.
For night flights in summer 1994, the
Government introduced a control system
combining a noise quota with a ceiling on
the total number of movements. The
population disturbed by aircraft noise'’ at
Heathrow fell from 591,000 in 1988 to
429,000 in 1991, even though the number of
air transport movements increased. This was
largely because of the phasing out of older,
noisier aircraft.
Under government proposals announced in
1993, airfield authorities will be given powers
to enforce noise amelioration schemes. The
Secretary of State would have powers to
compel airfield authorities to prepare such a
scheme. Local authorities would have powers
to act against the owner of an airfield who
did not take reasonable steps to ensure that
an agreed scheme was operated effectively.
Radioactivity
Man-made radiation represents only a small
fraction of that to which the population is
exposed; most is naturally occurring. A large
proportion of the man-made radioactivity to
which the public is exposed comes from
medical treatments, such as X-rays.
Nevertheless, the man-made fraction is
subject to stringent control. Users of
radioactive materials must be registered by
HMIP in England and Wales, and equivalents
in Scotland and Northern Ireland, and
authorisation is also required for the
accumulation and disposal of radioactive
3 That is, living within the 57 Leq noise contour, which is
regarded as the onset of disturbance. Using the older, broadly
comparable, 35 NNI measure, about 1.6 million people were
affected in 1979.
waste. The Health and Safety Executive
(see p. 190), through its Nuclear Installations
Inspectorate, is the authority responsible for
the granting of nuclear site licences for major
nuclear installations. No installation may be
constructed or operated without a licence
granted by the Executive.
The National Radiological Protection
Board (NRPB) provides an authoritative
point of reference on radiological protection.
Following the accident at the Chernobyl
nuclear power station in the then Soviet
Union in 1986, the Government set up a
national radiation monitoring network and
overseas nuclear accident response system
(RIMNET). An interim version began
operating in 1988. A larger and more fully
automated system, with 92 monitoring
stations across Britain, became operational at
the end of 1993.
In 1987 the Government announced
measures to deal with the problem of radon,
a naturally occurring radioactive gas which
can accumulate in houses. These included a
free survey by the NRPB for householders
living in radon-affected areas. In 1990 the
Government halved the level at which it
recommends that householders take action
to reduce radon in their homes. The
NRPB has designated several ‘radon-affected
areas’, for example, Cornwall, Devon,
Northamptonshire and parts of Derbyshire
and Somerset. Householders in these areas
are eligible for free radon tests.
Radioactive Waste Disposal
Radioactive wastes vary widely in nature and
level of activity, and the methods of disposal
reflect this. Some wastes can be disposed of
safely in the same way as other industrial and
household wastes. UK Nirex Ltd is
responsible for developing a deep disposal
facility for solid low-level and intermediate-
level radioactive waste. It is currently
concentrating its detailed geological
investigations on an area near the British
Nuclear Fuels site at Sellafield, in Cumbria.
As part of these studies, Nirex intends to
construct an experimental rock laboratory,
known as a ‘rock characterisation facility’.
The Department of the Environment is
365
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
sponsoring research, in collaboration with
other countries, into disposal of high-level or
heat-generating waste. This waste will first be
stored in vitrified form for at least 50 years to
allow the heat and radioactivity to decay.
Genetically Modified Organisms
Genetically modified organisms (GMOs) have
many potential beneficial uses, for example,
improving crops or clearing up contaminated
land. However, their release to the
environment could have harmful effects
unless precautions are taken. The
Environmental Protection Act 1990 and
regulations which came into force in 1993
contain powers to ensure that any risks to the
environment, including mankind, from the
release of GMOs are prevented or minimised.
The new legislation sets up a consent system
for experimental releases of GMOs and for
the EU-wide approval of GMO products.
The Government recently announced, in the
light of experience and developing knowledge,
‘fast track’ procedures for the approval of
low-risk GMOs so that their benefits may be
enjoyed as soon as possible with the least
burden on industry consistent with safety.
Environmental Research
Research into environmental protection is
essential to the Government’s environmental
policies. Its planned total spending on
environmental research and development in
1993-94 was £300-£400 million, including
work in areas such as renewable energy. The
Department of the Environment expected to
devote about £57 million in 1993-94 to
research into subjects including:
• climate change;
• atmospheric pollution and its monitoring;
• toxic chemicals and GMOs;
• waste disposal; and
• water quality and health.
Other departments have substantial
programmes, notably the Ministry of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, The
Scottish Office Agriculture and Fisheries
Department and other official bodies such as
the NRA and the Meteorological Office.
Research Councils
Basic and strategic research is carried out by
the government-funded research councils (see
pp. 311-15). All have a role in environmental
protection research, but particularly
important is the Natural Environment
Research Council (NERC), which has a
Science Budget allocation of £155 million in
1994-95. The NERC undertakes and
supports research in the environmental
sciences and funds postgraduate training.
Its programmes encompass the marine,
earth, terrestrial, freshwater, polar and
atmospheric sciences. The NERC stresses
international collaborative work on global
environmental issues. For example, it is
helping to develop global atmospheric climate
models and strengthening atmospheric
research in the Arctic. A major research
programme, the Terrestrial Initiative in
Global Environmental Research, aims to
assess the likely impact of climate change on
Britain and elsewhere. The NERC also co¬
ordinates the development and operation of
the Environmental Change Network.
Further Reading
Pollution Control. Aspects of Britain series, HMSO, 1993.
Environment Protection and Water Statistics. Annual report. HMSO.
The UK Environment. HMSO, 1992.
This Common Inheritance—The Third Year Report. HMSO, 1994.
366
Social and
Cultural Affairs
24 Health and Social
Services
Major Policy Developments 370
The National Health
Service 373
Administration 374
Family Health Services 376
Hospital and Specialist
Services 378
Environmental Health 389
Safety of Medicines 389
Research 389
Health Professions 390
Health Arrangements with
Other Countries 391
Personal Social Services 391
Total spending on health and social services in 1994—95 is expected to be
£38,223 million: £37,830 million on health and £394 million on social services.
Total National Health Service spending in Britain was equivalent to 5.9 per
cent of the gross domestic product in 1993-94, compared with 4.7 per cent in
1978-79. Recent developments include an expansion of the role of nurses in
primary care, projects designed to improve health care in inner city areas and
among ethnic minorities, and new procedures for assessing the care needs for
individuals within the community.
The National Health Service (NHS) provides
a full range of medical services which are
available to all residents, regardless of their
income. Local authority personal social
services and voluntary organisations provide
help and advice to the most vulnerable
members of the community. These include
elderly, physically disabled and mentally ill
people, those with learning disabilities
(mental handicap) and children in need of care.
Central government is directly
responsible for the NHS, which is
administered by a range of local health
authorities and health boards throughout
Britain, and for the social security system.
Personal social services are administered by
local authorities but central government is
responsible for establishing national policies,
issuing guidance and overseeing standards.
Joint finance and planning between health
and local authorities aim to prevent
overlapping of services and to encourage the
development of community services.
Spending on the health service has
increased substantially in real terms since 1980,
and is planned to grow further over the next
two years. More patients are being treated
than ever before. Spending on the personal
social services is determined by local authorities.
Central government has restricted the total
expenditure of individual local authorities,
but spending has risen substantially in real
terms since the late 1970s, reflecting the
priority given to this sector.
The NHS health programme consists of:
• Hospital and Community Health Services
(HCHS), providing all hospital care and
a range of community health services;
369
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
• Family Health Services (FHS), providing
general medical, dental, pharmaceutical
and some ophthalmic services, and
covering the cost of medicines prescribed
by general practitioners (GPs);
• Central Health and Miscellaneous
Services (CHMS), providing services
most effectively administered centrally,
such as welfare food (which includes free
milk and vitamins to families with
children under five, and expectant
mothers, on income support) and support
to the voluntary sector; and
• the administrative costs of the health
departments.
Major Policy Developments
Reforms in Management
The NHS and Community Care Act 1990
introduced wide-ranging reform in
management and patient care in the health
and social care services. The NHS reforms,
which came into effect in 1991, aim to give
patients, wherever they live in Britain,
better health care and greater choice of
service, as follows:
1. Health authorities and health boards have
been given a new role as purchasers of health
care on behalf of their local residents,
responsible for assessing local health care
needs and ensuring the availability of a full
range of services to meet identified health
needs. They ensure that those needs are met
within existing resources.
2. Each health authority is funded to buy
health care for its local residents through
arranging contracts with hospitals and other
health service units in either the public or
private sector. For the first time hospitals are
directly funded for the number of patients
they treat, making it easier for GPs to refer
patients outside their area if treatment
elsewhere is faster and better. However,
powers exist for allocating resources where
the urgent need for treatment does not allow
NHS contracts to be arranged in advance.
3. The contracts agreed between health
authorities and hospitals set out the quality,
quantity and cost of the services to be
delivered during the year. The contracts
secured by each health authority are based on
wide consultation with all local GPs.
4. Hospitals may apply to become self-
governing NHS trusts (see p. 379),
independent of local health authority control
but remaining within the NHS. They are
accountable to the relevant health
department, treating NHS patients, and are
funded largely through general taxation,
under contracts with health authorities.
5. GPs from larger medical practices may
apply to join the general practitioner
fundholding scheme (see p. 377), under which
they receive an annual budget directly from
the health authority, enabling them to buy
certain hospital services for their patients.
The reforms in community care provision,
which came into force between 1991 and
1993, establish a new financial and
managerial framework which aims to secure
the delivery of good quality services in line
with national objectives. They are intended to
enable vulnerable groups in the community to
live as independently as possible in their
own homes for as long as they are able and
wish to do so, and to give them a greater say
in how they live and how the services they
need should be provided. (For fuller details
see p. 392.)
Broadly similar changes have been
introduced under separate legislation in
Northern Ireland, where health and personal
social services are provided on an integrated
basis by health and social services boards.
Patient’s Charters
Patient’s Charters are part of the health
departments’ response to the Citizen’s
Charter (see p. 67). Patient’s Charters
support the objectives of the NHS reforms:
to improve standards of health care and
sensitivity to patients in the NHS. They set
out for the first time the rights of patients
and the standards of care they can expect to
receive from the NHS. Patients should
know what they can expect from the NHS
370
Health Service Expenditure
in England
HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES
NHS Gross Expenditure 1992-93 (estimate)
HCHS
current
£20,700 m
HCHS capital
£2,100 m 
Hospital and Community Health Services
Gross Current Expenditure by Sector
1990-91 (estimate)
Total: £14,788 m
Acute £6,700 m
Other
£1,175 m
DHA and RHA
Administration
£775 m
Other community
£869 m
Learning disability £746 m
1. Other community services include health visiting, immunisation,
screening, health promotion and community dental services.
2. Other services include ambulances, the blood transfusion service,
mass radiography and the Service Increment for Teaching and
Research (SIFTR).
Non-cash-limited Family Health Services
Gross Expenditure 1991 -92
£1,766 m
26.9%
Source: Department of Health. The Government's Expenditure Plans
1994-95 to 1996-97.
and the staff who provide services
should understand what is expected of them.
The responsibility for implementing the
Patient’s Charters rests with all parts of the
NHS, English regions, purchasers and
providers, and is carried out mainly through
contract arrangements.
As well as restating the existing rights that
patients have under the NHS, the Patient’s
Charter in England introduced three new
rights. These are that patients must:
• be given detailed information on local
health services, including quality
standards and maximum waiting times;
• be guaranteed admission for treatment no
later than two years from the date of
being placed on a waiting list; and
• have any complaint about NHS services
investigated, and receive a full reply as
soon as possible.
In England the Patient’s Charter also sets
national charter standards. These are not
legal rights but specific standards of service
which the NHS aims to provide. These
include respect for the individual patient;
waiting times for ambulances, clinical
assessment in accident and emergency
departments and appointments in out-patient
clinics; and cancellation of operations. Also
included are local charter standards of
service which health authorities aim to
provide (see below).
Separate Patient’s Charters have been
developed for Scotland, Wales and
Northern Ireland.
A new maternity services charter,
describing key standards and rights,
was published in April 1994. This is
the first of a series of special
documents based on the Patient’s
Charter. Others in preparation deal
with long-term NHS care services and
health services for children.
There are now initiatives on every aspect
of the Patient’s Charter—from setting up
translation services in 140 languages to
encourage access to services, to asking
patients for their views on improving services.
All family health services authorities in
371
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
England have produced local charters. These
include nationally set standards and targets
for information to the public; transfer of
patients’ medical records; help to people
wanting to change doctor; and effective
handling of patients’ complaints, suggestions
and comments. GP practice staff are being
encouraged to produce their own practice
charters, setting out the standards of service
they offer their patients.
In response to the Charter Right to
Information, English regions have set up
health information services. These can
provide details of the times people have to
wait for treatment for all specialties in local
hospitals, as well as information from
hospitals further afield (see p. 379).
The national health information service
freephone receives nearly 400 calls every day.
Developing Health Strategies
The Government emphasises the importance
of promoting health as well as treating
illness. Preventive health services such as
health education, and the responsibility
that individuals have for their own health,
play a major part in this. While great
progress has been made in eliminating
infectious diseases such as poliomyelitis and
tuberculosis, there is still scope for greater
success in controlling the major causes of
early death and disability.
The White Paper The Health of the
Nation, published in 1992, sets out a strategy
for improving health in England. 4 his is the
first time a strategy has been developed for
health in England and its long-term aim is
to enable people to live longer, healthier lives.
It sets targets for improvements in the
following areas:
• coronary heart disease and stroke (the
major cause of premature death in
England);
• cancers (the second biggest cause of
premature death);
• accidents (the commonest cause of death
in those under 30);
• mental illness (a leading cause of
ill-health and, through suicides, of
death); and
• HIV/AIDS and sexual health
(HIV/AIDS is perhaps the greatest new
public health threat this century—see
p. 386—and there is much scope for
reducing sexually transmitted diseases
and unwanted pregnancies).
Targets have been set for:
• reducing death rates (for example, from
coronary heart disease and stroke in those
under 65 by at least 40 per cent by the
year 2000);
• reducing ill-health (such as the incidence
of invasive cervical cancer by at least 20
per cent by 2000); and
• reducing risk behaviour (for example, the
percentage of smokers to no more than
20 per cent of the population by 2000).
While the NHS has a central role in
working towards the targets, the strategy also
emphasises that there is a role for everyone in
improving the nation’s health.
The White Paper also sets out the
Government’s objective of ensuring the
provision of effective family planning services
for those people who want them. The
conception rate for those under 16 years is a
matter of particular concern.
Strategies have also been developed for
Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland which
reflect the health variations in the different
parts of Britain. In Wales, where the first of
Britain’s four national health strategies was
published in 1990, areas for improvement
include, among others: cancers; cardiovascular
disease; maternal and early child health;
physical disability; mental handicap and
mental health; and injuries. Scotland’s
national strategy, published in 1991, places
special emphasis on coronary heart disease,
cancer, HIV/AIDS, accidents and dental and
oral health, smoking, alcohol and drug
misuse. Northern Ireland’s strategy,
published in 1991, sets targets for
improvements in eight key areas which
include circulatory diseases, cancers,
respiratory diseases, child and maternal health
and mental health.
National activity in England includes
interdepartmental taskforces on accident
prevention, nutrition, smoking, the workplace
and physical activity, work with professional
372
HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES
and voluntary bodies and the provision of
guidance setting out a range of possible
actions for each tier of the NHS. At local
level, the NHS is being encouraged to form
‘healthy alliances’ for joint working with
agencies ranging from the voluntary sector
through to industry and the media. Progress
towards the targets is monitored regularly and
formally reviewed, and periodic progress
reports are published.
A review of the first year’s initiative in
England,1 published in November 1993,
reports:
• a 9 per cent fall in the death rate from
accidents among children aged under 15
towards a target of 33 per cent by 2005;
• a 4.8 per cent reduction in the death rate
from coronary heart disease in people
under 65 towards a target of at least 40
per cent by 2000; and
• a 3 per cent reduction in the death rate
from lung cancer in men under 75
towards a target of at least 30 per cent by
2010.
Instances of negative trends include:
• the figures on the death rate from
suicide, which show an increase of 0.9
per cent compared to a target of at least a
15 per cent reduction by 2000; and
• the figures on teenage smoking, which
remain static.
The Government is working closely with
the World Health Organisation (WHO) in
presenting The Health of the Nation as one
possible approach for other countries
wishing to develop a strategic approach to
improving health.
Improving London’s Health Services
The Government’s strategy to improve health
services in the London area was launched in
February 1993. It proposed to:
• develop better, local and accessible
primary and community health services;
• provide a better-balanced hospital service,
on fewer sites;
The Health of the Nation—One Year On. Department of Health.
1993.
• streamline specialist services; and
• consolidate medical education and
research, chiefly through mergers of
free-standing undergraduate medical
colleges with multifaculty colleges of
London University.
As a result:
• a London Initiative Zone has been
established as a focus for new investment
and new approaches in primary health
care and community-based services;
• regional health authorities are continuing
to implement proposals for restructuring
the acute hospital service in London;
• in late 1994 further plans to merge
medical schools and postgraduate
institutes with multifaculty colleges will be
available. It has been agreed that fewer,
larger specialist tertiary centres will offer
the best means of providing excellence in
treatment, care and research.
The National Health
Service
The NHS is based upon the principle that
there should be a full range of publicly
provided services designed to help the
individual stay healthy. The services are
intended to provide effective and appropriate
treatment and care where necessary while
making the best use of available resources. All
taxpayers, employers and employees
contribute to its cost so that those members
of the community who do not require health
care help to pay for those who do. Some
forms of treatment, such as hospital care, are
provided free; others (see p. 375) may be
charged for.
Growth in real spending on the health
service is being used to meet the needs of
increasing numbers of elderly people and to
take full advantage of advances in medical
technology. It is also used to provide more
appropriate types of care, often in the
community rather than in hospital, for
priority groups such as elderly and
mentally ill people and those with learning
373
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
disabilities. Increased spending has, in
addition, been allocated to combat the
growing problems arising from alcohol and
drug misuse; and to remedy disparities in
provision between the regions of Britain.
The Voluntary Sector
Government grant aid to voluntary
organisations working in health and personal
social services in England will exceed
£19.5 million in 1994-95—an increase of
more than 9 per cent on 1992-93. The grants
go primarily to national organisations dealing
with children, elderly people, carers and
people from ethnic minorities, as well as
those looking after people with mental illness,
physical or learning disabilities, or suffering
from the effects of HIV/AIDS or the misuse
of alcohol or drugs. In Scotland grants to
voluntary organisations in social welfare
increased by 18 per cent in 1994-95, with
grants to a wide range of bodies. Health
authorities and local authorities have similar
powers to make grants to local organisations.
Market Testing
The Government stresses the need for
collaboration between the public and private
health sectors and for improving efficiency in
order to secure the best value for money and
the maximum patient care.
Since 1983 the market testing of catering,
domestic services, and laundry has produced
cumulative savings of £1,000 million, which
has been reinvested into direct personal care.
NHS managers have already market-tested
most non-clinical services, including
administrative and financial services as well as
various aspects of information technology and
communications. They are now beginning to
test clinical support services such as
pathology and pharmacy.
Economies are also made in prescribing by
restricting the use of expensive branded
products in favour of cheaper but equally
effective equivalent medicines.
ADMINISTRATION
The Secretary of State for Health in England
and the Secretaries of State for Scotland,
Wales and Northern Ireland are responsible
for all aspects of the health services in their
respective countries. The Department of
Health is responsible for national strategic
planning in England. It carries out its
responsibility for providing services locally
through the NHS Executive. The Scottish
Office Home and Health Department, the
Welsh Office and the Department of Health
and Social Services in Northern Ireland have
similar responsibilities.
District health authorities in England
and Wales and health boards in Scotland
are responsible for securing hospital and
community health services in their areas. At
present England also has regional authorities
responsible for planning, resource allocation,
major capital building work and certain
specialised hospital services best administered
on a regional basis. The health authorities and
boards co-operate closely with local authorities
responsible for social work, environmental
health, education and other services. Family
health services authorities (health boards in
Scotland) arrange for the provision of services
by doctors, dentists, pharmacists and opticians,
as well as administering their contracts.
Community health councils (local health
councils in Scotland) represent local opinion
on the health services provided.
In Northern Ireland health and social
services boards are responsible for all health
and personal social services in their areas.
The representation of public opinion on these
services is provided for by area health and
social services councils.
In its continued drive to decentralise the
NHS, the Government has announced
proposals to streamline NHS management.
These involve:
• creating a clear identity for the NHS
Executive, within the Department of
Health, as the headquarters of the NHS;
• abolishing the English regional health
authorities (RHAs) and reorganising the
NHS Executive to include eight regional
offices, each headed by the regional
director;
• appointing non-executive members of the
NHS policy board to cover each of the
eight regions; and
374
HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES
• enabling and encouraging mergers
between district health authorities and
family health services authorities.
As a first step towards the new structure,
the number of RHAs was reduced from 14 to
eight in April 1994, creating common
boundaries with the planned new NHS
Executive regional offices.
The changes would be expected to produce
substantial savings in administrative costs and
maximise the proportion of NHS spending
devoted to direct patient care. Subject to
parliamentary approval, the plans are
expected to be fully in force by April 1996.
Finance
Over 82 per cent of the cost of the health
service in Great Britain is paid for through
general taxation. The rest is met from:
• the NHS element of National Insurance
contributions, paid by employed people,
their employers, and self-employed
people (13.2 per cent);
• charges towards the cost of certain items
such as drugs prescribed by family
doctors, and general dental treatment
(3.5 per cent); and
• other receipts, including land sales and
the proceeds of income generation
schemes (0.8 per cent).
Health authorities may raise funds from
voluntary sources. Certain hospitals increase
revenue by taking private patients, who pay the
full cost of their accommodation and treatment.
Almost 80 per cent of medical prescription
items are supplied free. Prescription charges
do not apply to the following:
• children under 16 years (or young people
under 19 and still in full-time education);
• expectant mothers and women who have
had a baby in the past year;
• women aged 60 and over and men aged
65 and over;
• patients suffering from certain specified
medical conditions;
• war and armed forces disablement
pensioners (for prescriptions which relate
to the disability for which they receive a
war pension); and
• people in families who are receiving income
support or family credit (see p. 406); and
people or families with low incomes.
There are proportional charges for most
types of NHS dental treatment, including
examinations. However, women who were
pregnant when the dentist accepted them for
treatment or who have had a baby in the past
year, anyone under the age of 18 (or 19 if in
full-time education), people in families
receiving income support or family credit,
and people in families assessed as having a
low income, do not have to pay.
Sight tests are free to children, people in
families receiving income support or family
credit, people in families assessed as having a
low income and those with specified medical
needs. Children, people on low incomes and
those requiring certain complex lenses receive
a voucher towards the cost of their spectacles.
Hospital medical staff are salaried and
may be employed full time or part time.
Family practitioners (doctors, dentists,
optometrists and pharmacists) are self-
employed and have contracts with the NHS.
GPs are paid by a system of fees and
allowances designed to reflect responsibilities,
workload and practice expenses. Dentists
providing treatment in their own surgeries
are paid by a combination of capitation fees
for treating children, continuing care
payments for adults registered with the
practice, and a prescribed scale of fees for
individual treatments. Pharmacists
dispensing from their own premises are
refunded the cost of the items supplied,
together with professional fees. Ophthalmic
medical practitioners and ophthalmic
opticians taking part in the general
ophthalmic service receive approved fees for
each sight test carried out.
Staffing
The NHS is one of the largest employers in
the world, with a workforce of nearly
1 million people. Staff costs account for
two-thirds of total NHS expenditure and
70 per cent of current expenditure on
hospitals and community health services. The
sharp fall in the numbers of directly
employed ancillary staff and of maintenance
375
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and works staff reflects the continuing effect
of competitive tendering (see p. 70). Between
1982 and 1992:
• the number of NHS medical and dental
staff in England rose by 12.5 per cent to
58,816, while in Scotland the increase
was 4.3 per cent to 7,904. In England on
average the number of hospital medical
consultants grew by 2.5 per cent a year
and the number of junior doctors by
1.7 per cent. In Scotland on average the
number of hospital medical consultants
grew by 1.5 per cent a year and the
number of junior doctors by 0.8 per cent.
• the number of scientific, professional
and technical staff in England rose by
34 per cent;
• the number of nursing and midwifery
staff, who make up 48 per cent of the
NHS workforce, has decreased by 4 per
cent since 1982. The drop in their
numbers in 1992 reflects the the growth
in bursaried students under the Project
2000 nurse training scheme (see p. 391).
Project 2000 trainees have full student
status and are not NHS employees.
• the number of general and senior
managers has risen in recent years, which
reflects the progressive introduction of
management posts in a series of phased
stages since 1986.
The Government’s aim throughout the
service is progressively to introduce greater
pay flexibility to allow managers to relate pay
to local markets and reward individual
performance. A number of measures are being
taken to provide a more effective workforce
through better management development,
education and training (see p. 379).
Health Service Commissioners
Health Service Commissioners (one each for
England, Scotland and Wales) are responsible
for dealing with complaints from members of
the public about health service bodies. The
three posts are at present held by one person,
who is also Parliamentary Commissioner for
Administration (Ombudsman—see p. 60). As
Health Service Commissioner, he reports
annually to Parliament.
The Health Service Commissioner can
investigate complaints that a person has
suffered injustice or hardship as a result of:
• a failure in a service provided by a health
service body;
• a failure to provide a service which was
the function of the health service body to
provide; or
• a maladministration connected with
action taken by or on behalf of a health
service body.
The Health Service Commissioner’s
jurisdiction does not extend to complaints
about clinical judgment, family practitioners,
personnel matters and the use of a health
authority’s discretionary powers; separate
procedures exist for these. In Northern
Ireland the Commissioner for Complaints has
a similar role.
An independent review of all aspects
of NHS complaints procedures was
published in May 1994. It
recommends a single, speedy system
to handle all types of complaint to
replace current procedures, which are
seen as too complex and fragmented.
FAMILY HEALTH SERVICES
The family health services are those given to
patients by doctors, dentists, opticians and
pharmacists of their own choice. They remain
the first point of contact most people have
with the NHS. Every year there are about
200 million consultations with family doctors
and about 6 million people visit a pharmacy
every day. Many of those who visit their
family doctor or dentist need no clinical
treatment but instead healthy lifestyle
counselling and preventive health care advice.
The Government’s longstanding policy has
been to build up and extend these services in
order to improve health and relieve pressure
on the far more costly secondary care sector
(that is, hospital and specialist services).
GPs provide the first diagnosis in the case
of illness and either prescribe a suitable
course of treatment or refer a patient to the
more specialised services and hospital
376
HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES
consultants. About four-fifths of GPs in
Britain work in partnerships or group practices,
often as members of primary health-care teams.
The teams also include health visitors and
district nurses, and sometimes midwives, social
workers and other professional staff employed
by the health authorities. About a quarter of
GPs in Great Britain and about half in Northern
Ireland work in health centres, where medical
and nursing services are provided. Health
centres may also have facilities for health
education, family planning, speech therapy,
chiropody, assessment of hearing,
physiotherapy and remedial exercises. Dental,
pharmaceutical and ophthalmic services,
hospital out-patient and supporting social
work services, may also be provided.
There have been substantial increases in
primary health care staff in recent years. For
example, between 1978-9 and 1992-93 the
number of GPs in England increased by
23.4 per cent (to almost 26,000); average
patient list size fell by 16.9 per cent (to just
under 2,000); and the number of family
dentists increased by 26.4 per cent (to
15,000). The number of GP practice
nurses increased ninefold—to 9,000—and the
number of opticians increased by 24.5 per
cent (to 6,600).
Special funds have been earmarked by the
Government for improving the quality of
primary health care in inner city areas. Efforts
have also been made to improve health services
for ethnic minority groups. These include
new health projects in Britain’s Chinese
communities, a project in Cardiff for the
Somali refugee community, and increased
central funding for health information material
to be produced in many minority languages.
An NHS ethnic health unit was set up in
November 1993. Its aim is to ensure that
people from different ethnic backgrounds
derive full benefit from the Health of the
Nation strategy (see p. 372), from local health
purchasing policies, the Patient’s Charter (see
p. 371), the Care in the Community initiatives
and the developing role of primary care.
The Government has welcomed a recent
report which recommends ways in which the
role of community pharmacists could be
developed to increase their contribution to
health care.
Recent Developments
GP Fundholders
GP practices with 7,000 patients or more
(6,000 in Scotland and Northern Ireland)
may apply for fundholding status. This is a
voluntary scheme which gives larger medical
practices the opportunity to manage sums of
NHS money for the benefit of their
patients. It aims to improve services for
patients and enable GPs to explore more
innovative methods of providing health care.
GP fundholders are responsible for part of
their own NHS budgets, enabling them to
buy certain non-urgent hospital services.
Prescription charges and part of the cost of
running the practice are also covered.
Fundholders may negotiate for services
directly with hospitals from both public
and private sectors in any district or
regional health authority or health board in
Britain. GP fundholders may buy NHS
community nursing services for their patients,
including district nursing and health visiting
services and community psychiatric and
community mental handicap nursing. In
1992-93 GP fundholders in England spent
just over 1.5 per cent of their budget with
non-NHS organisations.
By April 1994 some 8,800 GPs in over
2,000 practices in Great Britain had
become fundholders, and 36 per cent of
the population are now registered with a
fundholding GP.
Contracts
The performance-related contract for GPs,
introduced in 1990, is designed to raise
standards of care, extend the range of
services available to patients and improve
patient choice. The changes are intended
to make it easier for patients to see their
GP at times convenient to them; easier for
patients to change doctors; and to
encourage doctors to practise more
preventive medicine.
The new contract for dentists, introduced
in 1990, aims at improving care and
providing more information to patients about
general dental services. As a result NHS
377
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
dental care now includes preventive care as
well as restorative treatment. All adult
patients are now offered ‘continuing care’,
and dentists are encouraged to practise more
preventive dentistry for children. There are
also incentives for dentists to undertake
further training.
Clinical Audit
Clinical audit is a programme that requires
all healthcare professionals to look
systematically at the procedures used for
diagnosis, care and treatment, examining
how associated resources are used and
investigating the effect care has on the
outcome and quality of life for the patient.
The Government has so far allocated
.£221 million for clinical audit; more than
7,000 audit projects have been established.
Midwives, Health Visitors and District
Nurses
Midwives provide care and support to women
throughout pregnancy, birth and the post¬
natal period (up to 28 days after the baby is
born). Midwives work in both hospital and
community settings.
From October 1994 district nurses
and health visitors in eight pilot
schemes in England will be able to
prescribe from a limited list of drugs
and medical appliances. These
schemes will be based in GP
fundholding practices and are
intended to reduce significantly the
time patients have to wait for relief
of their symptoms.
Health visitors are responsible for the
preventive care and health promotion of
families, particularly those with young
children. They have a public health role,
identifying local health needs and working
closely with GPs, district nurses and other
professions. District nurses give skilled
nursing care to people at home or
elsewhere outside hospital; they also play
an important role in health promotion
and education.
HOSPITAL AND SPECIALIST
SERVICES
A full range of hospital services is provided
by district general hospitals. These include
treatment and diagnostic facilities for in¬
patients, day-patients and out-patients;
maternity departments; infectious diseases
units; psychiatric and geriatric facilities;
rehabilitation facilities; and other forms of
specialised treatment. There are also specialist
hospitals or units for children, people
suffering from mental illness, those with
learning disabilities, and elderly people, and
for the treatment of specific diseases.
Examples of these include the world-famous
Hospital for Sick Children (Great Ormond
Street) and the Moorfields Eye Hospital, in
London. Hospitals designated as teaching
hospitals combine treatment facilities with
training medical and other students, and
research work.
Many of the hospitals in the NHS were
built in the 19th century; some trace their
origins to much earlier charitable foundations.
Much has been done to improve and
extend existing hospital buildings and many
new hospitals have been or are being opened.
Since 1979 in Great Britain over 700 major
building schemes, each costing £1 million or
more, have been completed. A further 340
schemes are at various stages of development.
This is the largest sustained building
programme in the history of the NHS.
Recent policy in England and Wales has
been to provide a balanced hospital service
centred around a district general hospital,
complemented as necessary by smaller, locally
based hospitals and facilities.
The hospital service is now treating more
patients a year than ever before. Between
1978-79 and 1992-93 lengths of stay for
in-patients declined and the number of
people treated as day patients more than
trebled, to 1.8 million. In 1992-93 day cases
accounted for 23 per cent of all hospital
admissions in the general and acute specialities.
Waiting Times
Over the last few years there have been
substantial reductions in the number of
378
HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES
patients waiting more than 12 months for
in-patient or day case treatment.
• In England in March 1994 fewer than
65,000 patients were waiting over a year
for hospital treatment, compared with
more than 200,000 in 1987. Since March
1988 the average waiting time has fallen
from over nine months to less than five.
• In Scotland in 1993-94 the number of
patients waiting over a year for hospital
treatment fell by over 50 per cent to
4,193, while the number waiting for
over two years fell by over 45 per cent
to 1,830.
Regions are meeting the Patient’s
Charter guarantees of a maximum two-year
wait for in-patient or day case treatment, and
18 months for hip or knee replacements or
cataract operations. From April 1995 two new
targets will be introduced to cover waiting
times for coronary revascularisations and for
first out-patient’s appointment.
NHS Trusts
Under the NHS and Community Care Act
1990 hospitals and other health service units
(for example, ambulance services and
community health services) may apply to
become independent of direct local health
authority control and establish themselves as
self-governing NHS Trusts. Parallel
legislation was introduced in Northern
Ireland to create Health and Social Services
Trusts, which are broadly similar to NHS
Trusts. The Trusts remain within the NHS,
accountable to the appropriate Secretary of
State and finally to Parliament. NHS Trusts
are required to publish their business plans
and annual reports and accounts, and to hold
at least one public meeting a year.
Each NHS Trust is run by a board of
directors. Trusts are free to employ their own
staff and set their own rates of pay, although
staff transferring to Trust employment retain
their existing terms and conditions of service.
Trusts are also free to carry out research and
provide facilities for medical education and
other forms of training. They derive their
income mainly from NHS contracts to
provide services to health authorities and GP
fundholders. They may treat private patients
and generate income provided this does not
interfere with NHS obligations. By April
1994, 419 NHS Trusts were running in
England, delivering around 96 per cent of
NHS hospital and community health services.
At the same date in Northern Ireland, 13 trusts
were delivering over 70 per cent of the health
and personal social services for the population.
Organ Transplants
Over the past 25 years there have been
significant developments in transplant
surgery in Britain. The United Kingdom
Transplant Support Service Authority
provides a centralised organ matching and
allocation service. During 1993, 1,683 kidney
transplants were performed. A similar
service exists for corneas and, in 1993, 2,564
were transplanted.
Heart transplant operations have been
conducted at Papworth Hospital in
Cambridgeshire and Harefield Hospital in
London since 1979. There are six other
designated heart transplant centres in
England, while Scotland’s first unit opened in
Glasgow in 1991.
A programme of combined heart and lung
transplants is in progress and in 1993, 312
heart, 95 lung, and 39 heart/lung transplants
were performed. The world’s first combined
heart, lungs and liver transplant operation
was carried out at Papworth in 1987.
Commercial dealing in organs for
transplant is illegal.
There are six designated liver transplant
units in England and Scotland’s first liver
transplant centre opened in Edinburgh in
1992. In 1993 550 liver transplants were
performed. A voluntary organ donor card
system enables people to indicate their
willingness to become organ donors in the
event of their death. In March 1994 the
Government launched a £1 million television
campaign to encourage people to carry
donor cards.
Blood Transfusion Services
Blood transfusion services are run by the
National Blood Authority in England, the
379
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service
and the Common Health Services Agency
in Wales.
Around 2.5 million donations are given
each year by voluntary unpaid donors and
separated into many different life-saving
products for patients. Red cells, platelets and
other products with a limited ‘shelf life’ are
prepared at regional transfusion centres and
the more complex processing of plasma
products is undertaken at the Bio Products
Laboratory in Elstree (Hertfordshire) and
the Protein Fractionation Centre in Edinburgh.
Each of the three national bodies
co-ordinates programmes for donor
recruitment, retention and education, and
donor sessions are organised regionally, in
towns, villages and workplaces. Donors are
normally aged between 18 (17 in Scotland)
and 70. Regional transfusion centres are
responsible for blood collection, screening,
processing and regional blood banks. They
also provide wide-ranging laboratory, clinical,
research, teaching and advisory services and
facilities. These are subject to nationally
co-ordinated quality audit programmes.
Britain is completely self-sufficient in
‘fresh’ blood products and the National Blood
Authority aims to meet fully the demand for
plasma products in England. Scotland is
already self-sufficient in all blood products.
Ambulance and Patient Transport
Services
NHS emergency ambulances are available
free of charge for cases of sudden illness or
collapse, and for doctors’ urgent calls. Rapid
response services, in which paramedics use
cars and motor cycles to reach emergency
cases, have been introduced in a number of
areas, particularly London and other major
cities with areas of high traffic density.
Helicopter ambulances serve many parts of
England and an integrated air ambulance
service is available throughout Scotland.
Non-emergency patient transport services
are available to NHS patients considered by
their doctor (or dentist or midwife) to be
medically unfit to travel by other means. The
principle applied is that each patient should
be able to reach hospital in a reasonable time
and in reasonable comfort, without detriment
to his or her medical condition. In many
areas the ambulance service organises
volunteer drivers to provide a hospital car
service for non-urgent patients.
Patients on income support, family credit
or with low incomes may have their
travelling expenses reimbursed.
(In Scotland this also applies to patients in
the Highland and Islands Development Area
who travel 30 miles or more by land or five
or more miles by sea to hospital.)
Rehabilitation
Rehabilitation services are available for
elderly, young, and mentally ill people, and
those with physical or learning disabilities
who need such help to resume life in the
community. These services are offered in
hospitals, centres in the community and in
people’s own homes through co-ordinated
work by a range of professionals.
Medical services may provide free artificial
limbs and eyes, hearing aids, surgical
supports, wheelchairs, and other appliances.
Following assessment, very severely
physically disabled patients may be provided
with environmental control equipment which
enables them to operate devices such as alarm
bells, radios and televisions, telephones, and
heating appliances. Nursing equipment may
be provided on loan for use in the home.
Local authorities may provide a range of
facilities to help patients in the transition
from hospital to their own homes. These
include the provision of equipment, help with
cleaning, shopping and cooking care from
domestic help workers, and professional help
from occupational therapists and social
workers. Voluntary organisations also
provide services, complementing the work of
the statutory agencies and widening the
range of services.
Hospices
A number of hospices provide care for
terminally ill people (including children),
either directly in in-patient or day-care units
or through nursing and other assistance in
the patient’s own home. Control of symptoms
380
HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES
and psychological support for patients and
their families form central features of the
modern hospice movement, which started in
Britain and is now worldwide. Some hospices
are administered entirely by the NHS; the
rest are run by independent charities, some
receiving support from public funds. The
number of voluntary hospices has more than
doubled in the past ten years. There are over
150 hospices in England and Wales, providing
over 2,500 beds; in Scotland 15 independent
voluntary hospices providing almost 265 beds;
and in Northern Ireland there are four
independent hospices providing 76 beds.
The Government’s aim has been to
provide a level of public funding for the
hospice movement which matches voluntary
donations. In 199T-95, almost £48 million has
been allocated to health authorities in
England and Wales to enable them to offer
increased support to hospices and similar
organisations, including £6.3 million to enable
them to arrange for drugs to be supplied to
hospices without charge and £5.7 million to
help them maintain levels of funding for
in-patient voluntary hospices following the
community care changes (see p. 392). In
Scotland health boards have been allocated
£2.7 million for 1994-95 to cover 50 per cent
of the running costs of hospices in their areas
and £436,000 has been provided for hospice
pharmaceutical services. The National
Council for Hospice and Specialist Palliative
Care Services covers England, Wales and
Northern Ireland; its Scottish counterpart is
the Scottish Partnership Agency for Palliative
and Cancer Care.
Private Medical Treatment
The Government’s policy is to welcome cost-
effective co-operation between the NHS and
the independent sector in meeting the
nation’s health needs. It believes that this will
benefit the NHS by adding to the resources
devoted to health care and offering flexibility
to health authorities in the delivery of
services. Some health authorities share
expensive facilities and equipment with
private hospitals, and NHS patients are
sometimes treated (at public expense) in the
private sector to reduce waiting lists. The
scale of private practice in relation to the
NHS is, however, very small.
It is estimated that about three-quarters of
those receiving acute treatment in private
hospitals or NHS hospital pay-beds are
covered by health insurance schemes, which
make provision for private health care in
return for annual subscriptions. Over 3
million people subscribe to such schemes,
half of them within group schemes, some
arranged by firms on behalf of employees.
Subscriptions often cover more than one
person (for example, members of a family);
about 12 per cent of the population in Britain
are covered by private medical insurance.
The Government has introduced tax relief on
private health insurance premiums paid by
people aged 60 and over to encourage the
increased use of private health facilities.
Many overseas patients come to Britain for
treatment in private hospitals and clinics, and
Harley Street in London is an internationally
recognised centre for medical consultancy.
Parents and Children
Special preventive services are provided under
the health service to safeguard the health of
expectant mothers and of mothers with young
children. Services include free dental
treatment, dried milk and vitamins; health
education; and vaccination and immunisation
of children against certain infectious diseases
(see p. 387). Pregnant women receive
antenatal care from their GPs and hospital
clinics, and women in paid employment have
the right to visit the clinics during working
hours. Some 99 per cent of women have their
babies in hospital, returning home shortly
afterwards to be attended by a midwife or
health visitor and, where necessary, their GP.
The Government attaches great
importance to improving the quality of
maternity services, and to making them
more responsive to women’s wishes on how
care is provided. Two government reports,
one for England and Wales and one for
Scotland, were published in 1993. They
recommend giving women greater choice
over the care they receive during pregnancy
and childbirth. (See p. 518 for the new
maternity services charter.)
381
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
A comprehensive programme of health
surveillance is provided for pre-school
children in clinics run by the community
health authorities, and increasingly by GPs.
This enables doctors, dentists and health
visitors to oversee the physical and mental
health and development of pre-school
children. Information on preventive services
is given and welfare foods are distributed.
The school health service offers health care
and advice for schoolchildren, including
medical and dental inspection and treatment
where necessary.
Child guidance and child psychiatric services
provide help and advice to families and children
with psychological or emotional problems.
In recent years special efforts have been
made to improve co-operation between the
community-based child health services and
local authority social services for children.
This is particularly important in the
prevention of child abuse and for the health
and welfare of children in care.
Human Fertilisation and Embryology
The world’s first ‘test-tube baby’ was born in
Britain in 1978, as a result of the technique
of in vitro fertilisation. This opened up new
horizons for helping with problems of
infertility and for the science of embryology.
The social, ethical and legal implications were
examined by a committee of inquiry under
Baroness Warnock (1984) and led eventually
to the passage of the Human Fertilisation
and Embryology Act 1990, one of the most
comprehensive pieces of legislation on
assisted reproduction and embryo research
in the world.
This Act set up the Human Fertilisation
and Embryology Authority (HFEA) to license
and control centres providing certain
infertility treatments, undertaking human
embryo research or storing gametes or
embryos. The HFEA maintains a code of
practice giving guidance about licensed
centres and reports annually to Parliament.
Commercial surrogacy agencies and
advertising of, or for, surrogacy services
are prohibited; legislation to ban the use of
fetal ovarian tissue in fertility treatment is
before Parliament.
Family Planning
Free family planning advice and treatment are
available to women from family doctors and
from health authority family planning clinics,
which also make services available to men. The
Health of the Nation White Paper recognises
the need for providing effective family
planning services for people who want them.
Abortion
The Abortion Act 1967, as amended in 1990,
allows the ending of a pregnancy of up to
24 weeks by a doctor if two doctors consider
that continuing the pregnancy would involve
greater risk of injury to the physical or
mental health of the woman (or to any
existing children of the family of the
pregnant woman) than having an abortion.
There are three categories in which no time
limit applies: where there is a risk of grave
permanent injury to the physical or mental
health of the woman; where there is a
substantial risk of fetal handicap; or where
continuing the pregnancy would involve a
risk to the life of the pregnant woman greater
than that of the pregnancy being terminated.
The Act does not apply in Northern Ireland.
In 1992:
• 172,063 legal abortions were performed
in England and Wales, compared with
179,522 in 1991 (representing a 4.2 per
cent decrease). The figures for Scotland
were 10,764 and 11,068 respectively;
• abortions performed in the NHS in
England and Wales increased by 5.8 per
cent to 79,634, while those performed in
the non-NHS sector fell by 11.4 per cent
to 92,429. In Scotland 98 per cent of
abortions were preformed in the NHS;
and
• some 6.7 per cent of all abortions in
England and Wales were to non-residents.
In Scotland the figure was only about
0.2 per cent.
Drug Misuse
The misuse of dangerous drugs, such as
heroin, cocaine and amphetamines, is a
382
HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES
serious social and health problem, and the
Government has made the fight against such
misuse a major priority. Its strategy
comprises action to reduce the supply of
illicit drugs from abroad; to promote more
effective law enforcement by the police and
Customs services; and to maintain tight
controls on medicinal drugs that can be
misused. It also includes action to maintain
effective deterrents against misuse; to
develop effective programmes to treat and
rehabilitate misusers; and, through
educational programmes and publicity
campaigns, to prevent people who are not
misusers from starting.
Research on various aspects of drug misuse
is funded by several government departments.
The Government is advised on a wide range
of matters relating to drug misuse and
connected social problems by the Advisory
Council on the Misuse of Drugs.
In December 1993 the Central Drugs
Co-ordination Unit was set up to look at
existing government strategy in England and
to propose changes where appropriate.
Similarly, in Scotland a ministerial Drugs
Task Force was set up in April 1993 to
review existing arrangements for prevention,
provision of services and co-ordination. A
wide-ranging review of the effectiveness of
treatment services for drug misusers in
England was announced in April 1994.
Drug Statistics
Recent drug statistics show that between 1992
and 1993:
• the number of notified drug addicts in
Britain increased by 13 per cent
(to 28,000)—in line with the prevailing
upward trend;.
• the proportion of those notified who are
addicted to heroin, the most frequently
reported drug, fell to below 70 per cent,
but this is balanced by an increase in
notifications of addiction to methadone,
which now accounts for over 40 per cent
of notifications;.
• fewer than 10 per cent were reported to
be addicted to cocaine, although the
proportion is increasing;
• in general the highest numbers of all
categories of notified addicts are to be
found in London and the north west of
England; and
• the proportion of addicts injecting drugs
rose slightly from 54 per cent to 56 per
cent.
Prevention
The Government has run national mass
media campaigns since 1985 to persuade
young people not to take drugs, and to advise
parents, teachers and other professionals on
how to recognise and combat the problem.
They have included warning of the dangers
of heroin misuse and of the risks of
transmitting HIV, the virus which causes
AIDS (see p. 386), through the sharing of
injecting equipment. Since 1991-92 the focus
has changed to give greater emphasis to
locally-based campaigns.
At present the Drugs Prevention Initiative
provides funding for local drug prevention
teams in 20 areas in England, Wales and
Scotland. (A major restructuring takes place
from March 1995, when the Drugs
Prevention Initiative will be responsible for
12 teams in England.) Their task is to
strengthen community resistance to drug
misuse. Over 1,000 projects have been
supported since the Initiative began in 1989.
The 1994—95 budget for the initiative is
approximately £6 million.
The local teams have identified five main
prevention approaches which are being
pursued within the initiative:
• education and training;
• information and awareness raising;
• diversionary activities;
• supporting community development; and
• work with criminal justice agencies.
Working groups have been formed for
each of these themes to pool experience,
develop future work and identify areas
suitable for further research.
Separate measures have been introduced in
Scotland to discourage drug misuse through
publicity campaigns and action in the
education service and the community. The
383
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
recently established Drugline Scotland, a free
government-funded telephone line, gives
confidential advice.
The Government continues to make funds
available for local education authorities in
England and Wales to appoint staff to
promote and co-ordinate preventive work in
their areas, especially for anti-drug misuse
work in schools. As part of the National
Curriculum (see p. 418), children in primary
and secondary schools receive education on
the dangers of drug misuse.
Treatment and Rehabilitation
Funds have been made available to health
authorities since 1986-87 for developing and
expanding services for drug misusers. Further
funding has also been allocated to help prevent
the spread of HIV among and from injecting
drug misusers. This includes schemes
providing counselling and the exchange of
clean for used injecting equipment—in
England £2.7 million is being allocated in
1994-95 to expand the provision of needle
exchange schemes within pharmacies. The
total amount available to health authorities in
1994-95 is over £25 million. Similar projects
are in progress in Scotland, where £7 million
is made available each year for the support of
drug misuse services.
Treatment for drug dependence is
provided mainly on an out-patient basis.
Many hospitals provide specialist treatment
for drug misusers, mainly in psychiatric
units, or have special drug treatment units.
An increasing number of GPs also treat drug
misusers, but only certain specialist doctors
are licensed to prescribe heroin, cocaine and
dipipanone (Diconal). All doctors must notify
the authorities of any patient they consider to
be addicted to certain controlled drugs, and
guidelines on good medical practice in the
treatment of drug misuse are issued to
doctors.
Other Services
A number of non-statutory agencies work
with and complement the health service
provision. Advice and rehabilitation services,
including residential facilities, for example,
are provided mainly by voluntary
organisations. Support in the community is
provided by the probation service and local
social services departments (and in Scotland
by social work departments).
Solvent Misuse
Government policy is directed towards
preventing solvent misuse through the
education of young people, parents and
professionals and, where practicable,
restricting the sales of solvent-based liquefied
gas and aerosol products to young people.
In England and Wales it is an offence to
supply such substances to children under
18 if the supplier knows or has reason to
believe they are to be used to cause
intoxication. In Scotland proceedings can be
taken under the common law.
Alcohol Misuse
Alcohol is consumed by over 90 per cent of
the adult population. About 28 per cent of
men and 11 per cent of women drink to an
extent that may put their health at risk. An
estimated 8 million working days each year
are lost through alcohol-related absenteeism.
The cost to British industry of alcohol misuse
is estimated at £1,700 million a year, and the
total cost to society at £2,500 million.
The Government’s view is that the
consumption of alcohol in sensible
quantities and in appropriate circumstances
provides many people with enjoyment.
Drinking fewer than 21 units of alcohol a
week by men and 14 units a week by women
is unlikely to damage health. (A unit is 8
grammes of pure alcohol, roughly equivalent
to half a pint of ordinary strength beer or
lager; or a glass of wine; or a pub measure of
spirits.) The British medical profession
advises that sustained drinking above these
levels progressively increases the health
risk, and that drinking over 50 units a week
by men and over 35 units by women is
definitely dangerous.
The health strategies include targets for
reducing the proportion of people drinking
over sensible levels and set out a programme
of action by government departments, health
384
HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES
and local authorities, the independent sector,
employers and the alcohol industry.
Part of the funds of the Health Education
Authority (see p. 388) are for promoting the
sensible drinking message in England, and
equivalent bodies are similarly funded in
other parts of Britain. At local level this
requires co-ordinated action by a wide range
of organisations with an interest in the use or
misuse of alcohol.
Treatment and rehabilitation within the
NHS include in-patient and out-patient
services in general and psychiatric hospitals
and specialised alcoholism treatment units.
Primary care teams (GPs, nurses and social
workers) and voluntary organisations
providing treatment and rehabilitation in
hostels, day centres and advisory services also
play an important role.
The development of services to help
problem drinkers and their families is being
taken forward within the framework of
community care. Local authorities are
required to identify the need for alcohol
misuse services in their area, and to list the
services provided in their community care
plans (see p. 392). They are then responsible
for arranging for the needs of individuals
with alcohol problems to be assessed, and for
buying an appropriate course of care.
There is close co-operation between
statutory and voluntary organisations. In
England the voluntary agency Alcohol
Concern, which is receiving a government
grant of £1.58 million for 1994—95, plays a
prominent role in training for professional
and voluntary workers. It is improving the
network of voluntary agencies and their
collaboration with statutory bodies in the
prevention of misuse.
Between 1991-92 and 1995-96 a total
government contribution of £6 million is
being allocated to Alcohol Concern for
improving and extending the network of care,
advisory and counselling services. In addition,
a grant of £2.4 million is being paid to local
authorities during 1994—95 to help voluntary
agencies improve and extend provision for
alcohol and drug misusers. The Scottish
Council on Alcohol undertakes similar
work in Scotland, with the help of a
government grant (£185,000 in 1994-95).
Research and surveys on various aspects of
alcohol misuse are funded by several
government departments.
Smoking
Cigarette smoking is the greatest preventable
cause of illness and death in Britain. It is
associated with around 110,000 premature
deaths and an estimated 50 million lost
working days each year, and costs the NHS
an estimated £10 million a year for the
treatment of related diseases (for example,
heart disease, lung cancer and bronchitis). In
addition, smoking by pregnant women can
cause low birth weight in infants. The
Government is following an active health
education policy supported by voluntary
agreements with the tobacco industry (see
below) aimed at reducing the level of smoking.
The Government aims to reduce adult
smoking in England from the present
30 per cent to 20 per cent by the year 2000.
A further aim has been to reduce smoking by
young people by one-third between 1988 and
the end of 1994. Smoking is also being
tackled as a priority in Wales, Scotland and
Northern Ireland and similar targets have
been set for the year 2000.
A three-year national campaign, costing
£4 million a year, started in 1994. Aimed at
adult smokers, particularly parents, the
campaign will emphasise the dangers of
passive smoking. It will be backed up by local
activities to help people to stop smoking.
Education on the harmful effects of smoking
is included in the National Curriculum for all
pupils in publicly maintained schools in
England and Wales.
The Government also supports the work
of the voluntary organisation Action on
Smoking and Health (ASH), whose services
include a workplace services consultancy,
offering advice and help to employers in
formulating anti-smoking policies. The
Government is committed to creating a
smoke-free environment, with facilities where
appropriate for those who wish to smoke, and
has published a code of practice on smoking
in public places. Health authorities have been
asked to promote non-smoking as the
normal practice in health service buildings
385
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and to give help and advice to people who
want to give up smoking. The Independent
Scientific Committee on Smoking and Health
estimated that passive smoking, especially in
the workplace and the home, may cause
several hundred deaths through lung cancer
every year.
Voluntary Agreements
Voluntary agreements between the
Government and the tobacco industry
regulate the advertising and promotion of
tobacco products, and sports sponsorship by
the industry. The agreement on tobacco
advertising provides for the use on posters of
six different health warnings about the
dangers of smoking and contains measures to
protect groups at particular risk, such as
children, young people and women in their
early child-bearing years.
Under a revised agreement, which runs for
five years from 1994:
• health warnings on cigar and pipe
tobacco advertisements are to be
introduced for the first time;
• all permanent shopfront advertising is to
be removed by the end of 1996;
• all poster advertising is to be banned
from within a 200m radius of school
entrances;
• all advertisements for cigarettes and
hand-rolling tobacco are to be banned on
buses and taxis; and
• permitted expenditure on cigarette poster
advertising is to be reduced by 40 per cent.
The voluntary agreement on sports
sponsorship covers levels of spending,
restrictions on sponsorship of events chiefly
for spectators under 18 years and controls over
the siting of advertising at televised events.
Legislative Measures
It is illegal to sell any type of tobacco
product to children; the maximum fine is
£2,500. All tobacco advertising is banned on
television and cigarette advertisements are
banned on radio. Oral snuff products have
been banned since 1993.
AIDS
Up to the end of June 1994 a total of 9,436
cases of AIDS had been reported in Britain,
of whom 6,388 (68 per cent) had died; the
total number of recognised HIV infections
was 21,101. While this is recognised as a
considerable underestimate of the true
numbers of infections, attempts to contain
the spread of HIV infection have nevertheless
been successful and Britain now has one of
the lowest estimated rates of HIV prevalence
in Western Europe.
Government Strategy
The latest medium-term predictions
(published in June 1993) show that new cases
of AIDS among homosexual men are
levelling out and declining among injecting
drug misusers, but there is a steady increase
in cases of HIV infection through
heterosexual contact.
Key elements of the Government’s
strategy for dealing with the disease include:
• encouraging appropriate behaviour
change by increased targeting of sections
of the population at particular risk,
including homosexual and bisexual men
and drug misusers;
• sustaining and improving general public
awareness;
• continuing to make HIV testing facilities
more widely known, and encouraging
health authorities to commission
additional accessible HIV testing sites;
and
• continued funding for the voluntary
sector.
The Government’s commitment to policies in
this area is demonstrated by its inclusion of
HIV/AIDS with sexual health as one of the
five key areas in the Health of the Nation
White Paper. HIV/AIDS has also been
identified as a health priority in Scotland. A
concerted approach is being maintained,
spanning government, the NHS, local
authorities and the voluntary sector
(including women’s groups, Britain’s faith
communities and organisations working with
ethnic minorities).
386
RELIGION
Legislation allowing the ordination of women
to the priesthood of the Church of England was
passed in 1994. Here, Angela Berners-Wilson,
the first woman to be ordained, celebrates the
Eucharist at St Paul’s Church, Bristol.
Muslim boys attend a class during
Ramadan at the Jamia Mosque in
High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire.
There are nearly 500 mosques and
prayer centres in Britain.
FOOD AND DRINK
The growing awareness in Britain of
the importance of a healthy diet is
encouraged by nationwide public
information campaigns. Government
guidelines recommend that more fruit,
vegetables and starchy foods should be
eaten instead of foods high in sugar
and fat.
Denbies Wine Estate in Dorking,
Surrey, has over 300,000 vines and
19 grape varieties. It produces over
1 million bottles of high-quality wine
each year.
Shopping for food can now take place
at times more convenient to the
customer: new legislation, which came
into force in summer 1994, has put an
end to the anomalies surrounding
Sunday retailing. Large stores like
supermarkets may open for six hours a
day, while smaller shops can open at
any time.
Bottled water is increasingly popular
in Britain. The export market is also
expanding: Ty Nant, a company based
in Dyfed, Wales, now sells 85 per cent
of its spring water overseas.
WOMEN IN SPORT
Karen Dixon, who won the
individual bronze medal in the
World Three-Day Event
Championship in The
Netherlands. Britain’s all¬
woman team won the gold
medal.
England’s 4 x 400
metres relay team, (left
to right) Linda Keough,
Sally Gunnell, Phylis
Smith and Tracy
Goddard, celebrate their
gold medal win in the
Commonwealth Games
in Victoria, Canada.
HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES
In England NHS funding for
HIV/AIDS increased from £214 million in
1993-94 to £225 million in 1994-95, and
local authority funding increased from
£12.4 million to £12.9 million. In Scotland
over £19.5 million has been made available
to health boards in 1994—95, in addition to
their general allocations for HIV/AIDS
related purposes.
Details of Britain’s contribution to
international co-operation on AIDS are given
in Chapter 9.
Voluntary Organisations
Voluntary agencies concerned with
HIV/AIDS include the Terrence Higgins
Trust, London Lighthouse, Body Positive,
National AIDS Trust, and Scottish AIDS
Monitor, which promote knowledge about the
disease and help people with AIDS and HIV.
Both London Lighthouse and the Mildmay
Mission Hospital, in London, provide hospice
care and community support. The
Government will continue distributing grants
on a yearly basis, taking into account
developing health priorities and the ability of
voluntary bodies to raise funds from other
sources for HIV/AIDS work.
Infectious Diseases
District health authorities (health boards in
Scotland and Northern Ireland) carry out
programmes of immunisation against diphtheria,
measles, mumps, rubella, poliomyelitis,
tetanus, tuberculosis and whooping cough. A
new immunisation, ‘Hib’, was introduced in
1992, offering protection against invasive
haemophilus disease, a major cause of
meningitis in children under five years. As a
result, Hib infections fell by over 70 per cent
in the first quarter of 1993, compared with
the same period in previous years.
Immunisation is voluntary, but parents are
encouraged to protect their children. The
proportion of children being vaccinated has
been increasing since the end of 1978. GPs
who achieve targets of 70 and 90 per cent
uptake of child immunisation receive special
payments (see p. 378).
The Public Health Laboratory Service
provides a network of bacteriological and
virological laboratories throughout England
and Wales which conduct research and
assist in the diagnosis, prevention and control
of communicable diseases. Similar facilities
are provided in Scotland by the Scottish
Centre for Infection and Environmental
Health and, as in Northern Ireland, by some
hospital laboratories.
Cancer Care
Controlling cancer forms an enormous part of
the NHS’s work, consuming nearly 10 per
cent of its total budget. In May 1994 the
Government outlined proposals for
reorganising the provision of cancer services.
It proposes care at three levels:
• primary care, with detailed discussions
between GPs and the hospital service to
clarify patterns of referral and follow-up;
• designated cancer units, which should be
created in many local hospitals and
should be large enough to support multi¬
disciplinary clinical teams, with sufficient
expertise and facilities to manage the
more common cancers; and
• designated cancer centres to provide an
extra range of specialised services in
support of cancer units, and to treat less
common cancers, or to provide
treatments that are too technically
demanding, too specialised, or too
capital-intensive for the cancer units.
Cancer Screening
Breast cancer is recognised as a major health
problem in Britain. Some 13,000 women die
from it each year and 1 in 14 women in
England will develop it. To help combat this,
the Government has set up a national
screening programme under which women
aged between 50 and 64 are invited for
mammography (breast X-ray) every three
years by computerised call and recall systems.
Nearly 1,900 women die each year in
Great Britain from cancer of the cervix, and
the Government has, similarly, set up a
nationwide cervical screening programme. All
district health authorities in England and
387
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Wales have computerised call and recall
systems which enable all women aged
between 20 and 64 to be invited to have a
smear test at least every five years. Similar
arrangements apply in Scotland (where the
age range is 20 to 60) and in Northern
Ireland. Deaths from cervical cancer in
England and Wales have fallen since the
programme began, dropping from 1,903 in
1987 to 1,647 in 1992. Special payments are
made to GPs who achieve uptake targets for
smear tests of 50 and 80 per cent. The
response has been encouraging in many areas
and the Government estimates that over
90 per cent of GPs now earn bonus payments
for meeting cervical screening and childhood
immunisation targets.
The reduction of deaths and illness from
cancer is a key area in the Government’s
Health of the Nation White Paper. The
targets set are:
• to reduce breast cancer deaths among
women invited for screening by at least
25 per cent by the year 2000;
• to reduce the incidence of invasive
cervical cancer by at least 20 per cent by
the year 2000;
• to halt the year-on-year increase in the
incidence of skin cancer by 2005; and
• to reduce the death rate for lung cancer
under the age of 75 by at least 30 per
cent in men and by at least 15 per cent
in women by 2010.
Health Education
In England health education is promoted by
the Health Education Authority, a part of the
NHS. Its functions are to:
• advise the Government on health
education;
• plan and carry out health education
programmes in co-operation with health
authorities and other bodies; and
• sponsor research and evaluation.
In addition, the Authority has the major
executive responsibility for public education
in Britain about AIDS. It also assists in the
provision of training for HIV/AIDS workers,
and provides a national centre of information
and advice on health education. Major
campaigns carried out by the Authority
include those focusing on coronary heart
disease, smoking and alcohol misuse.
The Health Education Board for Scotland,
with a budget of £6.6 million in 1994-95, the
Welsh Health Promotion Authority (£3.2
million in 1994-95) and the Northern Ireland
Health Promotion Agency are responsible for
health education in their areas.
Almost all health authorities have their
own health education service, which works
closely with health professionals, health
visitors, community groups, local employers
and others to determine the most suitable
local programmes. Increased resources in the
health service are being directed towards
health education and preventive measures.
GPs receive special annual payments for
health promotion programmes.
Healthier Eating
There has been growing public awareness in
recent years of the importance of a healthy
diet. The Health of the Nation White Paper
followed the recommendations of the
Committee on Medical Aspects of Food
Policy (COMA) that people should reduce
their average intakes of total fat and saturated
fatty acids in order to reduce cardiovascular
disease. It contained a number of dietary
targets, and the Nutrition Task Force was
established to devise a programme to achieve
them. Launched in March 1994, the
programme is being implemented through a
number of project teams in information and
education, catering, the NHS and the food
chain. A report on obesity is due to be
published in late 1994.
Nutritional labelling indicating the energy,
fat, protein and carbohydrate content of food
is being encouraged on a voluntary basis.
The major supermarket chains and most food
manufacturers have already introduced
voluntary labelling schemes. The
Government has issued guidelines on the
labelling of food to show nutrient content in
a standard format.
Current work by COMA includes a review
of the relationship between diet and
cardiovascular disease and between diet and
388
HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES
cancer; matters relating to the nutrition of
infants and children; and assessment of the
nutritional implications of certain novel foods.
Its recent reports have included
comprehensive information on dietary
reference values for food energy and nutrients
(1991); and on the nutritional needs of elderly
people (1992).
ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH
Environmental health officers employed by
local authorities are responsible for a range of
functions, including the control of air
pollution and noise, and food hygiene and
safety. Their duties also cover the occupational
health and safety aspects of a variety of
premises, including offices and shops; the
investigation of unfit housing; and in some
instances refuse collection and home safety.
Doctors who specialise in community
medicine and are employed by the health
authorities advise local authorities on the
medical aspects of environmental health,
infectious diseases and food poisoning. They
may also co-operate with the authorities
responsible for water supply and sewerage.
Environmental health officers at ports and
airports carry out duties concerned with
shipping, inspection of imported foods, and
disease control. In Northern Ireland district
councils are responsible for noise control;
collection and disposal of refuse; clean air;
and food composition, labelling and hygiene.
A new public body, the Institute for
Environment and Health, was established by
the Medical Research Council (see below) in
1993. It is concerned mainly with the
chemical hazards to which people may be
exposed through the environment.
Safety of Food
It is illegal to supply food unfit for human
consumption or to apply any treatment or
process to food which makes it harmful to
health. Places where food or drink is
prepared, handled, stored or sold must
comply with certain hygiene provisions.
Environmental health officers may take away
for examination samples of any food intended
for sale or human consumption. Specific
regulations control the safety of milk, meat,
ice-cream and shellfish. The Food Safety
Directorate within the Ministry of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and the
Health Aspects of the Environment and Food
Division within the Department of Health
ensure the safety and quality of Britain’s
food. The two Departments work closely
with the food industry, environmental health
departments and consumer bodies to ensure
the provision of safe food in order to protect
public health. (For further details on food
safety, see Chapter 18.)
SAFETY OF MEDICINES
Only medicines which have been granted a
product licence may be sold or supplied to
the public. Licences are issued following
scientific assessment by the Medicines
Control Agency of the Department of Health.
(The Veterinary Medicines Directorate of the
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food
is similarly responsible for animal medicines).
A number of committees provide
independent advice to Ministers. The
Medicines Commission advises on matters
connected with the safety of human and
veterinary medicines; its duties also include
hearing appeals from companies against advice
that a product licence should not be granted.
The Committee on Safety of Medicines and
the Committee on Dental and Surgical
Materials advise on the safety, quality and
efficacy of medicinal products for human use.
In 1994, for example, a new homoeopathic
registration scheme was set up, covering
homoeopathic products for oral and/or
external use. Registered products have to
satisfy high standards of quality and safety
although no evidence of efficacy is required.
RESEARCH
In 1993-94 the Department of Health in
England spent an estimated £30 million on
health and personal social services research,
in addition to expenditure by the Medical
Research Council (the main government
agency for the support of biomedical and
clinical research—see Chapter 20). Priority
areas include research into health promotion
389
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and the prevention of ill health; environmental
health; adult health; and child care.
Wales also participates in the Department
of Health’s programme of centrally
commissioned research. A research and
development strategy for the NHS in
Scotland was published in 1993.
The NHS research and development
programme aims to ensure that health service
care is based on high-quality research
relevant to improving the nation’s health.
The programme is managed by the regional
health authorities, which are developing their
own research plans. It is intended that up to
1.5 per cent of NHS expenditure will be used
for research and development by 1997.
A new centre for primary health care
research and development is being set up at
Manchester University; the Department of
Health will contribute £1.5 million a year.
The Department of Health is involved in
international research and development, and
takes part in the European Union’s medical
and public health research programme.
THE HEALTH PROFESSIONS
Doctors and Dentists
Only people on the medical or dentists’
registers may practise as doctors or dentists
in the NHS. University medical and dental
schools are responsible for teaching; the NHS
provides hospital facilities for training. Full
registration as a doctor requires five or six
years’ training in a medical school and
hospital, with a further year’s experience in a
hospital. For a dentist, five years’ training at
a dental school is required.
An extensive review of postgraduate
medical education was carried out in 1992-93
and is expected to lead to considerable
improvements in junior doctors’ education
and training, including a significant reduction
in the time which individual doctors spend in
the training grades.
The regulating body for the medical
profession is the General Medical Council
and, for dentists, the General Dental Council.
The main professional associations are the
British Medical Association and the British
Dental Association.
Nurses
The minimum period of training required to
qualify for registration as a first level nurse in
general, mental health, mental handicap, or
children’s nursing is normally three years.
Midwifery training for registered general
nurses takes 18 months, and for others, three
years. Health visitors are registered general
nurses who have completed a one-year course
in health visiting. District nurses are registered
general nurses who practise within the
community. They must complete a six-month
course followed by a period of supervised
practice in district nursing. In Northern
Ireland health visitors, district nurses and
schools’, community psychiatric, community
mental handicap and occupational health
nurses undertake a one-year diploma course.
Project 2000 is the new system of nurse
education and training, stemming from
proposals put forward by the nursing
profession in response to people’s changing
health care needs. The course is designed to
give nurses a broader based education,
emphasising health promotion as well as the
care of the sick, and enabling them to work
in either hospital or community without
extensive further training. Implementation
began in 1989 and all colleges now offer
Project 2000.
The United Kingdom Central Council for
Nursing, Midwifery and Health Visiting is
responsible for regulating and registering
these professions.
Pharmacists
Only people on the register of pharmaceutical
chemists may practise as pharmacists.
Registration requires three or four years’
training in a school of pharmacy, followed by
one year’s practical experience in a
community or hospital pharmacy approved
for training by the Royal Pharmaceutical
Society of Great Britain or the
Pharmaceutical Society of Northern Ireland
(regulatory bodies for the profession).
Opticians
The General Optical Council regulates the
390
HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES
professions of ophthalmic optician and
dispensing optician. Only registered
ophthalmic opticians (or registered ophthalmic
medical practitioners) may test sight. Training
of ophthalmic opticians takes four years,
including a year of practical experience under
supervision. Dispensing opticians take a two-
year full-time course with a year’s practical
experience or follow a part-time day-release
course while employed with an optician.
Other Health Professions
Chiropodists, dietitians, medical laboratory
scientific officers, occupational therapists,
physiotherapists and radiographers may, on
qualification, apply for state registration. Each
profession has its own board under the
general supervision of the Council for
Professions Supplementary to Medicine.
Applications for a further two boards have
been made from art, drama and music
therapists and orthotists and prosthetists.
State registration is mandatory for
employment in the NHS and local authorities
and is highly recommended in other public
services and the private sector.
Dental therapists and dental hygienists are
almost exclusively recruited from certified
dental surgery assistants who have taken at
least one year’s training. Dental therapists
then take a two-year training course and
dental hygienists a one-year course; both
carry out some simple dental work under the
supervision of a registered dentist.
National and Scottish Vocational
Qualifications (NVQs and SVQs—see p. 425)
have been developed for health care support
workers, ambulance personnel, operating
department practitioners, physiological
measurement technicians and administrative
and clerical staff.
HEALTH ARRANGEMENTS WITH
OTHER COUNTRIES
The member states of the European
Economic Area have special health
arrangements under which EEA nationals
resident in a member state are entitled to
receive emergency treatment, either free or at
a reduced cost, during visits to other EEA
countries. There are also arrangements for
referral for specific treatment in certain
circumstances and to cover people who go to
work or live in other EEA countries. In
addition, there are reciprocal arrangements
with some other countries under which
medical treatment is available to visitors to
Britain if required immediately. Visitors are
generally expected to pay if the purpose of
their visit is to seek medical treatment.
Visitors who are not covered by reciprocal
arrangements must pay for any medical
treatment they receive.
Personal Social Services
Personal social services assist elderly people,
disabled people and their carers, children and
young people, people with mental illness or
learning disabilities, and families. Major
services include skilled residential and day
care, help for people confined to their homes,
and the various forms of social work. The
statutory services are provided by local
government social services authorities in
England and Wales, social work departments
in Scotland, and health and social services
boards in Northern Ireland. Alongside these
providers are the many and varied
contributions made by independent private
and voluntary services. Much of the care
given to elderly and disabled people is
provided by families and self-help groups.
Demand for these services is rising because
of the increasing number of elderly people,
who, along with disabled and mentally ill
people, or those with learning disabilities, can
lead more normal lives in the community,
given suitable support and facilities.
The shift away from long-term hospital
care to care in the community is reflected in
recent hospital statistics. Average length of
stay in the geriatric hospital sector has
declined by around 9 per cent a year since
1978. Personal social services staff increased
by 23 per cent between 1978-79 and
1991-92, the most significant increases being
in social work staff, day care and home
helps. In the residential care group, numbers
of staff in adult services in 1991-92 fell
significantly for the first time.
391
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Management Reforms
New policies on community care in England,
Wales and Scotland have been implemented
in stages under the NHS and Community
Care Act 1990. In Northern Ireland similar
arrangements were introduced in April 1993
under equivalent legislation. Many of the
procedures which local authorities are
implementing correspond to similar procedures
being introduced in the NHS (see p. 373).
Local authorities increasingly act as enablers
and commissioners of services after assessing
their populations’ needs for social care.
• Since April 1991 inspection units have
been responsible for inspecting local
authority as well as private and voluntary
sector residential care homes, and local
authorities have had to have procedures
for dealing with complaints about their
social services.
• Since April 1992 local authorities have
been obliged to produce community care
plans after wide consultation with the
NHS and other interests.
• Since April 1993 new procedures for
assessing individuals’ care needs and
commissioning services to meet them
have been introduced.
Local authorities are now responsible for
funding and arranging social care in the
community for people who require public
support. This includes the provision of home
helps or home care assistants to support
people in their own homes, and making
arrangements for residential and nursing
home care for those no longer able to remain
in their own homes. Previously, residents of
these homes who obtained public funding
received help principally through special
higher levels of income support (see p. 405).
In 1994—95 central government grant of over
£1,000 million is being made available to
local authorities for community care in
England. This includes an extra £20 million
for developing respite and domiciliary care.
Elderly People
Between 1981 and 1991 the number of people
over 60 in Great Britain increased by about
500,000; little change is expected over the
period 1991 to 1996. The number of people
aged 75 and over in Britain is projected to
rise from 3.9 million in mid-1993 to
4.5 million in mid-2003—an increase of
14 per cent.
Spending on health care for elderly people
increased by 40.8 per cent in real terms
between 1978-79 and 1990—91 and has
remained broadly constant since 1991-92.
Between 1978-79 and 1992-93 net spending
on social services increased by 68.3 per cent
in real terms. About 5 per cent of those aged
65 or over live in residential homes.
Services for elderly people are designed to
help them live at home whenever possible.
These services may include advice and help
given by social workers, domestic help, the
provision of meals in the home, sitters-in,
night attendants and laundry services as well
as day centres, lunch clubs and recreational
facilities. Adaptations to the home can
overcome a person’s difficulties in moving
about, and a wide range of equipment is
available for people with difficulties affecting
their hearing or eyesight. Alarm systems
have been developed to help elderly people
obtain assistance in an emergency. In some
areas ‘good neighbour’ and visiting services
are arranged by the local authority or a
voluntary organisation.
Many local authorities provide free or
subsidised travel for elderly people within
their areas. Local authorities also provide
residential care for elderly people and those
in poor health.
As part of their responsibility for public
housing, local authorities provide homes
designed for elderly people; some of these
developments have resident wardens.
Housing associations and private builders also
build such accommodation.
Disabled People
Britain has an estimated 6 million adults with
one or more disabilities, of whom around
400,000 (7 per cent) live in communal
establishments. Over the past ten years there
has been increasing emphasis on
rehabilitation and on the provision of day,
domiciliary and respite support services to
392
HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES
enable disabled people to live independently
in the community wherever possible.
Local social services authorities help with
social rehabilitation and adjustment to
disability. They are required to identify the
number of disabled people in their area and
to publicise services. These may include
advice on personal and social problems
arising from disability, as well as
occupational, educational, social and
recreational facilities, either at day centres or
elsewhere. Other services provided may
include adaptations to homes (such as ramps
for wheelchairs, and ground-floor toilets);
the delivery of cooked meals; and help in the
home. In cases of special need, help may be
given with installing a telephone or a
television. Local authorities and voluntary
organisations may provide severely disabled
people with residential accommodation or
temporary facilities to allows their carers
relief from their duties. Specially designed
housing may be available for those able to
look after themselves.
The Independent Living (1993) Fund is
an independent and discretionary
trust which provides financial help to
very severely disabled people of
working age to live independently in
the community. The Fund works in
partnership with local authorities,
which are expected to make a
contribution in the form of services
equivalent to what they would have
spent on residential or nursing care.
Some authorities provide free or
subsidised travel for disabled people on
public transport, and they are encouraged to
provide special means of access to public
buildings. Special government regulations
cover the provision of access for disabled
people in the construction of new buildings.
In 1991 the Government committed
£3 million for a pilot scheme in England—
the National Disability Information Project—
designed to improve information services for
disabled people, their carers and service
providers. Twelve projects are being funded
to explore ways in which the voluntary and
statutory agencies can work together to
provide information services aimed at
satisfying the needs of users. Similar projects
are being supported in Wales. A separate
survey of the information needs of disabled
people has been carried out in Scotland.
People with Learning Disabilities
(Mental Handicap)
The Government’s policy is to encourage
the development of local services for
people with learning disabilities and their
families through co-operation between health
and local authorities, and voluntary and
other organisations.
Local authority social services departments
are the leading statutory agency for planning
and arranging services for people with
learning disabilities. They provide short-term
care, support for families in their own homes,
residential accommodation and support for
various types of activities outside the home.
The main aims are to ensure that as far as
possible people with learning disabilities can
lead full lives in their communities and that
no one is admitted to hospital unless it is
necessary on health grounds.
The NHS provides specialist services
w here the general health needs of people
with learning disabilities cannot be met by
ordinary NHS services, and residential
care for those w ith severe disabilities or
whose needs can only effectively be met by
the NHS.
Mentally 111 People
Government policy aims to ensure that
people with mental illnesses should have
access to all the services they need as
locally as possible. These services should be
based on a comprehensive network of
health and social services facilities in each
district. They should be community based
and easily accessible.
While the total number of places for
mentally ill people in the large hospitals has
continued to fall, this has been matched by
increasing provision of alternative places in
smaller NHS hospitals, local authority
accommodation and private and voluntary
sector homes.
393
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In England between 1982 and 1993:
• the number of homes and hospitals
specialising in the care of mentally ill people
grew from about 1,000 to almost 2,500;
• of 130 hospitals with over 100 beds open
in 1961, 89 remained open; all but 22 of
these had plans for closure by the end of
the century; and
• the number of places available for
mentally ill people remained in the region
of 80,000.
Arrangements made by social services
authorities for providing preventive care and
after care for mentally ill people in the
community include day centres, social centres
and residential care. Social workers help
patients and their families with problems
caused by mental illness. In some cases they
can apply for a mentally disordered person to
be compulsorily admitted to and detained in
hospital. The Mental Health Act Commission
aims to provide improved safeguards for such
patients. Similar arrangements apply in Wales,
Scotland and Northern Ireland.
District health authorities (health boards in
Scotland) are required to plan individual
health and social care programmes for all
patients leaving hospital and for all new
patients accepted by the specialist psychiatric
services. A specific grant of £36 million for
1994—95 to local authorities in England is
designed to encourage them to increase the
level of social care available to mentally ill
patients, including those with dementia who
need specialist psychiatric care in the
community. In Scotland a similar scheme is
supporting community projects to the value of
£14 million in 1994—95.
The Government plans to introduce
legislation to provide a new power of
supervised discharge for mentally ill patients
who need special support after they leave
hospital. Under this patients who do not
comply with their care programme may be
recalled compulsorily to hospital. In addition
supervision registers for discharged patients
most at risk were introduced in April 1994.
These are to be maintained by the providers
of services for mentally ill people and will
allow hospital staff to keep track of
discharged patients.
The first government-backed national
survey of mental illness began in April 1993
and will be completed in 1995. The survey,
which covers adults aged 16 to 64 living in
communal establishments as well as those
living in private households, will estimate the
prevalence of different types of mental illness
and will identify the resulting social
disabilities. It will also examine the varying
use of health, social and voluntary care
services, and the risk factors associated with
mental illness. A review of mental health
nursing reported in March 1994. The
Government is considering its recommendations.
A three-year public information campaign
began in spring 1993 to increase people’s
awareness and understanding about mental
illness and suicide.
There are many voluntary organisations
concerned with mental illness and learning
disabilities, and they play an important role in
providing services for both groups of people.
Help to Families
Social services authorities, through their own
social workers and others in the voluntary
sector, give help to families facing special
problems. This includes services for families
with children in need or at risk of harm or
neglect including some who may need care
away from their own families, and support
for family carers who look after elderly and
other family members in order to give them
relief from their duties. They also help single
parents. There are now many refuges run by
local authorities or voluntary organisations for
women, often with young children, whose
home conditions have become intolerable.
The refuges provide short-term
accommodation and support while attempts
are made to relieve the women’s problems.
Many authorities also contribute to the cost
of support and counselling with families
(such as marriage guidance) carried out by
voluntary organisations.
Day Care for Children
Day care facilities for children under five are
provided by local authorities, voluntary
agencies and privately. In allocating places in
394
HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES
their day nurseries and other facilities, local
authorities give priority to children with
special social, learning or health needs. Local
authorities also register and inspect
childminders, private day nurseries and
playgroups in their areas and provide support
and advice services. Day care figures for 1993
show the number of places for children in
day nurseries and with childminders has
continued to grow.
In 1993 the Government launched a
£45 million scheme to help create childcare
facilities in Great Britain for children over
five after school hours and during the
holidays. The scheme is operated through
Training and Enterprise Councils and Local
Enterprise Companies (see p. 195). These
organisations are developing local partnerships
with employers, schools, parents, local
authorities and voluntary organisations.
Child Abuse
Cases of child abuse are the joint concern of a
number of different agencies and professions.
Area child protection committees provide
forums for discussion and co-ordination and
draw up policies and procedures for handling
these cases. The Government’s central
training initiative on child abuse, established
in England and Wales in 1986, consists of a
variety of projects, including training for
health visitors, school nurses, and local
authority social services staff. Guidelines and
training packs have been developed for those
implementing the Children Act 1989 (see
below). In Scotland the Government provides
support for child abuse training at the
University of Dundee and through a specific
grant scheme.
The training initiative is now combined
with a treatment initiative which began in
1990 to provide grant funding for a range of
child abuse treatment projects.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland
children under the age of 14 called as
witnesses in criminal cases involving certain
violent and sexual offences are able to give
evidence to courts through video recorded
interview and television links, thus
avoiding, wherever possible, the need for
them to give evidence in open court in the
presence of the alleged abuser. Similar
arrangments are available in Scotland.
Children in Care
Local government authorities must provide
accommodation for children who have no
parent or guardian, have been abandoned, or
whose parents are unable to provide for them.
The Children Act 1989, which came into
effect in England and Wales in 1991, recasts
the legislative framework for children’s
services, care and protection into a single
coherent structure. It lays new duties on local
authorities to safeguard and promote the
welfare of children. Under the Act parents of
children in care retain their parental
responsibilities but act as far as possible as
partners with the authority. There is a new
requirement to prepare a child for leaving the
local authority’s responsibility and to
continue to advise him or her up to the age
of 21. Local authorities are required to have a
complaints procedure with an independent
element to cover children in their care.
The latest report on the working of the
Children Act2, published in May 1994,
confirms that the number of children looked
after by local authorities, and on a child
protection register, continues to decline as
local authorities respond to the Act’s
requirement that wherever possible children
should remain at home with their families.
In England and Wales a child may be
brought before a family proceedings court if
he or she is neglected or ill-treated, exposed
to moral danger, beyond the control of
parents, or not attending school. The court
can commit the child to the care of a local
authority under a care order. Under the
Children Act 1989 certain preconditions have
to be satisfied to justify an order. These are
that the child is suffering or is likely to suffer
significant harm because of a lack of
reasonable parental care or is beyond parental
control. However, an order is made only if
the court is also satisfied that this will
positively contribute to the child’s well-being
and be in his or her best interests. In court
Children Act 1989. A Report by the Secretaries of State for Health
and for Wales. HMSO, £14.40.
395
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
proceedings the child is entitled to separate
legal representation and the right to have a
guardian to protect his or her interests.
All courts have to treat the welfare of the
child as the paramount consideration when
reaching any decision about his or her
upbringing. The family proceedings court
consists of specially trained magistrates with
power to hear care cases as well as all other
family and children’s cases.
Recent concerns over standards of care in
certain local authority children’s homes have
prompted a number of official inquiries
whose recommendations are now being
implemented. They include:
• Norman Warner’s inquiry into the
selection of staff in children’s homes and
the support and guidance available to
them after appointment (1992);
• the Howe inquiry into staff conditions,
management and training for all
residential care staff in adult and
children’s homes (1992);
• the Skinner review of residential child
care in Scotland (1992); and
• a report by the Social Services
Inspectorate on children’s homes in
England (1993). This was the first
national report to come from a team of
SSI Inspectors and young people who
had themselves been in care.
In Scotland children in trouble or in
need may be brought before a children’s
hearing, which can impose a supervision
requirement on a child if it thinks that
compulsory measures are appropriate.
Under these requirements most children are
allowed to remain at home under the
supervision of a social worker but some may
live with foster parents or in a residential
establishment while under supervision.
Supervision requirements are reviewed at
least once a year until ended by a children’s
hearing. A government White Paper,
Scotland’s Children: Proposals for Child Care
Policy and Law, proposing reforms in
Scottish child care policy and law, was
published in 1993. In addition to proposed
legislative changes, a number of
improvements in child care services, policy
and practice have already been made
through administrative means, increased
funding and additional training of social
work staff.
In Northern Ireland the juvenile court
may place children who are in need of care,
protection or control into the care of a fit
person (including a health and social
services board), or may make them subject
to a supervision order. Children in trouble
may be required to attend an attendance
centre, be committed to a training school,
or may be detained in a remand home.
New child care legislation is being
prepared in Northern Ireland which will
reflect the changes introduced in England
and Wales under the Children Act 1989 and
will make a distinction between the
treatment of children in need of care and
young offenders.
Fostering and Children’s Homes
When appropriate, children in care are placed
with foster parents, who receive payments to
cover living costs. Alternatively, the child
may be placed in a local authority, voluntary
or private children’s home or other suitable
residential accommodation, including
boarding school. In Scotland local authorities
are responsible for placing children in their
care in foster homes, in local authority or
voluntary homes, or in residential schools.
Similar provisions apply in Northern Ireland.
Regulations concerning residential care and
the foster placement of children in care are
made by central government.
Adoption
Local authorities are required by law to
provide an adoption service, either directly or
by arrangement with a voluntary organisation.
Agencies may offer adoptive parents an
allowance in certain circumstances if this
would help to find a family for a child.
Adoption is strictly regulated by law, and
voluntary adoption societies must be
approved by the appropriate Secretary of
State. The Registrars-General keep
confidential registers of adopted children.
Adopted people may be given details of their
original birth record on reaching the age of
396
HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES
18, and counselling is provided to help them
understand the circumstances of their
adoption. An Adoption Contact Register
enables adopted adults and their birth parents
to be given a safe and confidential way of
making contact if that is the wish of both
parties. A person’s details are entered only if
they wish to be contacted.
A government White Paper on adoption in
England and Wales was published in 1993. It
includes proposals to allow children aged 12
or over to agree to the making of their
adoption order and to have the right to take
part in their own adoption proceedings;
simpler alternatives to adoption for
step-parents, relatives or long-term foster
parents; and streamlined arrangements for
adopting from overseas.
In Scotland a consultation document on
the review of adoption law was also published
in 1993.
Social Workers
The effective working of the social services
depends largely on professionally qualified
social workers. Training programmes in social
work are provided by universities and colleges
of higher and further education. The Central
Council for Education and Training in Social
Work is the statutory body responsible for
promoting and regulating social work
training. A programme to introduce two-year
courses leading to a new professional
qualification, the Diploma in Social Work
(DipSW), has been implemented. National
Vocational Qualifications are being developed
for other staff, including those in residential
day and domiciliary care services.
Professional social workers (including
those working in the NHS) are employed
mainly by the social services departments of
local authorities. Others work in the
probation service, the education welfare
service, or in voluntary and private
organisations. In Scotland local authority
social work departments provide most
services, including those to the NHS and in
probation and criminal justice. There is also a
growing voluntary sector.
The Government is committed to
improving social work training. In England
alone it is providing £33.3 million in 1994-95
(£4.2 million in Scotland) through its
training support programme to assist local
authorities to train staff. Total spending by
local authorities in England on social services
training amounts to £46.9 million.
Further Reading
One Year On: A Report on the Progress of the Health of the Nation. Department of
Health, 1993.
On the State of the Public Health 1993. The Annual Report of the Chief Medical Officer of
the Department of Health, HMSO, 1993.
Health in Scotland 1993. HMSO, 1993.
Social Welfare. Aspects of Britain series, HMSO, 1993.
397
25 Social Security
Administration 398 Arrangements with Other
Contributions 399 Countries
Benefits 400
Spending on social security is rising because of increasing numbers of
beneficiaries, especially retirement pensioners, and long-term sick and
disabled people. The value of retirement and most other long-term benefits
has also increased in real terms since 1980. Planned spending in 1994-95 is
£83,000 million—the Government’s largest expenditure programme.
As part of its long-term review of public
spending (see p. 155), the Government is
examining the social security programme and
reforming the structure of the present system
to ensure it involves:
• better targeting of those in need;
• encouraging more self-provision; and
• providing more incentives to work.
The social security system is designed to
secure a basic standard of living for people in
financial need by providing income during
periods of inability to earn (including periods
of unemployment), help for families and
assistance with costs arising from
disablement. Nearly a third of government
expenditure is devoted to the social security
programme, which provides financial help for
people who are elderly, sick, disabled,
unemployed, widowed, bringing up children
or on very low incomes.
Some benefits depend on the payment of
contributions by employers, employees and
self-employed people to the National
Insurance Fund, from which benefits are
paid. The Government also contributes to the
Fund. The other social security benefits are
non-contributory and are financed from
general taxation; some of these are income-
related (see p. 407). Appeals about claims
for benefits are decided by independent
tribunals.
ADMINISTRATION
Administration in Great Britain is handled by
separate executive agencies of the
Department of Social Security:
• the Benefits Agency, responsible for
paying the majority of social security
benefits;
• the Child Support Agency, responsible
for collecting and enforcing maintenance
payments for children (see p. 403);
• the Contributions Agency, responsible for
handling National Insurance
contributions;
• the Information Technology Services
Agency, responsible for computerising
the administration of social security;
• the Resettlement Agency, responsible for
hostels for single homeless people; and
• the War Pensions Agency, set up in
April 1994, responsible for delivering
services to war pensioners.
398
SOCIAL SECURITY
The Employment Services Agency of the
Employment Department pays
unemployment benefits and income support
to unemployed people on behalf of the
Benefits Agency. The housing and council tax
benefit schemes are administered by local
authorities, which recover most of the cost
from the Government.
In Northern Ireland contributions as well
as social security benefits are administered by
the Social Security Agency. The housing
benefit scheme is administered by the
Northern Ireland Housing Executive and the
Rate Collection Agency; council tax does not
apply in Northern Ireland.
A major programme to improve quality
and customer service is in progress. The
Benefits Agency, for example, is moving
towards one-stop service delivery (a single
contact point to handle each customer’s
business with the Agency where appropriate).
Anti-fraud Measures
Further measures are being introduced to
improve the prevention and detection of
social security fraud. These include:
• greater incentives to local authorities to
prevent and detect fraud in the benefits
they administer;
• better use of information technology;
and
• better targeting of resources, and
additional resources where necessary.
In 1994-95 the Benefits Agency is aiming
to save £654 million through anti-fraud work.
Advice about Benefits
The demand for advice about benefits is
partly met by the Freeline Social
Security Service, which handles over
1 million calls each year. A complementary
service, the Social Security Advice Line for
Employers, handles some 3,500 calls a week.
The Ethnic Freeline Service provides
information on social security in Urdu,
Punjabi and Chinese. There is also a freeline
service in Welsh.
The Department of Social Security
produces a wide range of leaflets and posters
providing general information on entitlement
and liability. These are available in English
and a number of other languages.
CONTRIBUTIONS
Entitlement to National Insurance benefits
such as retirement pension, sickness and
invalidity benefit, unemployment benefit,
maternity allowance and widow’s benefit, is
dependent upon the payment of
contributions. There are five classes of
contributions; the rates given are effective
from April 1994 to April 1995:
• Class 1—paid by employees and their
employers. Employees with earnings below
£57 a week do not pay Class 1
contributions. Contributions on earnings
of £57 a week and over are at the rate of
2 per cent of the first £57 of total
earnings and 10 per cent of the balance,
up to the upper earnings limit of £430 a
week. Employers’ contributions are
subject to the same threshold. On
earnings above the threshold,
contributions rise in stages from 3.6 per
cent of total earnings up to a maximum
of 10.2 per cent when earnings are £200
or more a week; there is no upper
earnings limit. The contribution is
lower if the employer operates a
‘contracted-out’ occupational pension
scheme (see p. 401).
• Class 1A—paid by employers who provide
their employees with car fuel and/or a car
for private use. A Class 1A contribution is
payable on the cash equivalent of the
benefit provided.
• Class 2—paid by self-employed people.
Class 2 contributions are at a flat rate of
£5.65 a week. The self-employed may
claim exemption from payment of Class 2
contributions if their profits are expected
to be below £3,200 for the tax year.
Self-employed people are not eligible
for unemployment and industrial
injuries benefits.
• Class 3—paid voluntarily to safeguard
rights to some benefits. Class 3
contributions are at a flat rate of £5.55
a week.
399
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
• Class 4—paid by the self-employed on their
taxable profits over a set lower limit
(£6,490 a year), and up to a set upper
limit (£22,360 a year) in addition to
their Class 2 contribution. Class 4
contributions are payable at the rate of
7.3 per cent.
Employees who work after pensionable age
(60 for women and 65 for men) do not pay
contributions but the employer continues to
be liable. Self-employed people over
pensionable age do not pay contributions.
BENEFITS
For most contributory benefits there are two
conditions. First, before benefit can be paid
at all, a certain number of contributions have
to be paid. Second, the full rate of benefit
cannot be paid unless contributions have been
paid or credited to a specific level over a set
period. A reduced rate of benefit is payable
dependent on the level of contributions paid
or credited. For example, a great many of
those receiving retirement pensions and
widows’ benefits receive a percentage-based
rate of benefit. Benefits are increased
annually in line with percentage increases in
retail prices. The main benefits (payable
weekly) are summarised below. The rates
given are those effective from April 1994
until April 1995.
Retirement Pension
A state retirement pension is payable, subject
to the satisfaction of contribution conditions,
to women at the age of 60 and men at the
age of 65. The Sex Discrimination Act 1986
protects employees of different sexes in a
particular occupation from being required to
retire at different ages. This, however, has
not affected the payment of the state
retirement pension at different ages for men
and women.
The Government plans to equalise the
Social Security Expenditure: Great Britain 1993 94
Analysis of planned expenditure 1993-94 Percentage of expenditure by
7 broad groups of beneficiaries 1993-94
Source: Social Security Departmental Report: The Government’s Expenditure Plans 1994 - 95 to 1996-97.
400
SOCIAL SECURITY
state pension age for men and women at 65.
A White Paper published in December 1993
states that the change would start from 2010
and would be phased in over ten years.
Women born before 6 April 1950 would not be
affected; their pension age would remain at
60. The new pension age of 65 would apply
to women born on or after 6 March 1955.
Pension age for women born between these
dates will move up gradually from 60 to 65.
The state pension scheme consists of a
basic weekly pension of £57.60 for a single
person and £92.10 for a married couple,
together with an additional earnings-related
pension. Pensioners may have unlimited
earnings without affecting their pensions.
Those who have put off their retirement
during the five years after state pension age
may earn extra pension. A non-contributory
retirement pension of £34.50 a week is
payable to people over the age of 80 who
meet certain residence conditions, and who
have not qualified for a contributory pension.
People whose pensions do not give them
enough to live on may be entitled to income
support. Over 10 million people in Great
Britain received a basic state pension in 1992.
Rights to basic pensions are safeguarded
for people whose opportunities to work are
limited while they are looking after a child or
a sick or disabled person. Men and women
may receive the same basic pension, provided
they have paid full-rate National Insurance
contributions when working. From April
1999 the earnings-related pension scheme will
be based on a lifetime’s revalued earnings
instead of on the best 20 years. It will be
calculated as 20 per cent rather than 25 per
Table 25.1: Estimated Number of Recipients of Benefits in Great Britain 1993-94
Contributory (C)
Benefit or non-contributory (NC) Thousands
Retirement pension C 10,055
Widows’ benefits C 337
Unemployment benefit C 584
Sickness benefit C 155
Invalidity benefit C 1,509^
Maternity allowance C 19
Non-contributory retirement pension NC 29
War pension NC 267
Attendance allowance NC 890
Disability living allowance NC 1,167
Disability working allowance NC 3
Invalid care allowance NC 199
Severe disablement allowance NC 322
Industrial injuries disablement benefit NC 000'
Industrial death benefit NC 24
Income support NC 5,675
Child benefit NC
-numbers of children 12,522
-numbers of families 6,897
One-parent benefit NC 873
Family credit NC 447
Housing benefit NC
-rent rebate 3,037
-rent allowance 1,290
Council tax benefit NC 6,550
Estimate only; figures not available at time of going to print.
^Figures not available at time of going to print.
401
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
cent of earnings, to be phased in over ten
years from 1999. The pensions of people
retiring this century will be unaffected.
Occupational and Personal Pensions
Employers may ‘contract out’ their employees
from the state scheme for the additional
earnings-related pension and provide their
own occupational pension instead. Their
pension must be at least as good as the state
additional pension. Joining an employer’s
contracted-out scheme is voluntary: employers
are not free to contract out employees from
the earnings-related pension scheme without
the employees’ consent, d he State remains
responsible for the basic pension.
Occupational pension schemes cover about
half the working population and have nearly
11 million members. The occupational
pension rights of those who change jobs before
pensionable age, who are unable or who do
not want to transfer their pension rights, are
now offered some protection against inflation.
Workers leaving a scheme have the right to a
fair transfer value. The trustees or managers
of pension schemes have to provide full
information about their schemes.
Increasing numbers of pensioners receive
income from occupational pensions and
investment income. In 1990-91:
• 61 per cent had income from
occupational pensions, compared with 43
per cent in 1979; and
• 76 per cent had income from savings,
compared with 62 per cent in 1979.
Eighty-five per cent of pensioners now
have income in addition to state benefits.
As an alternative to their employers’
scheme or the state additional earnings-related
pension scheme, people are entitled to choose
a personal pension available from a bank,
building society, insurance company or other
financial institution. Some 7.8 million people
have contracted out of the state earnings-
related pension scheme and taken out personal
pensions. In June 1994 the Government
published a White Paper with its proposals
for the future of occupational pensions. These
are intended to enable occupational schemes
to provide equal treatment between men and
women and to make personal pensions more
flexible and attractive to a broader age range.
A Pensions Ombudsman deals with
complaints about maladministration of
pension schemes and adjudicates on disputes
of fact or law. A pensions registry helps
people trace lost benefits.
Parents and Children
Most pregnant working women receive their
statutory maternity pay directly from their
employer for a maximum of 18 weeks. There
are two rates:
• where a woman has been working for
the same employer for at least two years,
she is entitled to 90 per cent of her
average weekly earnings for the first six
weeks and to the lower rate of £48.80 a
week for the remaining 12 weeks; and
• where a woman has been employed for
between 26 weeks and two years, she is
entitled to payments for up to 18 weeks
at the lower rate.
Women who are not eligible for statutory
maternity pay because, for example, they are
self-employed, have recently changed jobs or
given up their job, may qualify for a weekly
maternity allowance of £44.55, which is
payable for up to 18 weeks.
In 1992 the European Council of Ministers
adopted a directive aimed at improving health
and safety at work for pregnant women and
nursing mothers. Legislation in Britain will
be brought into line with the directive by
October 1994. As a result:
• any woman who has worked for the same
employer for 26 weeks will be entitled to
statutory maternity pay, with the first six
weeks paid at 90 per cent of average
weekly earnings;
• the lower rate of statutory maternity
pay will increase from £48.80 to
£52.50; and
• all pregnant employees will have the right
to take 14 weeks’ maternity leave.
A payment of £100 from the social fund
(gee p. 406) may be available if the mother
or her partner are receiving income
support, family credit or disability working
402
SOCIAL SECURITY
allowance (see p. 405). It is also available if
a woman adopts a baby.
Non-contributory child benefit of £10.20 a
week for the eldest qualifying child and £8.25
for each other child is the main social
security benefit for children. Tax-free and
normally paid to the mother, it is payable for
children up to the age of 16 and for those up
to 19 if they continue in full-time non-
advanced education. In addition, one-parent
benefit of £6.15 a week is generally payable
to certain people bringing up one child or
more on their own, whether as their parents
or not. A non-contributory guardian’s
allowance of £11 a week for an orphaned
child is payable to a person who is entitled to
child benefit for that child. This is reduced
to £9.80 if the higher rate of child benefit is
payable for the child. In exceptional
circumstances a guardian’s allowance may be
paid on the death of only one parent.
At the end of 1992 child benefit was paid
for 12,425,000 children, an increase on the
previous year of 134,000.
Child Support Agency
An estimated 1.3 million lone parents bring
up over 2 million children in Britain. The
Child Support Agency, which started work in
April 1993, will—over a four-year phased
timetable—replace the court system for
obtaining maintenance for children. The
Agency is responsible for assessing, collecting
and enforcing child maintenance payments
and for tracing absent parents. Assessments
are made using a formula which takes into
account each parent’s income and essential
outgoings.
Between April 1993 and March 1994
the Child Support Agency:
• took on 858,000 cases;
• traced over 28,000 absent parents
in cases where the parent with
care did not know their
whereabouts and where other
attempts to locate them had
failed; and
• produced benefit savings of over
£418 million.
Changes to the child support arrangements
were introduced in February 1994 to take
account of concerns raised by members of the
public and MPs. These are designed to
reduce the amount of child maintenance that
many absent parents are required to pay and
to give some families more time to adjust to
increased bills.
Widows
Widows under the age of 60, or those over
60 whose husbands were not entitled to a state
retirement pension when they died, receive a
tax-free single payment of £1,000 following
the death of their husbands, provided that
their husbands had paid a minimum number
of National Insurance contributions. Women
whose husbands have died of an industrial
injury or prescribed disease may also qualify,
regardless of whether their husbands had paid
National Insurance contributions.
A widowed mother with a young family
receives a widowed mother’s allowance of
£57.60 a week with a further £9.80 for a
child for whom the higher rate of child
benefit is payable and £11 for each
subsequent child. A widow’s basic pension of
£57.60 a week is payable to a widow who is
55 years or over when her husband dies or
when her entitlement to widowed mother’s
allowance ends. A percentage of the full rate
is payable to widows who are aged between
45 and 54 when their husbands die or when
their entitlement to widowed mother’s
allowance ends. Special rules apply for
widows whose husbands died before 11 April
1988. Entitlement continues until the widow
remarries or begins drawing retirement
pension. Payment ends if she lives with a
man as his wife. Widows also benefit under
the industrial injuries scheme.
A man whose wife dies when both are
over pension age inherits his wife’s
pension rights just as a widow inherits her
husband’s rights.
Sick and Disabled People
Statutory Sick Pay and Sickness Benefit
A large variety of benefits is available for
403
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
people unable to work because of sickness or
disablement. Employers are responsible for
paying statutory sick pay to employees for up
to a maximum of 28 weeks. There are two
weekly rates—£47.80 or £52.50—depending
on average weekly earnings. Employees who
are not entitled to statutory sick pay can
claim weekly state sickness benefit of
£43.45 instead, as can self-employed people.
Sickness benefit is payable for up to
28 weeks.
Invalidity Pension and Allowance
A weekly invalidity pension of £57.60—with
additions of £34.50 for an adult dependant,
£9.80 for the eldest child and £11 for each
other child—is payable when statutory
sick pay or sickness benefit ends, for the
period to count towards receiving
invalidity pension the contribution
condition for sickness benefit must be
satisfied. An invalidity allowance of up to
£12.15 a week, depending on the age when
incapacity began, may be paid, but this is
offset by any entitlement to an additional
invalidity pension.
The New Incapacity Benefit
The Social Security (Incapacity for Work)
Act 1994 introduced a new Incapacity
Benefit to replace sickness benefit and
invalidity benefit. The Act comes into force
on 13 April 1995.
The new benefit will have three rates:
• a lower rate of £43.45 a week for the
first 28 weeks;
• a higher rate of £52.50 a week between
the 29th and 52nd week; and
• a long-term rate of £57.60 a week from
the 53rd week of incapacity.
It also comprises certain age additions and
increases for adult and child dependants.
A new, more objective medical test of
incapacity for work will also be introduced
for incapacity benefit as well as for other
social security benefits paid on the basis of
incapacity for work. The new test will apply
after 28 weeks’ incapacity for work and will
assess ability to perform a range of work-
related activities rather than the ability to
perform a specific job. Non-medical factors,
such as education, skills and experience, will
not be taken into account.
Severe Disablement Allowance
A severe disablement allowance of £34.80
plus an age-related addition of up to £12.15 a
week may be payable to people under
pensionable age. Those over 20 who are
unable to work and are 80 per cent disabled
but do not qualify for the National Insurance
invalidity pension because they have not
paid sufficient contributions may be entitled
to severe disablement allowance. Additions
for adult dependants and for children may
also be paid.
Industrial Injuries Disablement Benefits
Various benefits are payable for disablement
caused by an accident at work or a prescribed
disease. The main benefit is industrial
injuries disablement benefit; disablement
benefit of up to £93.20 a week is usually paid
after a qualifying period of 15 weeks if a
person is 14 per cent or more physically or
mentally disabled as a result of an industrial
accident or a prescribed disease. If the person
is incapable of work during the qualifying
period, statutory sick pay or sickness benefit
may be payable.
Basic disablement benefit can be paid in
addition to other National Insurance
benefits, such as sickness benefit or
invalidity benefit. It can be paid whether or
not the person returns to work and does not
depend on earnings. The degree of
disablement is assessed by an independent
adjudicating medical authority and the
amount paid depends on the extent of the
disablement and how long it is expected to
last. Except for certain progressive
respiratory diseases, disablement of less than
14 per cent does not attract disablement
benefit. In certain circumstances additional
allowances, such as constant attendance
allowance and exceptionally severe
disablement allowance, may be payable. In
some cases reduced earnings allowance may
be payable.
404
SOCIAL SECURITY
Other Benefits
Disability living allowance (which replaced
attendance allowance for people disabled
before the age of 65 and mobility allowance)
was introduced in 1992. It is a tax-free
benefit with two components for people
disabled before the age of 65 who need
help with personal care or with mobility.
The care component has three weekly
rates—£45.70, £30.55 and £12.15. The
mobility component has two rates—£31.95
and £12.15.
Motability, an independent charitable
organisation, helps disabled drivers wanting
to use the higher mobility component to
obtain a vehicle or powered wheelchair on
favourable terms. Applications for vehicles
increased by 10 per cent in 1993-94
compared with the previous year. Almost 4
per cent of all cars registered in Britain in
1993 were bought under the Motability
scheme, which currently has more than
180,000 customers.
A non-contributory, tax-free attendance
allowance of £30.55 or £45.70 a week may
be payable to people severely disabled at or
after age 65, who have personal care needs,
depending upon the amount of attention
they require. The higher rate of attendance
allowance and/or disability living allowance
is paid to people who are terminally ill.
A non-contributory invalid care allowance
of £34.50 weekly may be payable to people
between 16 and pensionable age who cannot
take up a paid job because they are caring
for a person receiving either the higher or
middle rate of disability living allowance care
component or attendance allowance; an
additional carer’s premium may be paid if
the recipient is also receiving income
support, housing benefit or council tax
benefit. It is estimated that some 1.5 million
adults in Great Britain care for a disabled
person for at least 20 hours a week.
Disability working allowance is an
income-related tax-free benefit introduced in
1992. It provides help for some disabled
people aged 16 or over who are working at
least 16 hours a week or more on average
and have an illness or disability which puts
them at a disadvantage in getting a job.
Awards are for fixed periods of six months.
To qualify a person must either:
• be getting disability living allowance, or
an analogous benefit, such as constant
attendance allowance under the war
pensions or industrial injuries
disablement scheme; or
• have an invalid three-wheeler or other
vehicle under the NHS Act 1977; or
• have been entitled to one of the following
in at least one of the 56 days before the
date of claim: invalidity benefit; severe
disablement allowance; or the disability
premium with income support, housing
benefit or council tax benefit.
Disability working allowance is available to
single people, lone parents and couples. The
rate depends on the person’s income and size
of family, and the ages of any children. The
allowance is not payable if capital or savings
exceed £16,000.
Unemployment Benefit
Unemployment benefit of £45.45 a week for
a single person or £73.50 for a couple is
payable for up to a year in any one period of
unemployment. Periods covered by
unemployment or sickness benefit, maternity
allowance or some training allowances which
are eight weeks or less apart, are linked to
form a single period of interruption of work.
Everyone claiming unemployment benefit has
to be available for work, but unemployed
people wishing to do voluntary work in the
community may do so in some cases without
losing entitlement to benefit. People seeking
unemployment benefit must not have become
unemployed voluntarily or have lost their job
through misconduct. They are expected to
look for work actively and must have good
reasons for rejecting any job that is offered.
Income Support
Income support is payable to people who are
not in work, or who work fewer than 16 hours
a week, and whose financial resources are below
certain set levels. It consists of a personal
allowance ranging from £27.50 weekly for a
single person or lone parent aged under 18 to
405
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
£71.70 for a couple, at least one of whom is
aged over 18. Additional sums, known as
premiums, are available to families, lone
parents, pensioners, long-term sick and
disabled people, and those caring for them
who qualify for the invalid care allowance.
The income support scheme sets a limit to
the amount of capital a person may have and
still remain entitled. People with savings or
capital worth more than £8,000 are ineligible;
savings between £3,000 and £8,000 will
reduce the amount received.
Although about half of fresh claims from
unemployed people result in payment of
unemployment benefit (see p. 405), a large
proportion of those on the unemployment
register at any one time rely partly or wholly
on income support. This is either because
they are disqualified from unemployment
benefit or have not paid sufficient
contributions to qualify for it, or because
their entitlement to it has run out, or because
they are entitled to income support as well as
unemployment benefit.
Proposed Changes
The Government has announced proposals to
introduce a new benefit—Jobseeker s
Allowance—to replace unemployment
benefit and income support for unemployed
people from April 1996. This would be more
clearly focused on helping unemployed
people into work. All unemployed people
would be required to enter into a jobseeker s
agreement, committing them to a plan of
action to seek work. Most recipients would be
required to satisfy a means-test, and the
benefit would be paid at rates determined by
family circumstances on a similar basis to
income support (see p. 405).
Housing Benefit
The housing benefit scheme assists people
who need help to pay their rent (rent and/or
domestic rates in Northern Ireland), using
general assessment rules and benefit levels
similar to those for the income support
scheme. People whose net income is below
certain specified levels qualify for housing
benefit of up to 100 per cent of their rent.
Unlike income support (see p. 405), the
housing benefit scheme sets a limit of
£16,000 on the amount of capital a person
may have and still remain entitled.
Council Tax Benefit
Council tax benefit helps people to meet their
council tax payments. The scheme offers help
to those claiming income support and others
with low incomes. Subject to rules broadly
similar to those governing the provision of
income support and housing benefit (see
above), people may receive rebates of up to
100 per cent of their council tax. At present
over 5 million households receive such help.
A person who is liable for the council tax
may also claim benefit (called ‘second adult
rebate’) for a second adult who is not liable
to pay the council tax and who is living in
the home on a non-commercial basis.
Recent Changes
In August 1994 a new residence test came
into force, requiring claimants to establish
that they are habitually resident in Britain
before a claim for income support, housing
benefit or council tax benefit can be paid.
The test brings Britain into line with most
other European countries, which already limit
access to their benefit systems to those who
have lived in the country for some time.
Family Credit
Family credit is payable to low-paid
employed and self-employed working families
with children. It is payable to couples or lone
parents. At least one parent must work for a
minimum of 16 hours a week. The amount
payable depends on a family’s net income
(excluding child benefit) and the number and
ages of the children in the family- A
maximum award, consisting of an adult rate
of £44.30 weekly, plus a rate for each child
varying with age, is payable if the family’s
net income does not exceed £71.70 a week.
The award is reduced by 70 pence for each
pound by which net income exceeds this
amount. In certain cases where children
under 11 have formal childcare arrangements,
406
SOCIAL SECURITY
up to £40 a week can be deducted from net
income before family credit is assessed.
Family credit is not payable if a family’s
capital or savings exceed £8,000.
Social Fund
Discretionary payments, in the form of loans
or grants, may be available to people on low
incomes for expenses which are difficult to
meet from their regular income. There are
three types:
• budgeting loans to help meet important
occasional expenses;
• crisis loans for help in an emergency or a
disaster; and
• community care grants to help people re¬
establish themselves or remain in the
community and to ease exceptional
pressure on families.
The total discretionary budget of £353
million for 1994—95 is £7 million higher than
in the previous year.
The social fund also provides payments to
help with the costs of maternity or funerals
or with heating during very cold weather.
These payments are regulated and are not
subject to the same budgetary considerations
as other social fund payments.
War Pensions and Related Services
Pensions are payable for disablement or death
as a result of service in the armed forces or
for certain injuries received in the merchant
navy or civil defence during wartime, or to
civilians injured by enemy action. The
amount paid depends on the degree of
disablement: the pension for 100 per cent
disablement is £98.90 a week.
There are a number of extra allowances.
The main ones are for unemployability,
restricted mobility, the need for constant
attendance, the provision of extra comforts,
and as maintenance for a lowered standard of
occupation. An age allowance of between
£6.60 and £20.40 is payable weekly to war
pensioners aged 65 or over whose disablement
is assessed at 40 per cent or more. Pensions
are also paid to war widows and other
dependants. (The standard rate of pension for
a private’s widow is £74.70 a week.)
The War Pensions Agency maintains a
welfare service for war pensioners, war
widows and other dependants. It works
Table 25.2: Tax Liability of Social Security Benefits
Not Taxable Taxable
Attendance allowance
Child benefit
Child’s special allowance
Disability living allowance
Disability working allowance
Family credit
Guardian’s allowance
Housing benefit
Income support"
Industrial disablement benefit
Invalidity benefit
Maternity allowance
One-parent benefit
Severe disablement allowance
Sickness benefit
Social fund payments
War disablement pension
War widow’s pension
Income support paid to
unemployed people
Industrial death benefit
pensions
Invalid care allowance
Retirement pension
Statutory maternity pay
Statutory sick pay
Unemployment benefit
Widowed mother’s allowance
Widow’s pension
“That part of income support payable in place of unemployment benefit is taxable when paid to unemployed people who have
to sign on, or to strikers or those directly interested in a trade dispute.
407
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
closely with ex-Service organisations and
other voluntary bodies which give financial
aid and personal support to those disabled or
bereaved as a result of war.
Concessions
Other benefits for which unemployed people
and those on low incomes may be eligible
include exemption from health service charges
(see p. 375), grants towards the cost of
spectacles, free school meals and free
legal aid.
Since April 1994 people on low incomes,
as well as all pensioners, widows and long¬
term sick people on invalidity benefit, have
received extra help to meet the cost of VAT
on their fuel bills (see p. 407). In 1994-95
some 15 million people will benefit, at a cost
of £381 million.
Reduced charges are often made to
unemployed people, for example, for adult
education and exhibitions, and pensioners are
usually entitled to reduced transport fares.
Taxation
The general rule is that benefits which
replace lost earnings are subject to tax, while
those intended to meet a specific need are not
(see Table 25.2). Various income tax reliefs
and exemptions are allowed on account of age
or a need to support dependants.
ARRANGEMENTS WITH OTHER
COUNTRIES
As part of the European Union’s efforts to
promote the free movement of labour,
regulations provide for equality of
treatment and the protection of benefit
rights for employed and self-employed
people who move between member states.
The regulations also cover retirement
pensioners and other beneficiaries who
have been employed, or self-employed, as
well as dependants. Benefits covered
include child benefit and those for sickness
and maternity, unemployment, retirement,
invalidity, accidents at work and
occupational diseases.
Britain also has reciprocal social security
agreements with a number of other countries
which also provide cover for some National
Insurance benefits and family benefits.
At the end of 1992 625,000 British national
insurance pensions were paid overseas, at a
cost of some £800 million.
Further Reading
Equality in State Pension Age. Cm 2420. HMSO, 1993.
Security, Equality, Choice: The Future for Pensions. Cm 2594-1. HMSO, 1994.
Social Welfare. Aspects of Britain series, HMSO, 1993.
Which Benefit? Leaflet FB2, issued by the Benefits Agency. Available free from social security
offices, post offices or Employment Service Jobcentres.
408
26 Education
Introduction 409
Schools 410
Education After 16 424
Educational Research 430
Links with Other Countries 431
The Youth Service 432
Over 9 million pupils attend about 29,900 state,1 1,800 special and 2,500 fee
paying independent schools. They are taught by just over half a million
teachers. The average pupil-teacher ratio is about 17:1, compared with 22:1 in
1970-71. There are over 25,000 nursery and primary schools and nearly 5,000
secondary schools. The proportion of young people entering higher education
in universities and colleges has risen from one in eight in 1980 to more than
one in four (one in three in Northern Ireland) and is expected to reach one in
three by the year 2000 (more than two in five in Scotland and Northern
Ireland). Continuing education for adults is provided by further education
institutions, adult colleges and centres, and by universities, which have seen
an increase in older students in recent years. Expenditure on education was
£32,000 million in 1992-93.
INTRODUCTION
History
England and Wales
Although government grants for education
were first made in 1833, it was the 1870
Education Act in England and Wales which
originally enshrined the idea of compulsory
elementary education with government aid.
There were two types of elementary school
—church voluntary schools and state schools
provided by school boards. Attendance at
school became compulsory in 1880 for
children aged between five and ten, and the
school leaving age was progressively raised to
14 by 1918.
’For ease of reference the term ‘state school’ is used to cover
schools maintained from public funds.
A co-ordinated national system of
education was introduced for the first time by
the 1902 Education Act, under which local
government became responsible for state
education and for helping to finance the
voluntary schools. The system was supervised
by the Board of Education.
In 1944 a new Education Act raised the
school leaving age to 15, and schools were
divided into primary and secondary. All
children were given a secondary education,
and the newly created Ministry of Education
was empowered to develop a national
education policy. Local government remained
responsible for administering the system.
Children were allocated to different
secondary schools on the basis of selection
tests taken at the age of 11. In the 1960s
and 1970s this system was gradually
replaced by comprehensive schools, which
409
BRITAIN 1995. AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
take pupils of all abilities. The school leaving
age was raised to 16 in 1972—73.
Scotland
In Scotland an Act passed in 1872 transferred
responsibility for education from the churches
to elected school boards, which provided
education for children between the ages of 5
and 13. In 1901 the school leaving age was
raised to 14. An Act passed in 1918 replaced
the boards by local government authorities
and made the provision of secondary
education mandatory for all children wanting
it. Church schools were transferred to
education authorities, while preserving their
denominational character. The school
leaving age was raised to 15 in 1947 and to
16 in 1972-73.
Northern Ireland
Education in Northern Ireland was brought
into a single system by legislation passed in
1923, under which local government took
over responsibility for its administration,
supervised by the Ministry of Education.
Secondary education remained largely in the
hands of voluntary bodies, with assistance
provided from public funds. Education was
made compulsory for pupils between the ages
of 5 and 14. The school leaving age was
raised to 15 in 1947 and to 16 in 1972—73.
Reform
During the 1970s concern arose about the
quality of education provided by Britain’s
schools and the lack of a formal national
school curriculum. As a result, the three
education systems are undergoing the most
far-reaching reforms since 1945.
Administration
The Secretary of State for Education has
overall responsibility for school and post¬
school education in England. The Secretaries
of State for Scotland, Wales and Northern
Ireland exercise similar responsibilities in
those countries.
The government education departments
are the Department for Education in
England, the Welsh Office Education
Department, the Scottish Office Education
Department and the Department of
Education for Northern Ireland. They
formulate education policies and are also
responsible for the supply and training
of teachers.
Most state school education is the
responsibility of education authorities, which
are part of the local government system; the
rest is provided by self-governing grant-
maintained (GM) schools (see p. 411). In
Northern Ireland the education service is
administered locally by five education and
library boards.
Education authorities pay teachers and
other staff, provide and maintain buildings,
and supply equipment and materials.
Governing bodies in GM schools are
responsible for these functions.
SCHOOLS
Finance
LEA-maintained Schools
Local education authorities (LEAs) in
England and Wales are responsible for most
of the public expenditure on schools; a large
amount of this, however, is indirectly funded
by the Government through the Revenue
Support Grant, which is made to local
government councils. Councils are free to
decide how much of this grant should be
distributed to education and the other
services for which they have responsibility.
There are also central Government grants
supporting expenditure made by LEAs on
items such as the National Curriculum (see
p. 418), local management of schools, teacher
recruitment, support for information
technology and health education in schools.
Finance also goes to inner city schools facing
particularly severe problems.
Additional government grants are made
for capital expenditure at voluntary-aided
schools (see p. 411).
The rest of LEA expenditure on education
is met by local taxes and by the non-domestic
rates paid by business and commerce.
410
EDUCATION
Grant-maintained Schools
State grant-maintained (GM) self-governing
schools are not financed by LEAs, as they
have chosen to opt out of LEA control (see
below). Instead, the Funding Agency for
Schools for England calculates and pays
grants to GM schools from public funds and
is responsible for financial monitoring. The
Agency is responsible to the Secretary of
State for Education, who appoints its
members. Grant-maintained schools in Wales
are financed by the Welsh Office.
Scotland and Northern Ireland
In Scotland most state schools are provided
by the regional and islands councils, which
are the education authorities; state self-
governing schools are funded directly by the
Government. The education authorities are
financed in a similar way to those in England
and Wales.
The costs of the education and library
boards in Northern Ireland are met by the
Department of Education.
School Management
England and Wales
There are three kinds of state school that are
wholly or mainly supported from public
funds:
• county schools, which are owned and
funded by LEAs;
• voluntary schools, mostly established by
religious denominations; the governors of
some types of voluntary school contribute
to capital costs; and
• self-governing GM schools (see below).
LEA-Financed Schools
Each LEA-maintained county and voluntary
school has a governing body which includes
governors appointed by the LEA, elected
teacher and parent governors, and people co¬
opted from the local community. Voluntary
schools also have governors from the church
associated with the school.
All LEA county and voluntary schools
manage their own budgets. LEAs allocate
funds to the schools, largely on the basis of
pupil numbers. The school governing body is
responsible for overseeing spending and for
most aspects of staffing, including
appointments and dismissals. LEAs also fund
special schools for pupils with special
educational needs (see p. 415); all these
schools will have full control over their
budgets by April 1996.
Each LEA is responsible for deciding
whether funds should be provided for
nursery education.
Grant-maintained Status
Some 15 per cent of secondary schools in
England are grant-maintained (GM) self-
governing schools. GM status is achieved if
the school’s parents support the idea in a
ballot and if the Secretary of State approves
the school’s proposals for GM status. Under
the 1993 Education Act the governing
bodies of non-GM state schools must
consider each year whether or not to hold a
ballot on GM status. If they decide not to
hold a ballot, they must give reasons to
parents for this decision.
The governing body for GM schools
consists of parents, teachers and people from
the community served by the school. The
parent governors are elected by the parents of
pupils at the school and the one or two
teacher governors by the school’s teachers.
Governors take all decisions about school
management, employ and pay staff, are
responsible for school premises, and may
acquire or dispose of land.
Some GM or voluntary aided secondary
schools are technology colleges, which
teach the National Curriculum and
emphasise technology, science and
mathematics. Governing body and financial
arrangements are broadly similar to those of
other GM or voluntary-aided schools. In
addition, each college is sponsored by one or
more companies or charitable trusts; the
sponsors are represented on the governing
body through sponsor governors. In April
1994, 25 schools were designated as
technology colleges.
411
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
City Technology Colleges
There are 15 city technology colleges in
England. These are non-fee-paying
independent schools created by a
partnership of government and private
sector sponsors. The promoters own or
lease the schools, employ teachers and other
staff, and make substantial contributions
towards the costs of building and
equipment. There is no LEA involvement.
The colleges teach the National Curriculum
(see p. 418), but with an emphasis on
mathematics, technology and science.
There are over 11,000 pupils in city
technology colleges.
Scotland
In Scotland school governing bodies are
known as school boards and consist of
elected parent and staff members as well as
co-opted members. They are required to
promote contact between parents, the
school and the community, and are
involved in the appointment of senior
staff and the community use of school
premises. They may also take on additional
functions delegated from the education
authority.
Plans are being made to ensure that
devolved management is in place in primary
and secondary schools by April 1996, and
in special schools by April 1997. Devolved
management does not have to be in place
until 1 April 1998 for primary schools with
full-time teaching headteachers.
Parents of children at state schools can
opt for self-governing status following
approval by a ballot; the school then
receives funding directly from central
government instead of the education
authority. The first self-governing school
came into existence in April 1994.
Northern Ireland
The main categories of school supported by
public funds are:
• controlled schools, which are owned
and financed 100 per cent by the
education and library boards;
• voluntary maintained schools, most of
which are owned by the Roman Catholic
Church and largely financed from public
funds;
• voluntary grammar schools, which may
be owned by denominational or non-
denominational bodies and are largely
financed from public funds; and
• grant-maintained or controlled integrated
schools, taking both Protestant and
Roman Catholic pupils.
All publicly financed schools are
managed by Boards of Governors, which
include elected parents and teachers among
their members.
Although all schools must be open to
pupils of all religions, most Roman Catholic
pupils attend Catholic maintained schools or
Catholic voluntary grammar schools, and
most Protestant children are enrolled at
controlled schools or non-denominational
voluntary grammar schools.
All recurrent expenditure (running
expenses such as teachers’ salaries) of
voluntary maintained schools is met by the
education and library boards. The
Department of Education provides 85 per
cent or 100 per cent of capital expenditure,
the rate of grant paid being dependent on the
constitution of the Board of Governors.
Recurrent expenditure on voluntary grammar
schools is met by the Department of
Education, which also provides capital grants.
The Government has a statutory duty to
encourage integrated education as a way of
breaking down sectarian barriers. There are
21 integrated schools, with a total enrolment
of 4,000 pupils—over 1 per cent of the school
population. Integrated schools are financed by
the Government. Existing controlled,
maintained and voluntary grammar schools
can apply to become integrated following a
majority vote by parents.
The Council for Catholic Maintained
Schools is responsible for employing teachers
in Catholic maintained schools and for
promoting effective control and management
of these schools by the Boards of Governors.
All secondary schools and some 42 nursery
schools and 605 primary schools are
responsible for managing all costs, including
412
EDUCATION
staffing costs. The remaining 346 primary
schools and 47 nursery schools have partially
delegated budgets and are responsible for only
non-staffing costs.
School Places
Education authorities are responsible for
providing school places, with the exception of
GM schools in England and Wales, where
governing bodies are responsible.
Under the 1993 Education Act the
Funding Agency for Schools in England may
take on some responsibility for securing
enough school places in individual LEA areas.
In areas where between 10 and 75 per cent of
pupils are being educated in GM primary or
secondary schools, the LEA and the Agency
may be jointly responsible. Once 75 per cent
of primary or secondary pupils are in GM
schools, the Agency may be solely responsible
for the provision of school places. The
Agency can only be involved in the provision
of school places if the Secretary of State
makes an order to that effect.
Table 26.1: School Pupils by Type of
School in Britain
 1991 92
State schools
Nursery 61,000
Primary 4,850,000
Secondary 3,535,000
Special schools
(Full-time equivalent) 113,000
Independent schools 604,000
Total school places 9,162,000
Pupils
Parents are required by law to see that their
children receive efficient full-time education,
at school or elsewhere, between the ages of
5 and 16 in Great Britain and 4 and 16 in
Northern Ireland. About 93 per cent of pupils
receive free education financed from public
funds, while the others attend independent
schools paid for by fees from parents.
Boys and girls are taught together in most
primary schools. More than 80 per cent of
pupils in state secondary schools in England
and Wales and about 66 per cent in Northern
Ireland attend mixed schools. In Scotland
nearly all secondary schools are mixed. Most
independent schools (see p. 416) for younger
children are mixed; the majority providing
secondary education are single-sex, although
the number of mixed secondary schools
is growing.
Nursery and Primary Schools
Although there is no statutory requirement to
educate under-fives, nearly 53 per cent of
three- and four-year-olds in Britain attend
nursery schools or classes. In addition, many
children attend pre-school playgroups,
most of which are organised by parents
and incorporated in the Pre-School
Playgroups Association.
Compulsory education begins at five in
Great Britain and four in Northern Ireland,
when children go to infant schools or
departments; at seven many go on to junior
schools or departments. The usual age for
transfer from primary to secondary schools is
11 in England, Wales and Northern Ireland,
but some local authorities in England have
established first schools for pupils aged 5 to
8, 9 or 10, and middle schools for age-ranges
between 8 and 14. In Scotland primary
schools take children from 5 to 12, when
they transfer to secondary schools. For
information on independent schools,
(see p. 416).
Secondary Schools
Around nine-tenths of the state secondary
school population in Great Britain attend
comprehensive schools. These take pupils
without reference to ability or aptitude and
provide a wide-ranging secondary education
for all or most of the children in a district.
English and Welsh schools can be organised
in a number of ways. They include:
• those that take the full secondary school
age-range, from 11 to 18;
• middle schools (see above); and
• schools with an age-range of 11 or 12 to
16, combined with a sixth-form or a
tertiary college for pupils over 16.
413
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Sixth-form colleges are schools which may
provide non-academic courses in addition to
academic ones. Tertiary colleges offer a
range of full-time and part-time vocational
courses for students over 16, as well as
academic courses.
Most other children attend grammar or
secondary modern schools, to which they are
allocated after selection procedures at the age
of 11.
Scottish secondary education is almost
completely non-selective; the majority of
schools are comprehensives covering the age-
range 12 to 18.
In Northern Ireland secondary education is
organised largely along selective lines, the 70
grammar schools admitting some 57,000
pupils on the basis of tests in English, maths
and science. Some 88,000 pupils attend non¬
grammar secondary schools. Some secondary
schools are run on a non-selective basis.
Rights of Parents
Parents must be given general information
about a school through a prospectus and the
school’s annual report or, in Scotland, the
school’s handbook. They also have a statutory
right to express a preference for a particular
school for their child, and there is an appeal
system if their choice is not met.
In England and Wales parents choosing
among local secondary schools have the right
to see:
• comparative tables showing the latest public
examination results, vocational qualification
results, rates of absence and amount of
lesson time, school by school; and
• information in each school’s prospectus
on public examination results, vocational
qualification results, attendance rates and
the destinations of school leavers.
National comparative tables are published
on state and independent secondary school
performance throughout Britain.
Summaries of school inspection reports
(see p. 422) are given to parents.
All state schools in England and Wales
have to give parents a written annual report
on their child’s achievements, containing
details about:
• the child’s progress in all subjects and
activities;
• the child’s general progress and
attendance record;
• the results of National Curriculum
assessments and of public examinations
taken by the child;
• comparative results of pupils of the same
age in the school and nationally; and
• information about the arrangements for
discussing pupils’ school reports with
teachers.
All parents are invited to an annual
meeting in order to discuss the governors’
annual report. They may raise any matters
about the school with the governors and
the headteacher.
When a pupil transfers to another school,
a record of his or her academic
achievements, other skills, abilities and
progress in school is sent to the new school
on request. Information about the pupil’s
latest assessments and examination results is
sent automatically.
In Scotland national guidelines to schools
on reporting to parents advise that they
should provide information about their child’s
attainment in the various subjects, teachers’
comments on his or her progress and details
about steps to build on success or overcome
difficulties. One main school report each year
is advised, together with one brief update
report. Parents have the opportunity to
respond to the report and discuss the next
steps at parent/teacher meetings.
The Northern Ireland reporting system to
parents is broadly similar to that in England
and Wales.
Failing Schools
If school inspectors in England and Wales
identify a school failing to give its pupils an
acceptable standard of education, the LEA
can appoint new governors and withdraw
delegated management from the school.
Should these measures fail to work, central
government can put the school under new
management until its performance reaches a
satisfactory level. The new management is
financed from central government. After
414
EDUCATION
further advice from the schools inspectorate
(see p. 422), the Secretary of State decides
whether to end the new management’s
period of care for the school; if this is done,
the school becomes grant maintained and
self governing.
Ethnic Minority Children
Most school-aged children from ethnic
minorities were born in Britain and tend to
share the interests and aspirations of children
in the population at large. Nevertheless, a
substantial number still have particular needs
arising from cultural differences, including
those of language, religion and custom.
The education authorities have done much
to meet these needs. English language
teaching continues to receive priority, with a
growing awareness of the value of bilingual
support in the early primary years. Schools
may teach the main ethnic minority
community languages at secondary level in
England and Wales as part of the National
Curriculum. Schools have to take account of
the ethnic and cultural backgrounds of
pupils, and curricula should reflect ethnic
and cultural diversity. Measures have been
taken to improve the achievement of ethnic
minority pupils, and to prepare all children,
not just those of ethnic minority origin, for
living in a multi-ethnic society.
Special Educational Needs
Special educational needs comprise learning
difficulties of all kinds, including mental and
physical disabilities which hinder or prevent
learning. In the case of children whose
learning difficulties are severe or complex,
LEAs are required to:
• identify, assess and secure provision for
their needs; and
• give parents the right to be involved in
decisions about their child’s special
education.
If the LEA believes that it should
determine the education for the child, it must
draw up a formal statement of the child’s
special educational needs and the action it
intends to take to meet them.
Parents have a right of appeal to the
Special Educational Needs Tribunal if they
disagree with the LEA decisions about their
child’s special educational needs. The
Tribunal’s verdict is final and binding on
all parties.
Under the 1993 Education Act there are
statutory time limits within which the LEA
in England and Wales must carry out
procedures for making assessments and
statements. Similar timetables for Scotland
are operated through guidance from the
Scottish Office Education Department. A
state school named in a statement of special
educational needs is normally required to
admit the child. The LEA has to consult the
governors before naming the school.
Wherever possible, children with special
educational needs are educated in ordinary
schools. Placement in an ordinary school
must be compatible with the needs of the
child and with the provision of efficient
education for the other children in the
school. The LEA is required to comply with
parents’ choice of school unless this is
inappropriate for the child or involves an
inefficient use of resources.
A Code of Practice has been issued
by the Government offering practical
guidance to all state schools in
England and Wales on how to
identify, assess and monitor all
pupils with special educational needs.
All schools, LEAs and health and
social services must take it into
account when making provision for
these pupils.
Each school must formulate a policy on
pupils with special educational needs and
must publish information about that policy.
This will include information on:
• the name of the person responsible for
co-ordinating day-to-day education for
these pupils;
• admission arrangements;
• facilities for pupils;
• arrangements for providing a broadly
based curriculum; and
• in-service training for teachers.
415
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Annual reports to parents must report on
the success of these policies.
In Scotland the choice of school is a
matter for agreement between education
authorities and parents. Legislation passed in
1986 and 1993 provided for earlier recording
of special educational needs and gave parents
improved rights on school choice for their
children. New draft advice on the assessment
and recording of children with special
educational needs has recently been issued.
This will be followed by a comprehensive
package of advice and guidance for everyone
involved in special education.
In Northern Ireland steps are being taken
to introduce changes similar to those in
England and Wales.
There are nearly 1,800 publicly maintained
special schools (both day and boarding) in
Britain for pupils with special educational
needs. Some of these are run by voluntary
organisations and some are established in
hospitals. They cater for some 113,000
pupils. The pupil teacher ratio in special
schools is 5.7 to 1 compared with 10.5 to 1
in 1970-71.
Health and Welfare of Schoolchildren
Physical education, including organised
games, is part of the curriculum of all
maintained schools, and in England and
Wales playing fields must be available for
pupils over the age of eight. Most secondary
schools have a gymnasium.
Government health departments are
responsible for the medical inspection of
schoolchildren and for advice on, and
treatment of, medical and dental problems.
The education service seeks to help prevent
and deal with juvenile drug misuse and to
help prevent the spread of AIDS. In England
and Wales government funds have supported
the appointment of drugs and health
education co-ordinators for schools, colleges
and the youth service. In Scotland this is an
education authority responsibility.
LEAs and GM schools are responsible for
providing school meals for pupils. They are
free to decide the nature of the meals service,
taking account of local circumstances. They
must provide free meals to pupils whose
parents receive a social security benefit called
income support (see p. 405) but must charge
all other pupils for meals. Although LEAs do
not have to provide milk to any pupil, they
can offer subsidised milk to all pupils and
many provide free milk to pupils of parents
in receipt of income support. In Northern
Ireland school meals must be provided for
primary, special and grant-aided nursery
school pupils.
LEAs must provide or arrange free of
charge the transport they consider necessary
to enable pupils living in their area to attend
school. The most common grounds for this
are distance, safety or pupils’ special needs.
LEAs may assist other pupils financially or
carry them in spare places on school buses.
LEAs must publish details each year about
their transport policies.
Corporal punishment is prohibited by law
in state schools in Britain, and for pupils in
independent schools whose fees are met
wholly or partly from public funds.
Independent Schools
Fee-paying independent schools must
register with the appropriate education
department and are open to inspection. 1 hey
can be required to remedy serious
shortcomings in their accommodation or
teaching and to exclude anyone regarded as
unsuitable to teach in or own a school. About
7 per cent of schoolchildren attend
independent schools.
There are nearly 2,500 independent
schools educating 600,000 pupils of all ages.
They charge fees varying from around £300 a
term for day pupils at nursery age to over
£4,000 a term for senior boarding pupils.
Many offer bursaries to help pupils from less
well-off families. Such pupils may also be
helped by LEAs—particularly if the
authorities’ own schools cannot meet the
needs of individual children—or by the
Government’s Assisted Places Scheme, under
which financial assistance is given according
to parental income. Over 35,000 places are
offered in England, Wales and Scotland
under the scheme. The Government also
gives income-related help with fees to about
550 pupils at five music schools and the
416
EDUCATION
Royal Ballet School; there are also a limited
number of similar scholarships at cathedral
choir schools.
Independent schools range from small
kindergartens to large day and boarding
schools, and from new and, in some cases,
experimental schools to ancient foundations.
The 600 boys’, girls’ and mixed preparatory
schools prepare children for entry to senior
schools. The normal age-range for these
preparatory schools is from seven-plus to 11,
12 or 13, but many have pre-preparatory
departments for younger children. A number
of independent schools have been established
by religious orders and ethnic minorities.
Independent schools for older pupils—
from 11, 12 or 13 to 18 or 19—include about
550 which are often referred to as ‘public
schools’. These belong to the Headmasters’
Conference, the Governing Bodies
Association, the Society of Headmasters and
Headmistresses of Independent Schools, the
Girls’ Schools Association and the Governing
Bodies of the Girls’ Schools Association.
In Northern Ireland there are 21
independent schools educating nearly 1,000
pupils. These schools are subject to
inspection by the Department of Education
but do not receive any public funds.
Teachers
England and Wales
Teachers in state schools in England and
Wales are appointed by LEAs or school
governing bodies. They must hold
qualifications approved by the Department
for Education.
Formal teacher appraisal is being
introduced in English and Welsh schools. By
1995 all teachers will have completed the first
year of their two-year appraisal cycle, which
is intended to assist professional development,
strengthen the management of schools and
improve the quality of education provided
to pupils.
Consideration is being given to ways of
ensuring that teachers’ pay is more closely
related to performance.
Almost all entrants to teaching in state
schools in England and Wales complete an
approved course of teacher training. These
courses are offered by university departments
of education as well as other higher education
establishments (see p. 426). One of the two
main qualifications is the four-year Bachelor
of Education (BEd) honours degree. The
other is the successful completion of a three-
year degree course, topped up by a one-year
Postgraduate Certificate in Education
(PGCE) course.
Reform of Initial Teacher Training
Under new government reforms in England
and Wales, schools will play a much larger
part in initial teacher training by taking on
more responsibility for planning and
managing courses and for the selection,
training and assessment of students, usually
in partnership with institutions. They will
train students to teach their specialist
subjects, assess pupils and manage classes;
they will also supervise students and assess
their competence.
Consortia of schools will be able to run
courses for postgraduate students if they
wish to do so. Other courses, including all
undergraduate courses, will be run by
universities and colleges in partnership
with schools.
From 1995-96, the Teacher Training
Agency, established by 1994
legislation, will finance initial teacher
training courses, ensure that national
standards are met and promote
teaching as a career. The Agency’s
objectives include:
• helping to raise teaching
standards;
• improving the quality and
efficiency of all routes into the
teaching profession; and
• securing the involvement of
schools in training courses.
In Wales, responsibility for the funding of
initial teacher training will remain with the
Higher Education Funding Council for
Wales, which will also be able to fund such
training in schools. This Funding Council
417
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
will also assume responsibility for accrediting
institutions and schools providing courses.
Other Training
Under the Licensed Teacher Scheme, a
trainee teacher is appointed to the school,
which provides training and pays a salary; on
successful completion of a two-year period
of in-service training, qualified teacher status
is granted.
A recent report from the Office of
Standards in Education (OFSTED—see
p. 422) indicates that licensed teachers are
generally achieving satisfactory levels of
teaching competence.
Qualified teachers from other European
Community countries are usually granted
qualified teacher status.
Scotland
All teachers in education authority schools
must be registered with the General Teaching
Council (GTC) for Scotland. The GTC is
responsible for disciplinary procedures under
which teachers guilty of professional
misconduct may be removed permanently or
temporarily from the register. Advice is given
by the GTC to the Secretary of State on
teacher supply and the professional suitability
of teacher-training courses.
All entrants to the teaching profession are
graduates. New primary teachers qualify
either through a four-year BEd course or a
one-year postgraduate course at a higher
education teacher-training institution. In
addition, the University of Stirling offers
courses which combine academic and
professional training for intending primary
and secondary teachers. Teachers of academic
subjects at secondary schools must hold a
degree containing two passes in the subjects
which they wish to teach. Secondary teachers
must undertake a one-year postgraduate
training course. For music and technology,
four-year BEd courses are also available,
and for physical education all teachers take
BEd courses.
Under new guidelines on initial teacher¬
training courses, students on the one-year
postgraduate course for secondary teachers
spend 22 weeks in school during their
courses. In addition, the overall school
placement for the undergraduate BEd degree
for primary school teachers is 30 weeks over
the four-year period of the course. The one-
year postgraduate course for primary teachers
remains unchanged; students will continue to
spend 18 weeks in school and 18 weeks in
college-based study.
All new pre-service and major in-service
courses provided by teacher-training
institutions must be approved by The
Scottish Office Education Department and a
validating body.
Education authorities have developed
schemes to implement national guidelines for
staff development and appraisal. Schemes
must ensure that all teachers have been
appraised at least once by the end of the
1995-96 school session.
Northern Ireland
Teacher training is provided by Queen’s
University, in Belfast, the University of
Ulster and two colleges of education. The
principal courses are BEd Honours (four
years) and the one-year Postgraduate
Certificate of Education. Education and
library boards have a statutory duty to ensure
that teachers are equipped with the necessary
skills to implement education reforms and the
Northern Ireland school curriculum.
School Curriculum
England and Wales
The National Curriculum consists of the core
subjects of English, mathematics and science,
as well as history, geography, technology,
music, art, physical education and, for
secondary school pupils, a modern foreign
language. The scope of these subject areas
is defined and amended through
Parliamentary Orders.
In Wales the Welsh language constitutes a
core subject in Welsh-speaking schools and a
foundation subject elsewhere under the
National Curriculum. The National
Curriculum requirements for Welsh were
introduced in 1990. The statutory
418
EDUCATION
requirement to teach Welsh to pupils aged 14
to 16 in non-Welsh-speaking schools has
been temporarily suspended; nevertheless,
schools have a statutory duty to prepare for
a full implementation of this requirement
from July 1999.
An Order has been laid before Parliament
removing history and geography as
compulsory subjects for 14-16 year olds,
although schools will be encouraged to
continue teaching these subjects. In Wales a
modern foreign language and technology will
also be optional subjects for 14—16 year olds.
The introduction of modern languages as a
compulsory subject for this group is being
postponed until 1996, as is a revised
curriculum on technology. These changes
will increase the scope for developing new
vocational courses intended for this age group.
Steps are being taken to lessen the
administrative burden on teachers by
simplifying the National Curriculum, while
retaining the same range of core and other
subjects. Under proposals published by the
School Curriculum and Assessment Authority
and the Curriculum and Assessment
Authority for Wales (see p. 421) in May
1994, the content of the Curriculum would
be reduced by releasing one day a week for
schools to use at their discretion. The
Curriculum would also be made far more
manageable for teachers and give them
significant professional discretion. Final
advice will be given to the Government by
the two Authorities in the autumn of 1994.
The intention is that the new slimmed-down
Curriculum will be introduced in September
1995 and September 1996. No further
changes to the Curriculum will take place for
five years.
National testing and assessment of pupils’
performance at the ages of 7, 11 and 14 is
being confined to the basics of English,
mathematics and science. This also applies to
Welsh in Wales. Pupils aged 16 are assessed
by the General Certificate of Secondary
Education (GCSE) examination. The
Independent Appeals Authority for School
Examinations hears written appeals against
grades awarded in GCSE exams when the
processes of the examining body concerned
are exhausted.
Scotland
The content and management of the
curriculum are not prescribed by statute and
responsibility rests with education authorities
and headteachers, though guidance is
provided by the Secretary of State and the
Scottish Consultative Council on the
Curriculum. The Council has recommended
that secondary level pupils should follow a
broad and balanced curriculum consisting of
English, mathematics, science, a modern
European language, social studies,
technological activities, art, music or
drama, religious and moral education, and
physical education.
A major programme of curricular review
and development has been carried out for the
5 to 14 age-range. The Government has
issued new guidance on English language,
mathematics, expressive arts, Latin, modern
languages, environmental studies and
religious and moral education. Under new
arrangements, standardised tests in English
and mathematics are given to pupils in the
5-14 age group whenever they complete one
of five levels. A major programme to extend
modern language teaching to primary schools
is in progress.
Provision is made for teaching in Gaelic in
Gaelic-speaking areas and in some other areas
where education authorities have identified
this as a priority.
Pupils take the Scottish Certificate of
Education (SCE) at Standard grade at the
end of their fourth year of secondary
education at the age of 16. The Higher grade
is taken in the fifth and sixth year. Some
pupils also sit examinations for the Certificate
of Sixth Year Studies or take vocational
National Certificate units (see p. 424).
Northern Ireland
The common curriculum in all publicly
financed schools is based on six broad areas
of study: English, mathematics, science and
technology, the environment and society,
creative and expressive studies, and, for
secondary schools, language studies.
The school curriculum also includes six
compulsory cross-curricular themes: cultural
419
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
heritage, education for mutual understanding,
health education, information technology,
and, in secondary schools, economic
awareness and careers education. The first
theme is designed to help overcome distrust
between the people of the Province by
enabling pupils to understand the common
and distinctive elements of their cultural
heritage. The second is intended to teach
pupils to understand other people’s points of
view and appreciate the benefits of resolving
conflicts by non-violent means.
Statutory assessment arrangements are not
yet in place. In 1992-93 pilot assessments
were organised for pupils at the ages of 11 and
14 who had followed programmes of study in
English, maths and science for three years. A
second pilot programme was organised in
1993-94 covering pupils aged about 8, 11 and
14 and was substantially revised and
simplified in the light of the first pilot.
As in England and Wales, the GCSE
examination is used to assess 16-year-old pupils.
Religious Education and Collective Worship
in Schools
In England and Wales state schools must
provide religious education and a daily act of
collective worship for all registered pupils.
Every LEA has to produce an agreed
religious education syllabus which must be
reviewed every five years. Syllabuses must
reflect Christianity while taking account
of the other main religions practised
in Britain.
In August 1993 the Government asked the
School Curriculum and Assessment
Authority to draw up national model
syllabuses for religious education. These are
intended to help LEAs to prepare syllabuses;
they may adopt one of the models in full or
draw on them when preparing the local
syllabus. The Authority’s work involved
teachers as well as working groups comprising
representatives of Christianity, Buddhism,
Hinduism, Islam, Judaism and Sikhism.
Voluntary schools provide the opportunity
for denominational religious education.
Parents have the right to withdraw their
children from religious education classes and
from collective worship.
Scottish education authorities are required
to see that schools practise religious
observance and give pupils religious
instruction; parents may withdraw their
children if they wish. Certain schools
provide for Roman Catholic children but
in all schools there are safeguards for
individual conscience.
In Northern Ireland, too, schools must
provide religious education and collective
worship, although parents have the right to
withdraw their children from both. In
controlled schools clergy have a right of
access which may be used for
denominational instruction. In voluntary
schools collective worship and religious
education are controlled by the management
authorities. The main churches have
approved a core syllabus which is being
taught to 12-, 13- and 14-year-old children
and will be extended to 15- and 16-year-olds
in 1995.
Sex Education
Under the 1993 Education Act state
secondary schools in England and Wales are
required to provide sex education for all
pupils registered at the school. This includes
education about HIV and AIDS and other
sexually transmitted diseases. In state primary
schools the governors are responsible for
considering whether sex education should be
offered to their pupils.
Sex education in state schools must
encourage young people to have regard to
moral considerations and the value of
family life. Parents are entitled to
withdraw their children from sex education
classes other than those required by the
National Curriculum Science Order. All
state schools must publish in their
prospectus a summary of the content and
organisation of any sex education provided.
The school governing body must keep
and make available to parents on
request a written statement of its policy on
sex education.
In Scotland, Government guidance on
sex education is provided to education
authorities and headteachers, who are
responsible for its content.
420
EDUCATION
Curriculum Development and
Assessment
The School Curriculum and Assessment
Authority in England and the Curriculum
and Assessment Authority for Wales are
responsible for:
• keeping all aspects of the school
curriculum and of school examinations
under review;
• advising the Government on the
curriculum, and assessment and
examination arrangements; and
• publishing information about the
curriculum.
All GCSE and other qualifications offered
to pupils of compulsory school age in state
schools in England and Wales must be
approved by the Government. Associated
syllabuses and assessment procedures must
comply with national guidelines and be
approved by the relevant curriculum and
assessment authority.
In Scotland curriculum development is
undertaken by the Scottish Consultative
Council on the Curriculum in close
consultation with the Scottish Office
Education Department. The Scottish
Examination Board liaises with the Council on
links between the curriculum and assessment.
The Council for the Curriculum,
Examinations and Assessment is responsible
for the curriculum and its assessment in
Northern Ireland.
Information Technology
The National Curriculum places a strong
emphasis on the use of information
technology (IT) to ensure that all children are
well versed in the new technologies. In
England the average number of pupils per
microcomputer in primary schools in 1992
was 25 and for secondary schools was 13. The
findings of a survey commissioned by the
British Educational Suppliers Association
suggest that in 1994 these figures have
improved to 18 and 9 respectively. In Wales
the average number of pupils per
microcomputer in primary schools went down
from 68 to 34 between 1988 and 1991; in
secondary schools over the same period the
average number decreased from 30 to 14.
In 1994—95 the Department for Education
is providing grants for microcomputers,
software and teacher training in secondary
schools in the areas of mathematics, science,
design and technology, and geography.
Support is also being given to the
development of primary pupils’ ability to
handle information technology; in addition,
these funds will help children with special
educational needs.
Other DFE projects have included
funding for:
• development and use of CD-ROM
technology in schools;
• evaluating portable computers and
graphical calculators;
• investigating the potential of interactive
multimedia technology as a teaching aid
and assessing its full use for curriculum
development in schools; and
• piloting integrated learning systems
software to assess the potential for
children’s learning.
In Wales the Welsh Office also has a grant
programme to support microcomputers in
schools and has financed the installation of
satellite television receiving equipment in all
secondary schools. It is used to teach modern
foreign languages and other subjects such as
geography and science.
The Government also helps finance the
National Council for Educational
Technology, which promotes the effective use
of new technologies throughout the
educational system. The corresponding body
in Scotland is the Scottish Council for
Educational Technology.
In Scotland computing studies are
included in the 5-14 national guidelines on
environmental studies. In most secondary
schools, first and second year pupils will take
a short course in computing; third and fourth
year pupils will choose between a Standard
Grade course or a National Certificate
module. Similarly, fifth and sixth year
pupils will be able to choose between
Higher Grade and a number of National
Certificate modules.
421
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In Northern Ireland, IT is one of the six
compulsory educational themes forming part
of the curriculum for all pupils of statutory
school age in publicly financed schools.
Other Educational Aids
Teachers and pupils use a range of other
aids in the classroom. Most schools have
audio-visual equipment such as slide and
overhead projectors. The BBC (British
Broadcasting Corporation) and the
independent broadcasting companies transmit
radio and television programmes designed for
schools. Teachers’ notes, pupils’ pamphlets
and computer software accompany many
broadcast series.
School Inspections
Various inspectorates report to the
Government on the quality of education
provided by schools.
England
In England the independent Office for
Standards in Education (OFSTED) advises
the Secretary of State on quality, standards
and efficiency and regulates a new system of
school inspections. The inspection cycle
began in September 1993 for secondary
schools and started in September 1994 for
primary and other schools.
Every school has to be inspected every
four years by a team of independent
inspectors—headed by a registered
inspector—containing educationists and lay
people. Inspections take place according to
agreed national standards monitored by
OFSTED. Parents are sent a summary of the
inspection report, which is published. School
governing bodies have to prepare action plans
to follow it up and then report back to
parents on their progress.
OFSTED is headed by Her Majesty’s
Chief Inspector of Schools.
Wales
In Wales Her Majesty’s Chief Inspector of
Schools for Wales has similar functions to
those of OFSTED. All schools are inspected
every five years in the first instance.
Scotland
In Scotland HM Schools Inspectorate is
responsible for independent and objective
evaluation of education standards and for
advising the Secretary of State. During
inspections, the views and concerns of
parents are taken into account by the
inspectors. Full reports on inspections are
published and a short summary given to
parents. From 1994—95, each inspection team
will contain lay people. The Inspectorate’s
Audit Unit collects, analyses and publishes
evidence about the performance of schools
and education authorities. Evidence is
published on a comparative basis and
recommendations are made for action
and improvement.
Northern Ireland
School inspections in Northern Ireland are
carried out by the Education and Training
Inspectorate. Each school is subject to a
major inspection once every five years. Before
each general inspection, the Inspectorate
meets with Boards of Governors and parents
in order to take note of their concerns and
comments. Parents are sent a summary of the
inspection report which is published. Boards
of Governors respond by indicating any
action planned and submitting details of this
to the Department of Education.
Schools, Careers and Business
One of the Government’s key objectives is to
help young people develop the skills the
economy needs.
The Technical and Vocational Education
Initiative (TVEI), applicable in England,
Scotland and Wales, is designed to ensure
that the school curriculum for 14- to 18-year-
olds is made more relevant to adult and
working life in a modern technological
society. It is financed and administered by
central government, working in close co¬
operation with LEAs. Over 1 million students
are benefiting from TVEI in England.
422
EDUCATION
Education Business Partnerships,
consisting of representatives from industry,
education and the wider community, aim to
bring about closer links between education
and industry in England and Wales, and
ensure that young people develop the skills
and attitudes to help them succeed in the
labour market. They are supported by
Training and Enterprise Councils, Local
Enterprise Companies (see p. 178) and LEAs.
One of the main schemes managed by the
Partnerships is the Teacher Placement
Service (TPS), funded by the Department of
Employment. The TPS organises placements
in business for teachers to extend their
professional and personal development,
improve learning opportunities for young
people, and provide better careers education
services. Since 1989 some 100,000 teachers
have been on placements.
Compacts bring together employers, young
people, schools, colleges and other bodies
involved in training in order to help young
people achieve more at school, and to
continue education and training after the age
of 16. Under Compact schemes young people
work towards agreed goals; in return for
achieving them, employers provide a number
of incentives.
Careers
Most schools have a written policy statement
on careers education and guidance, a Careers
co-ordinator and an agreement with the
Government’s Careers Service which
contracts a range of organisations to provide a
service responsive to the needs of local
communities. The majority of contracts are
with LEAs.
Careers services in schools and colleges are
supported by materials produced by the
Careers and Occupational Information Centre.
In Northern Ireland careers education is
one of the six compulsory education themes
forming part of the post-primary school
curriculum. The Careers Service is part of
the Training and Employment Agency.
All state secondary schools in England and
Wales have to provide leavers with a National
Record of Achievement setting out their
school attainments, including public
examination and National Curriculum
assessment results. The Record is designed to
give people a simple record of achievement in
education and training throughout working
life. In Scotland the Record is not
compulsory, but it is available to all education
authorities for issue to school leavers.
In Northern Ireland all pupils are issued
with a record of achievement on leaving
primary and secondary education.
EDUCATION AFTER 16
About 65 per cent of pupils choose to continue
in education after 16. This takes place in
school sixth forms, sixth form colleges, further
education colleges, universities and other
higher education institutions.
Broadly speaking, education after 16 is
divided into further and higher education.
Further and adult education is largely
vocational and covers courses up to and
including General Certificate of Education
(GCE) A level and AS qualifications, GNVQ
Advanced level or their equivalents (see p.
425). Higher education covers advanced
courses at levels higher than GCE A level or
equivalent.
Over 4 million people were enrolled on
further education courses in 1992-93. By
1995-96, every 16- and 17-year-old leaving
full-time education in Great Britain will be
encouraged to undertake vocational education
or training by the offer of a Youth Credit
(see p. 180), enabling them to buy training
from the establishment of their choice.
In 1992-93 there were 1.4 million home
and overseas students in higher education,
of whom 47 per cent were women (see
p. 426).
In 1993 the Government published
charters for the users of further and higher
education in England, Wales and Scotland,
chiefly students, parents and employers.
These set out the standards of service which
users should expect, including information
about courses, financial support for students
and complaints procedures if things go wrong.
Further education colleges also have their
own individual charters. A similar charter has
been published in Northern Ireland.
Credit accumulation and transfer schemes
423
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
are in use in many English and Welsh post¬
school establishments. In Scotland a credit
accumulation scheme covers courses in all
further and higher education. Similar
schemes in higher education in Northern
Ireland are compatible with those of
institutions in the rest of Britain.
The computer-based Educational
Counselling and Credit Transfer Information
Service (ECCTIS) provides prospective
students and employers with access without
charge to information about courses at over 700
universities and colleges throughout Britain.
ECCTIS can be found at many careers
centres, libraries, British Council offices and
institutions of higher and further education.
Schools and Sixth-form Colleges
Having taken the GCSE examination (see
p. 419), students in England, Wales and
Northern Ireland can stay on at school or be
educated in a further education college.
Students in England and Wales can also
study at sixth form colleges. They study for
examinations which are the main standard for
entry to higher education or professional
training. These include the academic General
Certificate of Education (GCE) Advanced (A)
level, the Advanced Supplementary (AS)
examination, Advanced General National
Vocational Qualifications (GNVQs) and
National Vocational Qualifications (NVQs).
The GCE A level is taken at the age of 18 or
19 after two years’ study; part of the
qualification is based on course work and the
rest on written test papers. Advanced
Supplementary (AS) levels enable sixth-form
pupils to study a wider range of subjects.
Students specialising in the arts and
humanities, for example, can continue to
study mathematics and technological subjects
at this level. Requiring the same standard of
work as A levels, an AS level occupies half
the teaching and study time of an A level.
Equality of status for academic and
vocational qualifications is being promoted in
England, Wales and Northern Ireland. The
new GNVQs for young people in full-time
education between the ages of 16 and 18
provide a broad-based preparation for a range
of occupations and higher education and are
designed to have parity of esteem with GCE
A levels. There are three GNVQJevels—
Advanced, Intermediate and Foundation. An
Advanced GNVQ;—called the vocational A
level—requires a level of achievement equal
to two GCE A levels. GNVQs may also be
taken in combination with other qualifications
such as GCE A levels or GCSEs (see p. 421).
Scotland
Pupils staying on at school after the end of
compulsory education study for the Higher
Grade Scottish Certificate of Education exam
at the age of 16-18; passes at this grade are
the basis for entry to higher education or
professional training. However, entry is
becoming more flexible as wider access to
under-represented groups with non-standard
qualifications is encouraged. The Certificate
of Sixth Year Studies (CSYS) is for pupils
who have completed their Higher grade main
studies and who wish to continue studies in
particular subjects.
A flexible system of vocational courses for
16- to 18-year-olds has been introduced in
schools and colleges in disciplines such as
business and administration, engineering and
industrial production. These courses are also
intended to meet the needs of many adults
entering training or returning to education.
The courses lead to the award of the non-
advanced National Certificate, intended for
students over 16 who have successfully
completed a programme of vocational courses
based on short study units. Similar
unit-based courses are also available at
advanced levels.
General Scottish Vocational Qualifications
(General SVQs) are designed to meet the
needs of 16- to 19-year-olds at school or in
further education colleges. Broadly
compatible with the GNVQs in the rest of
Britain, General SVQs are a stepping-stone
to higher education or further training.
In March 1994 the Government
announced plans for a new system of courses
and awards for fifth and sixth year pupils.
Under these, Highers will remain but courses
will be based on units called modules.
Existing courses validated by the Scottish
Examinations Board and the Scottish
424
EDUCATION
Vocational Educational Council (SCOTVEC)
will be drawn into a unified system of
curriculum and assessment. Advanced Higher
courses will be developed, incorporating and
replacing the Certificate of Sixth Form
Studies and building on Highers to
provide coherent and challenging two-year,
320-hour courses.
Further Education Colleges
People over the age of 16 can also take
courses in further education colleges. Much
further education is work-related and
vocational. The system is flexible and enables
the student to acquire qualifications according
to his or her abilities. Further education
institutions supply much of the education
element in government-sponsored training
programmes such as Youth Training and
Training for Work (see Chapter 11).
Table 26.2: Students enrolled on
further and adult education courses
in 1992-93 (Great Britain)
England 3,372,000
Scotland 310,449
Wales 202,868
Total 3,885,317
Note: In Northern Ireland 84,808 people were enrolled on
vocational further education courses and 44,917 on non-
vocational courses.
Many students on further education
courses attend part time, either by day
release or block release from employment or
during the evenings. The system has strong
ties with commerce and industry, and
co-operation with business is encouraged by
the Government and its agencies. Employers
are normally involved in designing courses.
Courses are run by nearly 550 institutions
of further education, many of which also offer
higher education courses (see p. 426). In
England and Wales each is controlled by an
autonomous further education corporation
and governing body with substantial
representation from business. Scottish
colleges are controlled by an autonomous
board of management.
Funds are allocated to institutions by
further education funding councils in England
and Wales; part of the funding is not cash
limited and is directly related to student
numbers. The Scottish Office Education
Department distributes funds to colleges in
Scotland, partly on the basis of student
numbers. In Northern Ireland further
education colleges are financed via the
education and library boards by the
Department of Education. Other sources of
income for colleges include services provided
for employers and other clients.
Institutions in England and Wales are
obliged to publish information about the use
of their financial and other resources.
Expenditure plans provide for a record 25
per cent rise in full-time equivalent student
numbers in England and a 28 per cent rise in
Wales over the three-year period from 1993.
The number of full-time equivalent students
in Scotland is projected to rise by more than
25 per cent between 1991 and 1996.
Funding Councils in England and Wales
send out independent inspectors to assess the
quality of the education provided by colleges.
Inspectors publish reports containing quality
assessments, and colleges are obliged to
explain how they will put things right if there
are major criticisms. Each college has to
publish information about its examination
results annually. Colleges in Scotland are
inspected by the Schools Inspectorate and
in Northern Ireland by the Education and
Training Inspectorate.
Vocational Qualifications
The National Council for Vocational
Qualifications (NCVQ) is establishing a new
framework of National Vocational
Qualifications (NVQs) in England, Wales and
Northern Ireland. These are based on
national standards that define the
competence, knowledge and understanding
that employers need. Awarding bodies have
been reforming their qualifications for
accreditation by the National Council.
The following five levels of NVQs have
been established:
Level 1—Foundation
Level 2—Basic craft
Level 3—Technician, advanced craft,
supervisor
425
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Level 4—Higher technician, junior
management
Level 5—Professional, middle
management.
NVQs consist of units setting out the
standards which the individual must reach in
a range of job-related tasks. Performance of
candidates is assessed by observation in the
workplace. This assessment consists of
practical work, oral questioning, course work
and tests. NVQs are designed mainly for
people in work, although they can also be
studied in colleges and some schools.
NVQs at levels 1 to 4 are available in most
occupations. The Government wants 50 per
cent of young people to have reached NVQ^
level 3 by the year 2000.
In Scotland there is a similar system of
Scottish Vocational Qualifications (SVQs).
NVQs and SVQs have equal recognition
throughout Britain. The General NVQ^and
General SVQ_ system for full-time students in
education is described on p. 424.
Examining Bodies
About 90 per cent of vocational qualifications
in England, Wales and Northern Ireland are
assessed by three examining bodies and
accredited by the NCVQ.
The Business and Technology Education
Council (BTEC) plans and administers a
unified national system of courses at all levels;
the most popular subjects are business,
engineering and construction.
The City and Guilds of London Institute
provides mostly part-time qualifications in
areas such as engineering, construction,
catering, hairdressing and community care.
The RSA Examinations Board is the
largest provider of information technology
qualifications throughout Britain and offers
qualifications in areas ranging from
management/customer service to retailing
and wholesaling.
These three main vocational awarding
bodies offer GNVQs and a wide range of
NVQs, which will eventually replace most of
their existing awards.
Other vocational qualifications are awarded
by a large number of professional bodies.
The Scottish Vocational Education Council
(SCOTVEC) is the main accreditation and
awarding body in Scotland.
Higher Education
Higher education consists of degree and
equivalent courses.
In order to maintain British expertise in
technology, recent government schemes have
sought to expand higher education and
research in electronics, engineering and
computer science by making available extra
student places, and additional staff and
research fellowships.
Higher education institutions are
responsible for providing high quality
education. The Higher Education Quality
Council, financed by subscriptions from
institutions, ensures that satisfactory quality
control arrangements are in place. The
Higher Education Funding Councils for
England, Scotland and Wales (see below)
carry out assessments of the education
provided by institutions, publish regular
reports on their findings and aim to
ensure that any serious problems are put
right by the university or college concerned.
Acting on behalf of the Department of
Education, the Higher Education Funding
Council for England publishes reports on the
quality of education in the two Northern
Ireland universities.
Table 26.3: Full- and Part-time
Students in Higher Education in
Great Britain
 1982 83 1992-93
Full time 553,000 934,200
Part time 296,600 474,700
Total 849,600 1,408,900
Finance
Higher education is largely financed by
public funds, tuition fees for students paid
through the awards system and income
charged by institutions for research and
other purposes.
Government finance for higher education
institutions in England, Scotland and W ales
426
EDUCATION
is distributed by higher education funding
councils responsible to their respective
Secretary of State. In Northern Ireland
grant is paid direct to the two universities by
the Department of Education, following
advice from the Northern Ireland Higher
Education Council. The private University of
Buckingham does not receive any public grants.
Finance from the funding councils helps
meet the costs of teaching, research and
related activities in all publicly funded
universities and higher education colleges. In
addition to teaching students, institutions
undertake paid training, research or consultancy
for commercial firms (see p. 428). Many
establishments have endowments or receive
grants from foundations and benefactors.
Student Grants and Loans
Over 90 per cent of full-time students
resident in England and Wales on first degree
and other comparable higher education
courses are eligible for mandatory awards
covering tuition fees and maintenance. There
are also contributions from parents, assessed
according to their income. Awards are made
by LEAs in England and Wales. Similar
schemes are administered by the Student
Awards Agency for Scotland and the
Northern Ireland education and library
boards. The Government reimburses in full
the amount spent by education authorities on
mandatory student grants and fees. LEA
grants for other courses are discretionary.
Most students on courses of full-time,
non-postgraduate higher education can top up
their grant with a loan to help pay their
maintenance costs. Loans are not means
tested and repayments are indexed to
inflation. The scheme is designed to share
the cost of student maintenance more
equitably between students, parents and the
taxpayer. In 1992-93 loans worth £227
million were made to 345,300 students in
Britain, representing 41 per cent of those
eligible. Loans are administered by the
Student Loans Company in Glasgow.
Limited access funds administered by
universities and colleges are available to
people in cases where access to higher and
further education might be inhibited by
financial considerations or where students
face real financial difficulties. In 1994-95, for
example, there is provision of £26.7 million
in England for this purpose.
Grants for postgraduate study are offered
by the government education departments
and by the research councils (see Chapter
19). Increasing numbers of scholarships are
available from research charities, endowments
and particular industries or companies.
Access Courses
Access and foundation courses provide a
preparation and an appropriate test before
enrolment on a course of higher education for
prospective students who do not possess the
standard entry qualifications (GCE A levels
and equivalent qualifications). Many are from
the ethnic minority communities. The
growth of access courses has been very rapid
in recent years; about 600 are now available
nationwide.
The Scottish Wider Access Programme
(SWAP) is designed to promote greater
participation in higher education by mature
students and those without the normal
entry requirements. Successful completion of
a SWAP course guarantees a higher
education place.
Universities
There are some 90 universities, including the
Open University. They are governed by royal
charters or by Act of Parliament and enjoy
academic freedom. They appoint their own
staff, decide which students to admit, provide
their own courses and award their own
degrees. The universities of Oxford and
Cambridge date from the 12th and 13th
centuries, and the Scottish universities of St
Andrews, Glasgow, Aberdeen and Edinburgh
from the 14th and 15th centuries. All the
other universities in Britain were founded in
the 19th and 20th centuries. The 1960s saw
considerable expansion in the number of new
universities. The number of universities also
jumped considerably in 1992, when
polytechnics and some other higher education
establishments were given the freedom to
become universities and chose to exercise it.
427
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Applications for first degree courses are
usually made through the Universities and
Colleges Admission Service (UCAS),
in Cheltenham.
First degree courses are mainly full time
and usually last three years in England, Wales
and Northern Ireland. However, there are
some four-year courses, and medical and
veterinary courses normally require five years.
All traditional first degree courses in Scotland
require a minimum of three years’ study.
The ratio of staff to full-time students is
about 1 to 12.5.
Universities offer courses in a wide range
of subjects, including traditional arts subjects
and science and technology. Some courses
lead to the examinations of the chief
professional bodies, and to qualifications such
as those of the BTEC.
Many universities have close links with
commerce and industry, with some students
having a job and attending on a part-time basis.
Degree titles vary according to the practice
of each university. In England, Wales and
Northern Ireland the most common titles for
a first degree are Bachelor of Arts (BA) or
Bachelor of Science (BSc) and for a second
degree Master of Arts (MA), Master of Science
(MSc), and Doctor of Philosophy (PhD). In
the older Scottish universities Master is used
for a first degree in arts subjects. Uniformity
of standards between universities is promoted
by employing external examiners for all
university examinations.
The Open University and other
universities are responsible for validating
degrees at higher education institutions
without degree-awarding powers.
Most staff combine research with teaching
duties and over half of postgraduate students
are engaged on research projects. The
Government is encouraging universities to
co-operate closely with industry on research
(see Chapter 20). Over 40 science parks have
been set up by higher education institutions
in conjunction with industrial scientists and
technologists to promote the development and
commercial application of advanced technology.
The Open University
The Open University is a non-residential
university offering degree and other courses
for adult students of all ages in Britain and
the other member countries of the European
Union. It uses a combination of specially
produced printed texts, correspondence
tuition, television and radio broadcasts and
audio/video cassettes. For some courses,
there are residential schools. There is a
network of study centres for contact with
part-time tutors and counsellors, and with
fellow students. Formal academic
qualifications are not required to register for
most courses, but the standards of the
University’s degrees are the same as those of
other universities. Its first degrees are the BA
(Open) or the BSc (Open), which are general
degrees awarded on a system of credits for
each course completed. In 1994 there were
some 91,000 registered undergraduates, and
in all some 155,000 first degrees have been
awarded since the University started its
courses in 1970.
The University has a programme of higher
degrees. The Bachelor of Philosophy (BPhil),
Master of Philosophy (MPhil) and PhD are
research degrees and the MA, MSc and
Master of Business Administration (MBA)
are awarded after successful completion of
taught courses. About 9,000 students were
registered on higher degree courses in 1994.
There are also programmes for
professionals in education and the health and
social welfare services, and for updating
managers, scientists and technologists. Some
of these are multi-media courses taught in a
similar way to those in the undergraduate
programme, and others are in the form of
self-contained study packs. In 1994 about
8,000 students were following courses in
these areas. The University’s first
Postgraduate Certificate in Education courses
attracted 1,100 students.
The University has advised many other
countries on setting up similar institutions. It
has made a substantial contribution to the
Commonwealth of Learning project, which
brings together distance-teaching
establishments and students throughout the
Commonwealth, and to the European
Distance Education Network. It is financed
by the Higher Education Funding Council
for England.
428
EDUCATION
Further Education for Adults
Further education for adults is provided by
further education institutions, adult centres
and colleges run by LEAs, and voluntary
bodies such as the Workers’ Educational
Association. The duty to secure it is shared
by the further education funding councils
and by LEAs.
The Councils fund formal academic and
vocational courses, courses providing access to
higher education and courses in basic literacy
and numeracy, including English for speakers
of other languages. LEAs are responsible for
the less formal leisure and recreational
courses. Both the Councils and the LEAs
must take account of adult students with
special educational needs.
University departments of continuing
education also provide courses for adults.
ALBSU
The Adult Literacy and Basic Skills Unit
(ALBSU) is concerned with adult literacy,
numeracy and related basic skills in England
and Wales. It provides consultancy and
advisory services; funds local development
projects, including research; publishes
materials for teachers and students; and
organises and sponsors staff training.
Government funding of ALBSU was worth
over £3 million in 1994-95.
The Government also supports two
programmes managed by ALBSU, one of
which is aimed at parents with literacy
difficulties and their children. The other is the
Basic Skills at Work programme, which helps
unemployed people and those in work who
cannot progress without improved basic skills.
National Organisation of Adult Learning
The National Organisation of Adult Learning
—formerly the National Institute of Adult
Continuing Education and still known as
NIACE—is the national body representing
adult learners in England and Wales. It
convenes conferences, seminars and meetings,
collects and disseminates information, conducts
enquiries and research, undertakes special
projects and works with other organisations.
Open and Distance Learning
The term ‘open and distance learning’
broadly means learning undertaken without the
direct supervision of a tutor through use of
various media such as television. More and
more further education colleges are
incorporating many distance learning materials
and methods in their mainstream courses,
thereby allowing increasing numbers of
students to learn in ways which suit them best.
Open learning opportunities in further
education were extended in 1987 by the
formation of the Open College, an
independent company set up with
Government support, which brings together
broadcasters, educationists and sponsors. It
provides vocational education and training
courses below degree level. The Open
College of the Arts, also launched in 1987,
offers foundation courses in the arts to those
wishing to study at home.
Scottish Community Education Council
The Scottish Community Education Council
advises the Government and promotes all
community education matters, including adult
literacy and basic education, and youth work.
EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH
Educational research is supported financially
by government departments, the Economic
and Social Research Council (see Chapter
20), philanthropic organisations, higher
education institutions, teachers’ associations
and other agencies.
The major research institutions outside the
universities are the autonomous National
Foundation for Educational Research in
England and Wales and the Scottish Council
for Research in Education.
LINKS WITH OTHER COUNTRIES
Large numbers of people come to Britain
from other countries to study, and British
people work and train overseas. The British
aid programme encourages links between
educational institutions in Britain and
developing countries.
429
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
There has been an expansion of interest in
European studies and languages, with
exchanges of teachers, schoolchildren and
students taking place. Exchange of students is
promoted by a European Union scheme
(ERASMUS), under which grants are
provided to enable Union students and those
from countries belonging to the European
Free Trade Association to study in other
states. Over 25,000 students from Britain
have benefited from the scheme.
The Union’s LINGUA programme seeks
to improve and widen competence in the use
of foreign languages. It gives grants towards
in-service training for teachers, study abroad
for language students, joint educational
projects and exchanges for young people
undergoing professional, vocational and
technical education; it also covers measures
to develop language training materials
for business.
The Action Programme for Education and
Training for Technology (COMETT) aims to
foster co-operation between higher education
establishments and industry in the Union by
training personnel, especially in small and
medium-sized enterprises, in the application
of advanced technology.
The EU’s PETRA vocational training
programme for young people organises
training and work experience placements in
other member states.
Union member states have created nine
European schools, including one at Culham,
Oxfordshire, to provide a multinational
education for the children of staff employed
in Union institutions.
Overseas Students in Britain
British universities and other further and
higher education establishments have built up
their strong reputation overseas by offering
tuition of the highest standards, maintaining
low student-to-staff ratios, and offering the
most relevant courses and qualifications.
In 1992-93 there were 99,700 overseas
students at publicly funded higher and
further education institutions in Great
Britain. Their numbers have increased by 76
per cent since 1982-83 and by 8 per cent
since 1991-92. In Northern Ireland there
were more than 5,000 students from overseas
in 1992-93.
In general, overseas students following
courses of higher or further education in Britain
pay fees covering the full cost of their courses.
Nationals of other member countries of
the European Union generally pay the lower
level of fees applicable to British students; if
their courses are designated for mandatory
awards, they may be eligible for fees-only
awards from LEAs. Students attending
Scottish institutions apply either to the
Student Awards Agency for Scotland or the
regional or island councils.
Government Scholarship Schemes
The Government makes considerable
provision for foreign students and trainees
under its overseas aid programme and through
other award and scholarship schemes. In
1992-93 some 21,000 overseas students were
supported at a cost of £147 million.
The Foreign & Commonwealth Office
(FCO) finances the British Chevening
Scholarships, a worldwide
programme offering outstanding
graduate students and young
professionals the opportunity to
spend a formative part of their
careers studying at British
universities and other academic
institutions. In 1994-95 the FCO is
spending some £30 million on
about 5,000 scholarships for students
from 146 countries.
There are also jointly funded scholarship
schemes for overseas students co-sponsored
by the FCO, business and industry, grant¬
giving foundations, churches and universities;
some 800 scholarships were provided under
these arrangements in 1993-94.
Outside the aid programme, the Overseas
Research Students Awards Scheme, funded
by the Department for Education, provides
assistance for overseas full-time postgraduate
students with outstanding research potential;
these awards meet the difference between
the home/European Union and overseas
student fee levels.
430
EDUCATION
Other Schemes
Many public and private scholarships and
fellowships are available to students from
overseas and to British students who want to
study overseas. Among the best known are
the British Council Fellowships, the
Commonwealth Scholarship and
Fellowship Plan, the Fulbright Scholarship
Scheme, the Marshall Scholarships, the
Rhodes Scholarships, the Churchill
Scholarships and the Confederation of
British Industry Scholarships. Most British
universities and colleges also offer
scholarships for which graduates of any
nationality are eligible.
THE YOUTH SERVICE
The youth service—a partnership between
local government and voluntary
organisations—is concerned with the informal
social education of young people.
Many of the voluntary organisations
were established at the end of the 19th
century and in the first decade of the 20th. In
1939 the Government first recognised the
need for a youth service forming part of
education and supported through LEAs. In
1944 the Education Act provided for the
development of a service in England and
Wales by LEAs in partnership with the
voluntary organisations.
Local authorities maintain their own youth
centres and clubs and provide most of the
public support for local and regional
voluntary organisations. The service is said to
reach around 5 million young people, the
voluntary organisations contributing a
significant proportion of overall provision.
The Department for Education’s Youth
Service Unit gives grants to the national
voluntary youth organisations to meet 50 per
cent of the cost of programmes designed to
promote access to the youth service, support
training for voluntary youth workers and help
improve the efficiency and effectiveness of
the organisations.
Funded primarily by central government,
England’s National Youth Agency provides:
• support for those working with young
people;
• information and publishing services; and
• support for curriculum development.
It is also responsible for the accreditation
of training and staff development for
youth workers.
The Welsh Office provides grant aid to
national youth service bodies w ith headquarters
in Wales and has established a Wales Youth
Agency similar to the one in England.
In Scotland the youth service forms part
of community education, which is promoted
by the Scottish Community Education
Council. The Scottish Office gives grants to
voluntary youth organisations to assist them
with their headquarters expenditure and staff
training and development.
In Northern Ireland the education and
library boards provide and fund youth clubs
and outdoor activity centres, help pay the
running costs of registered voluntary youth
units, advise and support youth groups and
assist young people visiting the rest of
Britain, Ireland and overseas in connection
with annual camps and award schemes. The
Youth Council for Northern Ireland advises
the education system on the development of
the youth service, promotes provision of
facilities and encourages cross-community
activity among young people. It also helps co¬
ordinate youth service resources and provides
funds to help voluntary youth organisations’
headquarters meet their running costs.
Voluntary Youth Organisations
National voluntary youth organisations
undertake a significant share of youth
activities through local groups, which raise
most of their day-to-day expenses by their
own efforts. Many receive financial and other
help from LEAs, which also make available
facilities in many areas. The voluntary
organisations vary greatly in character and
include the uniformed organisations such as
the Scouts and Girl Guides. Some
organisations are church-based. Some also
represent Jews and Muslims. Sport and the
arts are catered for by various bodies. In
Wales Urdd Gobaith Cymru (the Welsh
League of Youth) provides cultural, sporting
and language-based activities for young
Welsh speakers and learners.
431
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Thousands of youth clubs encourage
their members to participate in sport,
cultural and other creative activities. Some
youth clubs provide information, counselling
and advice.
Many local authorities and voluntary
youth organisations have responded to new
needs in society by making provision, for
example, for the young unemployed, young
people from the ethnic minorities, young
people in inner cities or rural areas and
those in trouble or especially vulnerable.
Other areas of concern are homelessness and
provision for handicapped young people.
Many authorities have youth committees
on which official and voluntary bodies are
represented. They employ youth officers to
co-ordinate youth work and to arrange in-
service training. There are also youth
councils, which are representative bodies of
young people from local youth organisations.
Youth Workers
In England and Wales a two-year training
course at certain universities and higher
education colleges produces qualified youth
and community workers; several
undergraduate part-time and postgraduate
courses are also available. In Scotland one-,
two- and three-year courses are provided at
colleges of education. Students from
Northern Ireland attend courses run in
universities and colleges in Britain and the
Irish Republic.
Other Organisations Concerned with
Young People
Finance is provided by many grant-giving
foundations and trusts for activities involving
young people. The Prince’s Trust and the
Royal Jubilee Trust provide grants and
practical help to individuals and
organisations; areas of concern include urban
deprivation, unemployment, homelessness,
and young offenders. Efforts are also made to
assist ethnic minorities.
The Duke of Edinburgh’s Award Scheme
challenges young people from Britain and
other Commonwealth countries to meet
certain standards in activities such as
community service, expeditions, the
development of personal interests, social and
practical skills and physical recreation.
Voluntary Service by Young People
Thousands of young people voluntarily
undertake community service designed to
help those in need, including elderly and
disabled people. Organisations responsible for
community service, such as Community
Service Volunteers, International Voluntary
Service and the British Trust for
Conservation Volunteers, receive grants from
the Government. Many schools also
organise community service work as part of
the curriculum, and voluntary work in the
community is sponsored by a number
of churches.
Further Reading
Education After 16. Aspects of Britain series, HMSO, 1994.
Education Reforms in Schools. Aspects of Britain series, F1MSO, 1994.
432
27 Religion
Introduction 433
Established Churches 434
Wales 436
The Anglican Communion 436
Free Churches 436
Roman Catholic Church 437
Other Christian Churches 437
Other Religions 438
Co-operation between Faiths 439
Everyone in Britain has the right to religious freedom without interference
from the community or the State. Religious organisations and groups may
own property, run schools, and promote their beliefs in speech and writing.
There is no religious bar to the holding of public office.
INTRODUCTION
Most of the world’s religions are represented
in Britain, including large Hindu, Jewish,
Muslim and Sikh communities, but Britain is
predominantly Christian. Non-religious
alternatives for humanists and atheists are
offered by organisations such as the British
Humanist Association and the National
Secular Society.
Religious Freedom
Britain has a long tradition of religious
tolerance. Freedom of conscience in religious
matters was achieved gradually from the
17th century onwards. The laws
discriminating against minority religious
groups were gradually administered less
harshly and then finally repealed. Heresy
ceased to be a legal offence with the passage
of the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction Act 1677,
and the Toleration Act 1688 granted freedom
of worship to Protestant minority groups.
In 1828 the repeal of the Test and
Corporation Acts gave nonconformists full
political rights, making it possible for them to
be appointed to public office. Roman
Catholics gained political rights under the
Roman Catholic Relief Act 1829, and the
Jewish Relief Act 1858 enabled Jews to become
Members of Parliament. The religious tests
imposed on prospective students and
academic staff of the universities of Oxford,
Cambridge and Durham were successively
abolished by Acts of 1854, 1856 and 1871.
Similar restrictions on the staff of Scottish
universities were formally removed in 1932.
The past 30 years have seen the
acceptance of a wide variety of religious
beliefs and of the traditions of large numbers
of immigrants of different nationalities.
Arrangements are made at places of work to
allow the members of non-Christian religions
to follow their religious observances.
Relations with the State
There are two established churches in
Britain, that is, churches legally recognised as
official churches of the State: in England the
Church of England, and in Scotland the
(Presbyterian) Church of Scotland. Ministers
of the established churches, as well as clergy
belonging to other religious groups, work in
services run by the State, such as the armed
433
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
forces, national hospitals and prisons, and are
paid a salary for such services by the State.
Voluntary schools provided by religious
denominations may be wholly or partly
maintained from public funds. Religious
education in publicly maintained schools is
required by law throughout Britain, as is a
daily act of collective worship (see p. 420).
Religious broadcasting is subject to some
legislative controls (see p. 470).
The Government contributes towards the
upkeep of nearly 300 redundant Church of
England churches for which no alternative
use can be found but which are of
architectural or historic importance. The
contribution for the period 1994 to 1997 will
be about £7.2 million. In 1993 the
Government launched the Historic Chapels
Trust, which aims to preserve the redundant
chapels and places of worship of other
denominations and faiths.
The State does not contribute to general
church expenses although some limited state
aid does help repair historic churches; in
1993-94, for instance, English Heritage grants
to churches totalled £10 million. Assistance is
also given to meet some of the costs of
repairing cathedrals and comparable
buildings; some £4 million is being made
available in each of the years 1994-95 and
1995-96. This funding is not restricted to
Church of England buildings.
Involvement in Social Issues
Religious involvement in broader social issues
was highlighted in the Church of England
report Faith in the City: A Call for Action by
Church and Nation, published in 1985. This
led to the establishment in 1988 of the
Church of England’s Church Urban Fund,
which aims to raise money for the Church’s
work in inner city and other priority areas.
By June 1993 it had raised over £24.5 million
and given grants to 550 inner city projects.
Organisations belonging to other churches
and religious groups are also closely involved
with a wide range of social issues.
The Inner Cities Religious Council aims to
provide faith communities with a new and
effective way of working together in the inner
cities and deprived urban areas in order to
bring about real and lasting change. It is
chaired by a government minister at the
Department of the Environment and its
members are drawn from the Christian,
Hindu, Jewish, Muslim and Sikh faiths.
Statistics on Religious Affiliation
There is no standard information about the
number of members of religious groups since
questions are not normally asked about
religious beliefs in censuses or for other
official purposes, except in Northern Ireland.
Each group adopts its own way of counting
its members, and the membership figures in
this chapter—supplied by the religious groups
themselves—are therefore approximate.
There has been a fall in recent years in
the number of full-time ministers and the
number of adults recorded as members of
most of the larger Christian churches. At the
same time there has been significant growth
in a range of independent churches, and in
new religious movements. Surveys have also
revealed that many people who do not belong
to religious groups claim to be religious and
say they believe in God.
ESTABLISHED CHURCHES
Church of England
The Church of England, founded by St
Augustine in AD 597, became the established
church during the Reformation in the 16th
century. Its form of worship was set out in
successive versions of the Book of Common
Prayer from 1549 onwards. The Church of
England’s relationship with the State is one
of mutual obligation, since the Church’s
privileges are balanced by certain duties it
must fulfil.
The Monarch is the ‘Supreme Governor’
of the Church of England and must always
be a member of the Church, and promise to
uphold it. Church of England archbishops,
bishops and deans of cathedrals are appointed
by the Monarch on the advice of the Prime
Minister, although the Crown Appointments
Commission, which includes lay and clergy
representatives, plays a decisive part in the
selection of archbishops and diocesan bishops.
434
RELIGION
All clergy swear allegiance to the Crown. The
Church can regulate its own worship. The
two archbishops (of Canterbury and York),
the bishops of London, Durham and
Winchester, and 21 other senior bishops sit in
the House of Lords. Clergy of the Church,
together with those of the Church of
Scotland, the Church of Ireland and the
Roman Catholic Church, may not sit in the
House of Commons.
The Church has two provinces: Canterbury,
comprising 30 dioceses, including the Diocese
in Europe; and York, with 14 dioceses. The
dioceses are divided into archdeaconries and
deaneries, which are in turn divided into
about 13,000 parishes. There are, altogether,
about 10,800 full-time stipendiary Church of
England clergy—men and women—working
within the diocesan structure, excluding
mainland Europe. In 1991 an estimated
225,000 people were baptised into the Church
in the two provinces, excluding the Diocese
in Europe; of these, 180,000 were under one
year old, representing 27 per cent of live
births. In the same year there were 55,246
confirmations. Attendances at services on a
normal Sunday are around 1.1 million. In
1991, 102,840 marriages were solemnised in
the Church of England and the Church in
Wales. These accounted for 66 per cent of all
marriages with religious ceremonies, and
34 per cent of all marriages in England and
Wales. Many people who rarely, if ever,
attend services still regard themselves as
belonging to the Church of England.
The central governing body is the General
Synod, which comprises separate houses of
bishops, clergy and lay members. Lay people
are also concerned with church government
in the parishes. The Synod is the centre of an
administrative system dealing with such
matters as missionary work, inter-church
relations, social questions, and recruitment
and training for the ministry. It also covers
other church work in Britain and overseas,
the care of church buildings and their
contents, church schools (which are
maintained largely from public funds),
colleges and institutes of higher education,
and voluntary and parish education.
The Church’s investment income from
historic sources is managed mainly by the
Church Commissioners. Most of the
remainder of the Church’s income is
provided by local voluntary donations.
The average annual stipend of a Church of
England priest is about £ 12,800; the average
value of additional benefits, including free
housing and a non-contributory pension, is
estimated to be about £9,000.
In November 1992 the General Synod
voted in favour of legislation allowing the
ordination of women to the priesthood. The
measure was subsequently approved by both
Houses of Parliament and received the Royal
Assent. The first women priests were
ordained in March 1994. The measure also
provided for those unable to accept the
ordination of women, including the payment
of compensation to clergy who feel they have
to leave the ministry of the Church. Two
bishops have been appointed to provide
additional pastoral care to those members and
parishes of the Church who remain opposed
to the ordination of women to the priesthood.
Church of Scotland
The Church of Scotland has a presbyterian
form of government, that is, government by
ministers and elders, all of whom are
ordained to office. It became the national
church following the Scottish Reformation
and legislation of the Scottish Parliament,
consolidated in the Treaty of Union 1707 and
the Church of Scotland Act 1921, the latter
confirming its complete freedom in all
spiritual matters. It appoints its own office
bearers, and its affairs are not subject to any
civil authority.
The adult communicant membership of
the Church of Scotland is 732,963; there are
about 1,215 ministers serving in parishes.
Both men and women may join the ministry.
About 1,312 churches are governed locally by
Kirk Sessions, consisting of ministers and
elders. Above the Kirk Session is the
Presbytery. The General Assembly,
consisting of elected ministers and elders,
meets annually under the presidency of an
elected moderator, who serves for one year.
The Monarch is normally represented at the
General Assembly by the Lord High
Commissioner.
435
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
There are also a number of independent
Scottish Presbyterian churches, largely
descended from groups which broke away
from the Church of Scotland.
WALES
The Church in Wales became part of the
Anglican Church at the Reformation. The Bible
was translated into Welsh by Bishop Morgan
in 1588. During the 18th and 19th centuries a
powerful nonconformist (or Free Church—see
below) movement developed throughout
Wales: a census of religion in 1851 found that
over 80 per cent of those at worship attended
a nonconformist chapel. This strength was
reflected in the disestablishment of the Church
in Wales in 1920. The Church in Wales has
some 101,000 members. The Church is
responsible for the care of the country’s
medieval churches and cathedrals; at present
only men may join its priesthood.
THE ANGLICAN COMMUNION
The Anglican Communion comprises
35 autonomous Churches in Britain and
abroad, and three regional councils overseas
with a total membership of about 70 million.
In the British Isles there are four Anglican
Churches: the Church of England, the Church
in Wales, the Scottish Episcopal Church, and
the Church of Ireland.
Every ten years the Lambeth Conference
meets for consultation between all Anglican
bishops. The last Conference was held in
Canterbury in 1988. Presided over by the
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Conference has
no executive authority, but enjoys considerable
influence. The Anglican Consultative Council,
an assembly of lay people and clergy as well as
of bishops, meets every two or three years and
is intended to allow consultation within the
Anglican Communion. The Primates Meeting
brings together the senior bishops from each
Church at similar intervals.
FREE CHURCHES
The term Tree Churches’ is often used to
describe some of the Protestant churches in
Britain which, unlike the Church of England
and the Church of Scotland, are not
established churches. Free Churches have
existed in various forms since the
Reformation, developing their own traditions
over the years. Their members have also been
known as dissenters or nonconformists. All
the major Free Churches allow both men and
women to become ministers.
The Methodist Church, the largest of
the Free Churches, with nearly 410,000
adult full members and a community of more
than 1.3 million, originated in the 18th
century following the evangelical revival
under John Wesley (1703-91). The present
church is based on the 1932 union of most of
the separate Methodist Churches. It has
3,601 ministers and 6,950 places of worship.
The Salvation Army was founded in
the East End of London in 1865 by
William Booth (1829-1912). Within
Britain it is second only to the
Government as a provider of social
services. It is the largest provider of
hostel accommodation, offering 4,000
beds every night. Other services
include work with alcoholics, prison
chaplaincy and a family tracing
service which takes on 5,000 cases
each year. The Army in Britain is
served by 1,800 officers (ordained
ministers) and runs more than 1,000
worship centres.
The Baptists first achieved an organised
form in Britain in the 17th century. Today
they are mainly organised in groups of
churches, most of which belong to the
Baptist Union of Great Britain (re-formed in
1812), with about 150,000 members, 2,300
ministers and 2,000 places of worship. There
are also separate Baptist Unions for
Scotland, Wales and Ireland, and other
independent Baptist Churches.
The United Reformed Church, with
some 111,000 members, 1,807 ministers
and 1,803 places of worship, was formed in
1972 following the merger of the
Congregational Church in England and Wales
(the oldest Protestant minority in Britain,
whose origins can be traced back to the
Puritans of the 16th century) with the
436
RELIGION
Presbyterian Church of England, many of
whose members are descended from
Scottish Presbyterians. This was the first
union of two different churches in Britain
since the Reformation in the 16th century.
In 1981 there was a further merger with
the Reformed Association of the Churches
of Christ.
Among the other Free Churches are the
Presbyterian Church in Ireland, the
Presbyterian (or Calvinistic Methodist)
Church of Wales and the Union of Welsh
Independents. There are also groupings of
‘Black Majority’ Churches.
ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH
The formal structure of the Roman
Catholic Church in England and Wales,
which ceased to exist after the Reformation,
was restored in 1850. The Scottish Church’s
formal structure went out of existence in the
early 17th century and was restored in 1878.
However, throughout this period
Catholicism never disappeared entirely.
There are now seven Roman Catholic
provinces in Great Britain, each under an
archbishop, and 30 dioceses, each under a
bishop (22 in England and Wales and eight
in Scotland, independently responsible to
the Pope). There are almost 3,300 parishes
and about 7,300 priests (only men may
become priests). Northern Ireland has six
dioceses, some with territory partly in the
Irish Republic. About one British citizen in
ten claims to be a Roman Catholic. The
Pope is represented diplomatically in Britain
by an Apostolic Pro-Nuncio.
The Roman Catholic Church attaches
great importance to the education of its
children and requires its members to try to
bring up their children in the Catholic faith.
Almost 5 per cent of the teachers in Britain’s
2,500 Catholic schools are members of
religious orders. These orders also undertake
other social work; about 250 Roman Catholic
religious orders, congregations and societies
are represented in Britain, as are
congregations representing about 25 different
nationalities who live in Britain. Most
Catholic schools are maintained out of
public funds.
OTHER CHRISTIAN CHURCHES
Other Protestant Churches include the
Unitarians and Free Christians, whose
origins are traceable to the Reformation, and
the Pentecostalists, whose movement began
in the early 20th century. The two main
Pentecostalist organisations operating in
Britain are the Assemblies of God
(approximately 50,000 members) and the
Elim Pentecostal Church (approximately
42,000 members). Recently both Pentecostal
Churches have applied to join the Free
Church Federal Council (see p. 439).
The Religious Society of Friends
(Quakers), with about 18,000 adult
members in Britain and 450 places of
worship, was founded in the middle of the
17th century under the leadership of George
Fox (1624—91). Silent worship is central to
its life as a religious organisation. Emphasis
is also placed on social concern and peace¬
making.
The Christian Brethren is a Protestant
body organised in its present form by J. N.
Darby (1800-82). There are two branches:
the Open Brethren (with an estimated
43,500 members) and the Closed or
Exclusive Brethren (with an estimated
7,600 members).
The Christian ‘house church’ movement
(or ‘new churches’) began in the early 1970s
and now has an estimated membership of
almost 110,000. Services were originally held
in private houses but now groups use a
variety of hired buildings. These non-
denominational congregations may come
together as ‘streams’, of which some of the
better known are New Frontiers, Pioneer
and Ichthus.
Many Christian communities of foreign
origin, including the Orthodox, Lutheran
and Reformed Churches of various
European countries, and the Coptic
Orthodox Church and the Armenian
Church, have established their own centres
of worship, particularly in London. All these
churches operate in a variety of languages.
The largest is probably the Greek Orthodox
Church, many of whose members are of
Cypriot origin. It is represented in many
cities throughout Britain.
437
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
There are also several other religious
organisations in Britain which were founded
in the United States in the last century.
These include the Jehovah’s Witnesses, the
Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints (the Mormon Church), the Seventh-
Day Adventists, the Christian Scientists and
the Spiritualists.
OTHER RELIGIONS
The Jewish Community
Jews first settled in England at the time of
the Norman Conquest and remained until
banished by royal decree in 1290. The present
community in Britain dates from 1656,
having been founded by those of Spanish and
Portuguese origin, known as Sephardim. Later
more settlers came from Germany and Eastern
Europe; they are known as Ashkenazim.
The present Jewish community in Britain,
numbering about 300,000, is the second largest
in Europe. It is divided into two main groups.
Some 77 per cent of the majority Ashkenazi
Jews are Orthodox and most acknowledge the
authority of the Chief Rabbi. The Sephardi
Orthodox element follow their own spiritual
head. The recently established Masorti
movement, the Reform movement, founded in
1840, and the Liberal and Progressive
movement, established in 1901, account for
most of the remaining 23 per cent.
Jewish congregations in Britain number
about 350. About one in three Jewish
children attend Jewish schools, some of which
are supported by public funds. Several
agencies care for elderly and handicapped
people. The officially recognised representative
body is the Board of Deputies of British
Jews, which was established in 1760.
The Muslim Community
The most recent estimates suggest that
Britain’s Muslim population is between
1.5-2 million. The largest number originate
from Pakistan and Bangladesh, while sizeable
groups have come from India, Cyprus, the
Arab world, Malaysia and parts of Africa. A
growing community of British-born
Muslims, mainly the children of immigrant
parents, includes an increasing number of
converts to Islam.
There are nearly 500 mosques and
numerous Muslim prayer centres
throughout Britain. Mosques are not
only places of worship; they also offer
instruction in the Muslim way of life
and facilities for educational and
welfare activities.
The first mosque in Britain was established
at Woking, Surrey, in 1890. Mosques now
range from converted houses in many towns
to the Central Mosque in Regent’s Park,
London, and its associated Islamic Cultural
Centre, one of the most important Muslim
institutions in the Western world. The
Central Mosque has the largest congregation
in Britain, and during festivals it may number
over 30,000. There are also important
mosques and cultural centres in Liverpool,
Manchester, Leicester, Birmingham,
Bradford, Cardiff, Edinburgh and Glasgow.
Many of the mosques belong to various
Muslim organisations, and both the Sunni
and the Shia traditions within Islam are
represented among the Muslim community in
Britain. Members of some of the major Sufi
traditions have also developed branches in
British cities.
The Sikh Community
A large British Sikh community, comprising
over 300,000, originates mainly from India.
The largest groups of Sikhs are in Greater
London, Manchester, Birmingham,
Nottingham and Wolverhampton. Sikh
temples or gurdwaras cater for the religious,
educational, social welfare and cultural needs
of their community. The oldest gurdwara in
London was established in 1908 and the
largest is in Southall, Middlesex. There are
over 140 gurdwaras in Britain.
The Hindu Community
The Hindu community in Britain comprises
around 320,000 members and also originates
largely from India. The largest groups of
Hindus are to be found in Leicester, different
438
RELIGION
areas of London, Birmingham and Bradford.
The first Hindu temple or mandir was
opened in London in 1962 and there are now
over 150 mandirs in Britain.
Buddhism
The Buddhist community in Britain consists
largely of adherents of British or Western
origin. There are about 150 Buddhist groups
in Britain and some 100 centres, with at least
15 monasteries and a number of temples. All
the main schools of Buddhism are
represented. The Buddhist Society promotes
the principles of Buddhism; it does not
belong to any particular school of Buddhism.
Other Religious Communities
Other religious communities include about
30,000 Jains, whose religion is of ancient Indian
origin. A deresar, or Jain temple, opened in
Leicester in 1988. The Zoroastrian religion,
or Mazdaism, originated in ancient Iran. It is
mainly represented in Britain by the Parsi
community, who are by origin from the South
Asian sub-continent. The Baha’i movement,
originating in 19th-century Iran, regards all
the major religions as divine in origin; there
are an estimated 5,000 Baha’is in Britain.
New Religious Movements
A large number of new religious movements
or cults, mainly established since the Second
World War and often with overseas origins,
are active in Britain. Examples include the
Church of Scientology, the Transcendental
Meditation movement and the Unification
Church (popularly known as the ‘Moonies’).
In response to public concern about the
activities of some of these cults the
Government provided start-up funding from
1987 to 1993 for the Information Network
Focus on Religious Movements, which is a
group supported by the main churches. It
seeks to provide objective information about
new religious movements.
Further Reading
Religion. Aspects of Britain series, HMSO, 1992.
CO-OPERATION BETWEEN FAITHS
A number of organisations exist which seek
to develop relations between different
religions in Britain. They include the Inter-
Faith Network for the United Kingdom,
which links a wide range of organisations
with an interest in inter-faith relations,
including representative bodies from the
Baha’i, Buddhist, Christian, Hindu, Jain,
Jewish, Muslim, Sikh and Zoroastrian faith
communities. Other organisations include the
Council of Christians and Jews, which works
for better understanding among members of
the two religions and deals with issues in the
educational and social fields.
Co-operation among the Churches
The Council of Churches for Britain and
Ireland was established in 1990, replacing the
former British Council of Churches and
taking over its role as the main overall body
for the Christian churches in Britain. The
Council co-ordinates the work of its 30
member churches, which are also grouped in
separate ecumenical bodies for England,
Scotland, Wales and Ireland.
The Free Church Federal Council, with
20 member churches, includes most of the
Free Churches of England and Wales. It
promotes co-operation among the Free
Churches (especially in hospital chaplaincy
and in education matters) and is a channel for
communication with government.
Inter-church discussions about the search
for unity now take place through
international as well as national bodies.
The Roman Catholic, Orthodox and
Lutheran Churches are represented on some
of these, as are the Anglican and some of the
Free Churches.
The Anglican Churches, the Church of
Scotland and the main Free Churches are
also members of the World Council of
Churches. This organisation links some
310 churches in over 100 countries around
the world.
439
28 The Arts
Introduction 440
Drama 445
Music 447
Opera 449
Dance 449
Films 450
Visual Arts 453
Literature and Libraries 457
Artistic and cultural activity in Britain ranges from the highest professional
standards to a wide variety of amateur performances and events. Thirty-six
per cent of adults attend events in one or more of the major art forms,
around 4 million people went to more than 650 professional arts festivals in
Britain in 1993.
INTRODUCTION
Britain’s artistic and cultural heritage is one
of the richest in the world. The origins of
English literature, one of the world’s most
influential bodies of writing, can be traced
back to medieval times, while over the
centuries Britain has amassed some of the
finest collections of works of art. The
performing arts also have a long and
distinguished history.
London is one of the leading world
centres for the arts. Other large cities,
including Birmingham, Sheffield,
Manchester, Edinburgh, Glasgow and
Cardiff, have also sustained and developed
their reputations as centres of artistic
excellence in recent years. Arts festivals
attract wide interest. Many British
playwrights, composers, film-makers,
painters, writers, actors, singers, musicians
and dancers enjoy international reputations.
They include, for example, Harold Pinter, Sir
Colin Davies, Sir Andrew Lloyd Webber,
David Hockney, Sir V.S. Naipaul, Vanessa
Redgrave and Sir Ian McKellen. Television
and radio bring a wide range of arts events to
a large audience. At an amateur level,
numerous groups and societies for the arts
make use of local talent and resources.
Department of National Heritage
The Secretary of State for National Heritage,
who is a member of the Cabinet, is
responsible for arts policy. The office was
created in 1992 and its holder heads the
Department of National Heritage (see
p. 441), which replaced the Office of Arts
and Libraries as well as taking on a range of
responsibilities from other departments. The
Department determines government policy
and administers government expenditure on
national museums and art galleries in
England, the Arts Council of England (see
p. 442), the British Library and other
national arts and heritage bodies. Other
responsibilities include the regulation of the
film industry, broadcasting, press regulation,
the National Lottery and the export licensing
of antiques.
The Secretaries of State for Wales,
Scotland and Northern Ireland are
responsible for the national museums,
galleries and libraries in their countries, and
for other cultural matters, including the
running of their respective arts councils.
The Government’s arts policies aim to:
• develop a high standard of artistic and
cultural activity throughout Britain;
• encourage innovation; and
440
THE ARTS
• promote public access to, and
appreciation of, the arts, crafts and the
cultural heritage.
The Department of National Heritage
provides funds and advice, and encourages
partnership with the private sector,
including business sponsorship. National
museums and galleries are given an
incentive to increase their resources, for
example, through trading and other
activities. An important concept in funding
policy is the ‘arm’s length’ principle, by
which government funds are distributed to
arts organisations indirectly, through bodies
such as the Arts Councils and the British
Film Institute. This principle helps to avoid
political influence over funding decisions by
ensuring that funds are allocated by those
best qualified to do so.
Local Authorities
Local authorities maintain around 1,000 local
museums and art galleries and a network of
over 4,000 public libraries. They also support
many arts buildings, arts organisations and
artistic events in their areas, providing grant
aid for professional and voluntary
organisations, including orchestras and
theatre, opera and dance companies. They
undertake direct promotions and contribute to
the cost of new or converted buildings for the
arts. In England revenue support from local
authorities is estimated to be about
£180 million a year. Arts education in
schools, colleges, evening institutes and
community centres is the responsibility of
central government education departments, in
partnership with local education authorities
and voluntary bodies.
Finance
Planned central government expenditure
through the Department of National
Heritage, excluding sport, amounts to
£920 million in 1994-95, of which
£186 million is channelled through the Arts
Council of England to support the
performing and visual arts; over £80 million
goes to the British Library. Grants are also
made to the British Film Institute, the Crafts
Council, certain other museums and arts
bodies, and to the National Heritage
Memorial Fund. The Fund helps organisations
wishing to acquire, for the public benefit,
land, buildings, works of art and other
objects associated with the national heritage.
Planned 1994—95 expenditure by the Arts
Councils for Scotland and Wales (see p. 442)
is £23.8 million and £13.5 million
respectively. The Scottish Office also aims to
provide £44 million for Scotland’s National
Galleries and Museums and National Library,
while the Welsh Office provides £23 million
for Wales’s National Museum and National
Library. Planned spending by the Arts
Council of Northern Ireland on the three
major museums there amounts £16 million
in 1994-95.
Business Sponsorship
Industrial and commercial companies offer
vital sponsorship to a wide range of arts. The
Business Sponsorship Incentive Scheme was
introduced in Great Britain in 1984 in
co-operation with the Association for
Business Sponsorship of the Arts (ABSA)
with the aim of raising the overall level of
business sponsorship. (A similar scheme was
set up in Northern Ireland in 1987.) Since its
inception the scheme has brought nearly
£79 million into the arts (including a
government contribution of £25.7 million)
and has attracted 3,600 first-time sponsors.
An estimated 80 per cent of the awards
have been made to arts organisations outside
London. Between 1994—95 and 1996-97 the
Government is making available
£14.4 million to match new sponsorships.
Some recent business sponsorships
include:
• a record £3.3 million agreement with the
Royal Shakespeare Company, allowing
for more international touring and the
production of educational programmes in
Britain (Allied Domecq);
• a Goya exhibition at the Royal Academy
(The Times and Classic FM radio) and
a Picasso exhibition at the Tate (Ernst
& Young);
• BT’s commitment of £500,000 to British
orchestras; and
441
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
• WH Smith sponsorship of an Arts
Council Childrens’ Literature summer
school in Oxford.
Further support is encouraged by tax
concessions which allow companies and
individuals to obtain tax relief on donations to
arts charities. For example, under the Gift
Aid scheme, single gifts of £250 and over in
any one year qualify for tax relief.
Foundation for Sport and the Arts
The Foundation for Sport and the Arts was
set up in 1991 by the Pool Promoters
Association, with grants expected to total
£60 million a year. About two-thirds of the
revenue is used to benefit sport and the
remainder to benefit the arts.
National Lottery
The new National Lottery (see p. 493) is
expected to generate substantial funds for the
arts, heritage, sports, charities and for a
millennium fund to celebrate the year 2000.
One-fifth of net proceeds of the lottery will
go on the arts, including film and crafts.
Arts Councils
The main channels for government aid to the
performing arts are the various independent
Arts Councils. The Arts Council of Great
Britain ceased to operate on 1 April 1994 and
was succeeded by the Arts Councils of
England, Scotland and Wales. The Scottish
Arts Council and the Arts Council of Wales
are now responsible to the Scottish and
Welsh Offices respectively. Northern Ireland
has its own independent Arts Council.
The aims and functions of these Arts
Councils are to:
• develop and improve the knowledge,
understanding and practice of the arts;
• increase their accessibility to the public;
and
• advise and co-operate with government
departments, local authorities and other
organisations.
The Councils give financial help and
advice to organisations ranging from the
major opera, dance and drama companies;
orchestras and festivals; to small touring
theatres and experimental groups. They also
provide funds for the training of arts
administrators and help arts organisations to
develop other sources of income, including
box-office, trading profits, sponsorship and
local authority support. They encourage
contemporary and traditional dance, mime,
jazz, literature, photography and art films,
and help professional creative writers,
choreographers, composers, artists and
photographers. The Councils also promote
art exhibitions and tours and make funds
available for some specialist training courses
in the arts. Emphasis is being placed on
obtaining funds through partnership
arrangements with local authorities and other
agencies, and from commercial sources. As an
extension of their responsibilities for funding
the arts and arts organisations, the Councils
promote the arts through broadcasting, film
and video (see p. 452).
Developments in Arts Funding
In 1991 ten Regional Arts Boards were
created to replace the 12 Regional Arts
Associations in England. The Boards offer
financial assistance to artists and arts
organisations and advise on, and sometimes
help to promote, arts activities. They are
financed mainly by the Arts Council of
England, with smaller sums from the British
Film Institute and Crafts Council, as well as
from local authorities. Through a system of
forward planning and budgeting, the Boards
are subject to a clearly focused system of
financial accountability to their national
funders. One-third of the members of each
Board are nominated by local authorities.
Boards also include representatives of the
regional business community as well as
others with expertise and interest in the arts.
The Boards have also been given
responsibility for funding over 60 client
organisations hitherto financed by the Arts
Council of Great Britain. However, the Arts
Council of England retains funding
responsibility for the four national companies
—the Royal Opera House, the English
National Opera, the Royal Shakespeare
442
THE ARTS
Company and the Royal National Theatre—
as well as for the South Bank Centre. It also
remains responsible for publishing works, for
touring companies without a regional base
and for other arts organisations which cannot
be assessed on a regional level.
The Arts and Minority Communities
The arts activities undertaken by Britain’s
diverse communities embrace both
traditional and new forms of artistic
expression. In seeking to reflect and
encourage this the former Arts Council of
Great Britain devoted particular attention
to black and Asian dance and drama. In
1990 ADiTi, a development organisation for
South Asian dance, was launched in
Bradford. The Council expanded its
training to include arts administration and
technical skills.
The Minorities Arts Advisory Service is
an independent organisation which provides
information on, and training in, the arts of
these communities.
Arts and Disabled People
In a 1993 report the Arts Council of Great
Britain expressed concern that the
buildings where arts activities take place
often fail to meet the needs of disabled
people, despite sensitive planning of new
buildings and a considerable amount of
work undertaken by local authorities and
arts venues.
The ADAPT Trust, a voluntary
organisation set up in 1989, contributes
towards the cost of making new facilities
accessible to disabled people. Its funds are
raised from government and private sector
sponsorship, the largest contributions coming
from the Carnegie (UK) Trust.
The Arts Council of England’s Disability
Unit produces the Arts Disability
Directory, which provides information on all
aspects of arts and disability. The Unit also
funds the Disability Arts Magazine and the
National Disability Arts Forum.
The Arts Council of England’s
apprenticeship scheme gives disabled people
the opportunity to acquire skills while working
in major arts organisations. Apprenticeships
now exist in the Royal Shakespeare
Company, the Belgrade Theatre in Coventry,
and the Bournemouth Orchestra.
Arts Centres
Over 200 arts centres in Britain give people
the chance of enjoying and taking part in a
range of activities, with educational projects
becoming increasingly important. Nearly all
arts centres are professionally managed and
most are supported by volunteer groups.
Most arts centres are converted buildings,
including former churches, warehouses,
schools, town halls and private houses. They
are assisted mainly by Regional Arts Boards
and local authorities, while the Arts Council
of England funds two large centres in
London—the South Bank Centre and the
Institute of Contemporary Arts. Many
theatres and art galleries also provide a focal
point for the community by making available
facilities for other arts.
British Council
The British Council (see p. 130) promotes a
knowledge of British culture overseas and
maintains libraries (including film libraries) in
many of the 108 countries in which it is
represented. The Visiting Arts Office, an
autonomous body administered by the British
Council, promotes foreign arts in Britain. It
provides a clearing house for British and
overseas arts organisations, advises on touring
matters and makes awards for projects.
Broadcasting
BBC radio and television and the
independent companies (see Chapter 29)
broadcast a wide variety of drama, opera,
ballet, and music; and general arts magazine
programmes and documentaries. These have
won many international awards at festivals
such as the Prix Italia and Montreux
International Television Festivals.
Independent television companies also make
grants for arts promotion in their regions.
Broadcasting is thus a major medium for
making the arts available to the general public
443
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and is a crucial source of work for actors,
musicians, writers, composers, technicians
and others in the arts world. It has created
its own forms—nothing like arts
documentaries or drama series, for instance,
exists in any other medium. Broadcasters
commission and produce a vast quantity of
new work. Television and radio provide
critical debate, information and education
about the arts.
The BBC also has six orchestras, which
employ many of Britain’s full-time professional
musicians. Each week it broadcasts about 100
hours of classical and other music (both live
and recorded) on its Radio 3 (FM) channel.
BBC Radio 1 (FM) broadcasts rock and pop
music 24 hours a day and a large part of the
output of BBC Radio 2 (FM) is popular and
light music. There are at present two national
commercial radio stations:
• Classic FM, which broadcasts mainly
classical music; and
• Virgin 1215, which plays broad-based
rock music.
Much of the output of Britain’s local radio
stations consists of popular and light music.
The BBC regularly commissions new
music, particularly by British composers,
and sponsors concerts, competitions and
festivals. Each summer it presents and
broadcasts the BBC Promenade Concerts
(the Troms’), the world’s largest music
festival, at the Royal Albert Hall. Classic FM
sponsors the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra;
it also organised a Summer Music Festival
in 1994.
The Press
Many national and local newspapers devote
considerable space to coverage of the arts, and
developments in the arts are also covered in
the ethnic minority press and in periodicals
such as the Spectator and New Statesman and
Society (see Chapter 29). Weekly ‘listings’
magazines, including Time Out, provide
details of cultural and other events in London
and other large cities.
There are also a large number of specialist
publications which cover specific aspects of
the arts, including the Times Literary
Supplement, Film Monthly, The Antique
Collector and Opera. A number of
publications publish original literature,
including the London Magazine, and Granta,
which publishes fiction as well as cultural
journalism. New Musical Express (NME)
and Melody Maker cover rock and pop music.
The newspaper Stage and Television Today is
directed at professional actors and others in
the industry.
Festivals
Some 650 professional arts festivals take place
in Britain each year. The Edinburgh
International Festival, featuring a wide range
of arts, is the largest of its kind in the world.
Other annual festivals held in Edinburgh
include International Folk and Jazz Festivals
and the Film and Television Festival. The
Mayfest, the second largest festival in Britain,
takes place in Glasgow. Some well-known
festivals concentrating on music are the
Three Choirs Festival, which has taken place
annually for more than 260 years in Gloucester,
Worcester or Hereford; the Cheltenham
Festival, largely devoted to contemporary
British music; and the Aldeburgh festival.
Among others catering for a number of art
forms are the Royal National Eisteddfod of
Wales, the National Gaelic Mod in Scotland,
the Belfast Festival at Queen’s, and the
festivals in Brighton, Buxton, Chichester,
Harrogate, Llangollen, Malvern, Pitlochry,
Salisbury, and York. Many much smaller
towns also hold arts festivals. A major event
in London is the Netting Hill Carnival, in
which the Afro-Caribbean community plays a
prominent part; over one million people
visited the Carnival in 1993.
Arts 2000
Arts 2000 is an Arts Council initiative which
celebrates the approach of the millennium.
During each year between 1992 and 2000, a
city, town or region in Britain is being
nominated to celebrate a particular art form,
concluding with the Year of the Artist in
2000.
• The East Midlands was the Region of
Dance in 1993;
444
THE ARTS
• Manchester is the City of Drama 1994,
• Swansea the City of Literature 1995;
• the Northern Region the Region of
Visual Arts 1996;
• the Eastern Region the Region of Opera
and Musical Theatre 1997; and
• West Yorkshire the Region of Photography
and the Electronic Image 1988.
The nomination for the year of architecture
and design 1999 will be announced in
December 1994.
Arts 2000 is a competitive process judged
by expert Arts Council selection committees.
Winners are offered between £250,000 and
£500,000 from Arts Councils’ funds, and are
expected to match this to create a wide-
ranging and imaginative programme with a
strong European context.
DRAMA
Britain is one of the world’s major centres
for theatre, and has a long and rich
dramatic tradition. There are many
companies based not only in London but in
many other cities and towns; in addition
numerous touring companies visit theatres,
festivals and other venues, including arts and
sports centres and social clubs. There were
67 companies in receipt of Arts Council
subsidies in 1992-93 and well over 200 from
regional arts boards.
Contemporary British playwrights
who have received international
recognition, with examples of their
works, include:
• Harold Pinter—The Caretaker, The
Homecoming;
• Tom Stoppard—Jumpers, Arcadia;
• Caryl Churchill—Top Girls, The
Skriker; and
• David Hare—Plenty, and the
trilogy Racing Demon, Murmuring
Judges and The Absence of War.
The musicals of Sir Andrew Lloyd Webber
have been highly successful both in Britain
and overseas; his more recent works are The
Phantom of the Opera and Sunset Boulevard.
Among the best-known directors are Sir
Peter Hall, Richard Eyre, Trevor Nunn,
Adrian Noble, Jonathan Miller, Terry Hands
and Deborah Warner, while the many British
performers who enjoy international
reputations include Sir John Gielgud, Sir
Alec Guinness, Kenneth Branagh, Vanessa
Redgrave, Sir Ian McKellen, Sir Derek
Jacobi, Jonathan Pryce, Albert Finney, Dame
Judi Dench, Juliet Stephenson, Helen
Mirren, Simon Callow, Dame Diana Rigg
and Dame Maggie Smith. British stage
designers such as John Bury, Ralph Koltai
and Carl Toms are internationally recognised.
Britain has about 300 theatres intended for
professional use which can seat between 200
and 2,300 people. Some are privately owned,
but most are owned either municipally or by
non-profit-distributing organisations. Over 40
of these have resident theatre companies
receiving subsidies from the Arts Councils
and Regional Arts Boards. In summer there
are also open air theatres, including one in
London’s Regent’s Park and the Minack
Theatre, which is on an open cliffside near
Land’s End in Cornwall.
Most theatres are commercially run and
self-financing, relying on popular shows and
musicals to be profitable. By contrast,
companies funded by the Arts Councils tend
to offer a variety of traditional and
experimental or innovative productions.
Experimental or innovative work is often
staged in ‘fringe’ theatres in London and other
cities; these are smaller theatres which use a
variety of buildings, such as rooms in pubs.
The Theatres Restoration Fund provided
£4 million in 1992-94 for renovating and
repairing theatres. It focused on backstage
projects for which no other funds were
available. Theatres which were renovated
included the Hackney Empire (London), the
Queen’s (Barnstaple) and the Miners’
Institute (Wrexham). The Fund was financed
jointly by the Government and the Wolfson
Foundation and Family Charitable Trust.
London
London has about 100 theatres, 15 of them
permanently occupied by subsidised
companies. These include:
445
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
• the Royal National Theatre, which stages
a wide range of modern and classical
plays in its three auditoriums on the
South Bank;
• the Royal Shakespeare Company, which
presents plays mainly by Shakespeare and
his contemporaries, as well as some
modern work, both in Stratford-upon-
Avon and in its two auditoriums in the
City’s Barbican Centre; and
• the English Stage Company at the Royal
Court Theatre in Sloane Square, which
stages the work of many new
playwrights.
The largest concentration of London’s
commercial theatres is around Shaftesbury
Avenue. West End theatre attendance was
over 11.5 million in 1993; almost half of
these went to modern musicals.
Table 28.1: Attendances at West
End Theatres, 1987 and 1992
Percentage
Type of Performance 1987 1992
Modern musicals
Modern drama
Traditional musicals
Classical plays
Comedy
Opera/operetta
Ballet/dance
Thrillers/others
Revue/ variety
Children’s shows/
pantomimes
Source: City University Research for the Society of
West End Theatres
In 1989 the partial remains of the Globe
Theatre, where Shakespeare acted, and the
Rose Theatre, where his plays were
performed during his lifetime, were excavated
on the south bank of the Thames; both have
since been listed as ancient monuments. A
modern reconstruction of the Globe Theatre,
near its original site, is in progress.
Regional Theatres
Outside London most cities and many large
towns have at least one theatre. Older theatres
which have been restored include the Theatre
Royal, Newcastle upon Tyne, which dates
from the 18th century; and the Alhambra,
Bradford; the Lyceum, Sheffield; the Theatre
Royal, Bristol; and the Grand Opera House,
Belfast, all dating from the 19th century.
Others, such as the West Yorkshire Playhouse,
Leeds, and the Theatre Royal, Plymouth,
have been built to modern designs. Edinburgh’s
old Empire Theatre has undergone a major
rebuilding and restoration scheme and has
reopened as the Edinburgh Festival Theatre,
providing an international venue for large-
scale productions. Several universities have
theatres which house professional companies
playing to the general public.
Most regional repertory companies
mount about eight to ten productions a
year; several have studio theatres in
addition to the main auditorium, where
they present new or experimental drama and
plays of specialist interest. Repertory theatres
also often function as social centres by
offering concerts, poetry readings and
exhibitions, and by providing restaurants,
bars and shops.
Regional theatre companies with major
reputations include the Citizens’ Theatre,
Glasgow; the Royal Exchange, Manchester;
Bristol Old Vic; West Yorkshire Playhouse;
the Festival Theatre, Chichester; and
Nottingham Playhouse, one of the first
modern regional theatres. Successful
productions from regional theatre companies
often transfer to London’s West End, while
the largest regional theatres receive visits
from the Royal National Theatre or the Royal
Shakespeare Company. Cambridge Theatre
Company, Oxford Stage Company and
English Touring Theatre Company tour the
English regions and worldwide.
Theatre for Young People
Unicorn Theatre for Children and Polka
Children’s Theatre, both in London, present
plays specially written for children; and the
Whirligig Theatre tours throughout Britain.
The Young Vic Company in London and
Contact Theatre Company in Manchester
stage plays for young people. Numerous
Theatre-in-Education companies perform in
28
13
17
7
15
7
4
3
2
51
10
8
8
7
6
4
3
2
1
446
THE ARTS
schools. Some of these companies operate
independently—Theatre Centre, for example,
plays in London and tours further afield.
Others are attached to regional repertory
theatres such as the Wolsey Theatre, Ipswich,
and Greenwich Theatre. Most regional
repertory theatres also mount productions for
younger audiences, and concessionary ticket
prices are generally available for those at
school, college or university. There are also a
number of puppet companies.
There has been a marked growth in youth
theatres, which number more than 500 in
England alone; both the National Youth
Theatre in London and the Scottish Youth
Theatre in Glasgow offer early acting
opportunities to young people.
Dramatic Training
Training for actors, directors, lighting and
sound technicians and stage managers is
provided mainly in drama schools, among
them the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art
(RADA), the Central School of Speech and
Drama, the London Academy of Music and
Dramatic Art, and the Drama Centre (all in
London); the Bristol Old Vic School, the
Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama
(Glasgow) and the Welsh College of Music
and Drama (Cardiff). Theatre design courses,
often based in art schools, are available for
people wanting to train as stage designers. A
number of universities and colleges offer
degree courses in drama.
Amateur Theatre
There are several thousand amateur dramatic
societies throughout Britain. They use a
variety of buildings, including schools and
public halls. Their work is encouraged by a
number of organisations, such as the Central
Council for Amateur Theatre, the National
Drama Conference, the Scottish Community
Drama Association and the Association of
Ulster Drama Festivals. A nationwide
umbrella body, the Voluntary Arts Network,
was established in 1991. Amateur companies
sometimes receive financial support from
local government, Regional Arts Boards and
other bodies.
MUSIC
People in Britain are interested in a wide
range of music, from classical to different
forms of rock and pop music. Jazz, folk,
world and light music, and brass bands also
have substantial followings.
The first National Music Day was held in
1992. During the second, in June 1993, over
1,100 separate events were organised, ranging
from musical fetes and marathons to
activities involving local churches, schools
and charities.
Orchestral and Choral Music
Seasons of orchestral and choral concerts are
promoted every year in many large towns and
cities. The principal concert halls in central
London are the Royal Festival Hall in the
South Bank Centre, next to which are the
Queen Elizabeth Hall and the Purcell Room,
which accommodate smaller scale
performances; the Barbican Hall (part of the
Barbican Centre for Arts and Conferences in
the City of London); the Royal Albert Hall in
Kensington; the Wigmore Hall, a recital
centre; and St John’s, Smith Square. A major
new concert hall, the Symphony Hall, opened
in Birmingham in 1991, and a new 2,400-seat
international concert hall is to be built for
Manchester’s Halle Orchestra; the
Government is to contribute £22 million,
about half the expected cost.
The leading symphony orchestras are the
London Philharmonic, the London
Symphony, the Philharmonia, the Royal
Philharmonic, the BBC Symphony, the Royal
Liverpool Philharmonic, the Halle, the City
of Birmingham Symphony, the Bournemouth
Symphony, the Ulster and the Royal Scottish
Orchestras and the BBC Welsh Symphony
Orchestra. The BBC’s six orchestras give
broadcast concerts which are often open to
the public. There are also chamber orchestras
such as the English Chamber Orchestra, the
Academy of St Martin-in-the-Fields, the
Bournemouth Sinfonietta, and the Scottish
Chamber Orchestra. Specialised ensembles
include the Orchestra of the Age of
Enlightenment, the English Baroque
Soloists and the English Concert. The
447
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
London Sinfonietta and the Birmingham
Contemporary Music Group specialise in
contemporary music.
British conductors such as Sir Colin Davis,
Vernon Handley, Sir Charles Mackerras, John
Eliot Gardiner, Sir Simon Rattle, Christopher
Hogwood, Jane Glover, and Sian Edwards
reach a wide audience through their
recordings as well as by their performances.
The works of living composers such as Sir
Michael Tippett, Sir Peter Maxwell Davies
and Sir Harrison Birtwistle enjoy
international acclaim. Other well-established
composers include George Benjamin, John
Tavener, Oliver Knussen, Jonathan Lloyd,
Colin Matthews, Nigel Osborne, Robert
Saxton, Mark-Anthony Turnage and Judith
Weir. The Master of the Queen’s Music,
Malcolm Williamson, holds an office within
the Royal Household with responsibility for
organising and writing music for state
occasions. Percussionist Evelyn Glennie and
clarinettist Emma Johnson are among solo
performers currently enjoying great acclaim.
The principal choral societies include the
Bach Choir, the Royal Choral Society, the
Huddersfield Choral Society, the Cardiff
Polyphonic Choir, the Edinburgh
International Festival Chorus and the Belfast
Philharmonic Society. Almost all the leading
orchestras maintain their own choral societies.
The English tradition of church singing is
represented by choirs such as those of King’s
College Chapel, Cambridge, and Christ
Church Cathedral, Oxford, while other choirs
such as the Roman Catholic Westminster
Cathedral choir are also well known. There
are many male-voice choirs in Wales and in
certain parts of England.
Pop and Rock Music
Hundreds of hours of pop and rock music are
broadcast through BBC and independent
radio stations every week, while magazine
programmes and occasional live or recorded
concerts on television further promote pop
and rock, which is by far the most popular
form of musical expression in Britain.
In the 1960s and 1970s groups such as the
Beatles, the Rolling Stones, Led Zeppelin and
Pink Floyd achieved international success.
British groups continue to be popular
throughout the world and are often at the
forefront of new developments in music.
Some of the more recent groups, with
examples of their recordings, include Take
That {Pray), Stereo MCs {Creation),
Jamiroquai {Emergency on Planet Earth), M
People {Renaissance), and The Brand New
Heavies {Stay This Way).
Well-known performers, with examples of
recent recordings, include Phil Collins
{Serious Hits Live!), Elton John {The Last
Song), Annie Lennox {Cold), Mike Oldfield
{Sentinel), and Dina Carroll {Perfect Year).
In recent years young black artists,
including Seal, Roland Gift, lasmin Archer,
Field, and Ronny Jordan have furthered the
development of popular music.
The pop and rock music industry
continues to contribute significantly to
Britain’s overseas earnings through the sale of
recordings, concert tours, and promotional
material, including clothing and books. The
recording industry in Britain has an estimated
annual turnover of £ 1,000 million.
Jazz
Jazz has a large following in Britain and is
played in numerous clubs and pubs. The
London Jazz Festival attracts international
stars such as the bandleader Django Bates,
saxophonists Pharoah Saunders and Joshua
Redman, and the singer Jean Carn. British
musicians such as Barbara Thompson, Stan
Tracey, Jason Rebello, Andy Sheppard and
Courtney Pine have established strong
reputations throughout Europe. Festivals of
jazz music are held throughout Britain,
including London, Cardiff Bay, Brecon,
Edinburgh, Glasgow, and Birmingham. Jazz
Services provides a national touring network.
Training
Professional training in music is given
mainly at colleges of music. The leading
London colleges are the Royal Academy of
Music, the Royal College of Music, the
Guildhall School of Music and Drama, and
Trinity College of Music. The City
University’s music industry course provides
448
THE ARTS
training in business practice aimed
specifically at musicians and music
administrators. Outside London the main
centres are the Royal Scottish Academy of
Music and Drama in Glasgow, the Royal
Northern College of Music in Manchester,
the Welsh College of Music and Drama,
Cardiff, and the Birmingham Conservatoire.
Other Educational Schemes
Many children learn to play musical
instruments at school, and some take the
examinations of the Associated Board of the
Royal Schools of Music. Music is one of the
foundation subjects in the National
Curriculum (see p. 418). The National Youth
Orchestras of Great Britain, of Scotland and
of Wales and other youth orchestras have
established high standards. Nearly a third of
the players in the European Community
Youth Orchestra come from Britain. There is
also a National Youth Jazz Orchestra.
Youth and Music, an organisation affiliated
to the international Jeunesses Musicales,
encourages attendance by young people at
opera, dance and concert performances.
OPERA
Interest in opera has been growing markedly
in Britain since 1986, with an estimated
2.8 million of the adult population attending
opera performances in 1993: an increase of
19 per cent. International singers such as
Luciano Pavarotti, Jose Carreras and Placido
Domingo have appeared in recent years at
open air concerts in front of huge audiences.
Regular seasons of opera are held at the
Royal Opera House, Covent Garden,
London. The English National Opera stages
opera in English at the London Coliseum.
Scottish Opera has regular seasons at the
Theatre Royal in Glasgow, and tours
mainly in Scotland and northern England.
Welsh National Opera presents seasons in
Cardiff and other cities. Leeds-based Opera
North tours primarily in the north of
England, but also has recently staged
Benjamin Britten’s Gloriana, produced by
Phyllida Lloyd, at Covent Garden. Opera
Factory, the resident company at London’s
South Bank, presents experimental work in
opera and music theatre. English Touring
Opera takes opera to towns throughout
England. Opera Northern Ireland presents
seasons at the Grand Opera House, Belfast,
and tours the province.
An opera season for which international
casts are specially assembled is held every
summer at Glyndebourne in East Sussex.
This is followed by an autumn tour by
Glyndebourne Touring Opera, often using
casts drawn from the chorus of the festival
season. Work on a new enlarged 1,200-seat
opera house, built on the same site at
Glyndebourne at a cost of £33 million, was
completed in record time for the 1994 season.
All the funding came from private sources.
The National Opera Studio in London
provides advanced training.
DANCE
An estimated 6 million people take part in
dance, making it one of Britain’s leading
participatory activities, and audiences
are attracted to a widening range of
professional dance.
The Royal Ballet and the Birmingham
Royal Ballet, English National Ballet and
Northern Ballet Theatre, which rank among
the world’s leading companies, are supported
by professional orchestras.
Subsidised Dance Companies
Subsidised dance companies include the
Birmingham (formerly Sadler’s Wells) Royal
Ballet, which tours widely in Britain and
overseas; English National Ballet, which
divides its performances between London and
the regions; Northern Ballet Theatre, which
is based in Halifax and also tours; and
Scottish Ballet, based in Glasgow.
The Arts Council of England also
subsidises a wide range of other companies
and dance organisations. Companies include
Rambert Dance Company (Britain’s oldest
ballet company, which re-formed in 1966 as a
leading contemporary dance company);
Diversions (based in Cardiff); Adzido Pan
African Dance Ensemble; Shobana Jeyasingh
Dance Company, and Green Candle Dance
449
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Company. Also subsidised is Dance
Umbrella, which promotes an annual festival
of contemporary dance in London. The three
Arts Councils and the Regional Arts Boards
support many smaller companies.
Lloyd Newson, Christopher Bruce, Richard
Alston, Michael Clark, Jonathan Burrows,
Shobana Jeyasingh and Siobhan Davies are
among the foremost British choreographers.
Leading dancers included Darcey Bussell,
Marion Tait, Adam Cooper and Deborah Bull.
Training
Professional training for dancers and
choreographers is provided mainly by
specialist schools, which include the Royal
Ballet School, the Central School of Ballet,
the Laban Centre (University of London) and
the London Contemporary Dance School;
these, with many private schools, have helped
in raising British dance to its present
standard. Dance is a subject for degree
studies at a number of institutions, including
the Laban Centre, the University of Surrey,
Darlington College of the Arts in Devon and
Middlesex University.
Courses for students intending to work with
community groups are available at several
institutions. In 1991 the Royal Ballet began a
scheme aimed to widen access to ballet
training for children from a broader range of
backgrounds, including ethnic minorities.
National Dance Agencies
A network of agencies for professional and
amateur dancers has been established in
Birmingham, Leeds, Nottingham, London,
Newcastle upon Tyne, Swindon and Suffolk.
The agencies, which receive Arts Council
support, offer classes, provide information
and advice, help to co-ordinate activities, and
commission dance artists to create work. All
ten Regional Arts Board areas now have a
national dance agency or are preparing to set
one up.
Other Educational Schemes
The Arts Council of England runs Taped, a
scheme to finance dance videos for use in
education, while the Video Place provides a
library of videotape documentation of dance
performances for viewing by promoters,
choreographers, dancers, teachers and
students.
All Government-funded dance companies
provide dance workshops and education
activities. Many have won awards for major
projects, such as Phoenix Dance Company’s
‘Urban Exchange’ and English National
Ballet’s ‘Striking a Balance’. Ludus Dance
Company, based in Lancaster, works mainly
with young people; and Scottish Ballet
Steps Out works in schools throughout
Scotland. The Performing Arts and
Technology School in Croydon, Surrey,
offers studies in drama, music and dance to
pupils aged from 14 to 18, with the emphasis
on the application of technology to the
performing arts.
The National Youth Music Theatre,
which is based in London, gives young
people between 11 and 18 the opportunity to
perform music theatre under the guidance of
professional directors and choreographers. All
the work takes place in the school holidays.
The National Youth Dance Company and
Yuva, the National South Asian Dance
Youth Company, provide opportunities for
young dancers to work with professionals
and to create and perform dance. Similar
opportunities exist for young people to
join local youth dance companies throughout
the country.
FILMS
British films, actors, and producers as well as
the creative and technical services supporting
them are widely acclaimed. In 1993 Emma
Thompson won an Oscar as the best film
actress for her role in Howard's End. Other
British performers who enjoy international
reputations include Sir Dirk Bogarde,
Michael Caine, Sir Anthony Hopkins,
Kenneth Branagh, Jeremy Irons, Dudley
Moore, Michael York, Gary Oldman, Bob
Hoskins, Liam Neeson, Alan Rickman, and
Greta Scacchi.
There are approximately 1,800 cinema
screens in Britain and estimated attendances
are currently running at about 1.9 million a
450
ROYAL HERITAGE
The Grand Staircase at Buckingham Palace.
The walls are set with full-length portraits, which
include George III, Queen Charlotte, and
William IV. The Palace was opened to the public
for the first time in 1993; it attracted 377,000
visitors during the eight-week opening period.
The Crown Jewels have long been one of
the main attractions at the Tower of
London. A major development programme
has recently been completed to offer better
visitor facilities in the Jewel House,
including the provision of moving walkways
past some of the exhibits.
FILM AND ANIMATION
The main stage at Ealing
Studios, London, is the
setting for the top special
effects being produced for a
new and dramatic futuristic
pan-European television
game show called Scavengers,
which is due to be screened
in late 1994.
British animators have led the way
in 3D and computer animation.
Nick Park at Aardman Animations
(pictured here) won an Oscar for
the BBC-commissioned film
The Wrong Trousers, featuring the
characters Wallace and Gromit
(below).
VISUAL ARTS
The Tate Gallery,
St Ives, Cornwall, houses
a collection of modern
British works, and
specialises in artists who
have been associated with
the area, such as Barbara
Hepworth.
The new Glass Gallery at
the Victoria and Albert
Museum, London,
houses Britain’s national
collection of glass. Over
6,000 items are on
display, illustrating the
history and development
of glass over the last
THE ARTS
week. Seating capacity in cinemas increased
during the late 1980s, due almost entirely to
the rise in the number of multi-screen
cinema complexes.
Cinema admissions in 1993 were estimated
at 110 million—compared with 58.4 million
in 1984. In London and other large cities a
number of art or repertory cinemas show
films which have not been more widely
distributed. These include low budget films
from Britain and abroad; other foreign films,
often with English subtitles; and older films
which are being shown again, sometimes in a
newly edited form. Arts centres often
include cinemas, and film societies use a
range of buildings including, for example,
public libraries.
Animation
The recent resurgence of interest in the
cartoon film in Britain is due in part to the
pioneering work of British animators, who
have created 3D animation and computer
animation. Television has proved an important
source of production finance. Channel 4
Wales, for example, funded the animation
of the opera Carmen, by the Italian-Welsh
animator, Mario Cavalli. Nick Park’s The
Wrong Trousers, a BBC-commissioned film,
won an Oscar in 1994; his Creature Comforts
received an Oscar in 1991.
Government Support
An annual government grant (an estimated
£17.1 million for 1994-95) is made to the
British Film Institute and one of £1.2 million
to the Scottish Film Council and the Scottish
Film Production Fund. Since 1993 Britain
has been a member of Eurimages, the
Council of Europe’s film co-production
support scheme, contributing approximately
£5.5 million over the first three years of
membership. Eurimages aims to develop the
European cinema and audio-visual industry
by providing financial support for feature-
length fiction films, creative documentaries
and distribution. Within six months of
Britain’s membership eleven productions with
British participation received loans worth
£2.6 million.
British Film Commission
The British Film Commission was launched
in 1991, with government funding of
£3.5 million over four years. The
Commission aims to attract film productions
from overseas by offering a service to assist
film-makers.
British Screen Finance
British Screen Finance, a private sector
company, provides finance for new film¬
makers with commercially viable productions
who have difficulty in attracting funding.
The company, investing its own money
together with contributions from the
Government, part-finances the production of
low- and medium-budget films involving
largely British talent. It encourages the early
stages of film project development and the
production of short films. The Government
is funding the company with £6 million
between 1994 and 1996. Successful films
supported by British Screen Finance include
The Crying Game and Orlando.
British Film Institute
The development of film, video and
television as art forms is promoted by the
British Film Institute (BFI), founded in
1933, and in Scotland by the Scottish Film
Council. The BFI offers some direct
financial and technical help through its
Production Board.
The BFI runs the National Film Theatre
in London and the National Film Archive,
and has the world’s largest library of
information on film and television. The BFI
holds extensive international collections of
books, periodicals, scripts, stills and posters.
Its Education Department aims to enable as
many people as possible to discover new ways
of appreciating film, video and television.
The National Film Archive contains over
200,000 films and television programmes,
including newsreels, dating from 1895. BFI
South Bank comprises the Museum of the
Moving Image, which traces the history of
film and television, and the National Film
Theatre. The latter has three cinemas
451
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
showing films of historical, artistic or
technical interest, and is unique in offering
regular programmes unrestricted by
commercial considerations. In November each
year it hosts the London Film Festival, at
which some 250 new films from all over the
world are screened.
The BFI promotes, and helps to fund, a
network of 34 regional film theatres, and is
involved in establishing film and television
centres with a range of activities and facilities.
It also co-operates with the Regional Arts
Boards and grant-aids their film work.
The Wales Film Council acts as the BFFs
agent in Wales, and also receives funding
from the Arts Council of Wales. The BFFs
charter was recently extended to Northern
Ireland, where the BFI works with the
Northern Ireland Film Council (NIFC). The
NIFC receives funds from the Arts Council
of Northern Ireland.
Scottish Film Council
In Scotland the Scottish Film Council
supports regional film theatres, administers
the Scottish Film Archive, and promotes
and provides material for media education.
Together with the Scottish Arts Council, it
has set up the Scottish Film Production Fund.
Children’s Film
The Children’s Film and Television
Foundation produces and distributes
entertainment films for children, shown
largely through video and television.
The Children’s Film Unit was founded in
1981. The Unit makes feature films for
children (mainly for Channel 4) and runs
weekly workshops for children on all aspects
of film-making. The unit caters for about
50 children at any time and has produced
14 feature films.
The Northern Ireland Film Council
funds an international film festival for
young people.
Training in Film Production
The National Film and Television School is
financed jointly by the Government and by
the film, video and television industries. It
offers postgraduate and short course training
for directors, editors, camera operators,
animators and other specialists. The School
enrols about 30 full-time students a year and
about 500 on short course programmes. In
1994—95 it is receiving a government grant of
£1.8 million.
The London International Film School, the
Royal College of Art, and some universities
and other institutions of higher education also
offer training in film production.
Cinema Licensing and Film
Classification
Cinemas showing films to the public must be
licensed by local authorities, which have a
legal duty to prohibit the admission of
children under 16 to unsuitable films, and
may prevent the showing of any film. In
assessing films the authorities normally rely
on the judgment of an independent non-
statutory body, the British Board of Film
Classification (BBFC), to which films must
be submitted. The Board was set up on the
initiative of the cinema industry to ensure a
proper standard in films shown to the public.
It does not use any written code of
censorship, but can require cuts to be made
before granting a certificate; on rare
occasions, it refuses a certificate.
Films passed by the Board are put into
one of the following categories:
• U (universal)—suitable for all;
• PG (parental guidance), in which some
scenes may be unsuitable for young
children;
• 12, 15 and 18, for people of not less than
those ages; and
• Restricted 18, for restricted showing only
at segregated premises to which no one
under 18 is admitted—for example,
licensed cinema clubs.
Videos
The BBFC is also legally responsible for
classifying videos under a system similar to
that for films. It is an offence to supply
commercially a video which has not been
452
THE ARTS
classified or to supply it in contravention of
its classification—for example, to sell or hire
a video classified 18 to a person under the
age of 18.
VISUAL ARTS
State support for the visual arts consists
largely of funding for the national museums
and galleries, purchase grants for municipal
museums and galleries, and funding through
local authorities, the Museums and Galleries
Commission and the area museum councils.
It also includes funding for the production,
exhibition and distribution of work by
contemporary artists and the development of
audiences, channelled through the Arts
Councils, the Crafts Council and the
Regional Arts Boards, and grants towards the
cost of art education. The Government
encourages high standards of industrial
design and craftsmanship through grants to
the Design Council (see p. 207). All
national museums and galleries are financed
chiefly from government funds. They may
charge for entry to their permanent
collections and special exhibitions. All the
national collections are managed by
independent trustees.
Museums and art galleries maintained by
local authorities, universities, independent
museums and private funds may receive help
in building up their collections through
grants administered by the Museums and
Galleries Commission (for England), the
National Museums of Scotland and the
Museum Councils in Wales and Northern
Ireland. Financial and practical assistance to
national and regional public and independent
museums and galleries is also given by the
Arts Councils and by trusts and voluntary
bodies, including the Calouste Gulbenkian
Foundation and the National Art
Collections Fund.
Pre-eminent works of art are accepted by
the Government in place of inheritance tax
and are allocated to public galleries; recent
acquisitions include paintings by Constable
and Picasso, and manuscripts of two marches
by Haydn. Financial help may be available
from the National Heritage Memorial Fund
(see p. 441), which is being allocated
£8.7 million by the Department of National
Heritage in 1994-95. In recent years the
Fund helped towards the acquisition of
masterpieces by Hans Holbein and Jacques-
Louis David (bought by the National
Gallery), by El Greco (the National Gallery
of Scotland), and by Gainsborough (the Tate
Gallery and Gainsborough’s House). The
British Museum bought the Bowleaze Jewel
and the Armada service (an Elizabethan
silver-gilt dinner service), while the
National Maritime Museum was able to
buy an important collection of Lord
Nelson’s letters.
In collaboration with the Regional Arts
Boards, the Arts Council of England provides
strategic funding for museums and galleries,
educational institutions from art schools and
universities to schools, commercial galleries
and publishers. It also supports touring
exhibitions and the presentation of works of
art commissioned for public spaces. The Arts
Council of England’s unique collection of
20th century British art, with the National
Touring Exhibition Service, is managed on
its behalf by the South Bank Board, which
also runs the Hayward Gallery. The Council
also supports the Institute of Contemporary
Art in London and five other independent
galleries: the Whitechapel and the Serpentine
in London, Museum of Modern Art in
Oxford, Ikon in Birmingham and Arnolfmi in
Bristol, as well as the newly formed Institute
of International Visual Arts, based in
London. The ten Regional Arts Boards
provide direct support for artists and the Arts
Council of England funds national
organisations such as the National Artists
Association and Axis, a national artists’
database, and provides publishing
opportunities for photographers and visual
arts magazines.
Support for galleries is given by the
Arts Councils in Scotland, Wales and
Northern Ireland.
British artists, photographers and
architects with international reputations
include David Hockney, Lucian Freud, Sir
Anthony Caro and Sir Eduardo Paolozzi.
Younger artists with a similar standing
include Richard Deacon, Tony Cragg and
Anish Kapoor.
453
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Museums and Art Galleries
About 80 million people a year, across all
social groups, attend more than 2,000
museums and galleries open to the public,
which include the major national collections
and around 1,100 independent museums,
some receiving support from local authorities.
Government provision for the national
museums and galleries is £219.2 million in
1994—95. The Museums and Galleries
Improvement Fund, which is jointly Financed
by the Government and the Wolfson
Charities and the Family Charitable Trusts, is
providing an annual budget of £4 million
over five years from 1991-92 for
refurbishment. The Fund is already supporting
over 100 projects at national and other
museums and galleries, including work in
Glasgow, Merthyr Tydfil, Reading and Halifax.
The Government takes advice on policy
from the Museums and Galleries
Commission. The Commission also promotes
co-operation between national and regional
institutions. Ten area museum councils
supply technical services and advice on
conservation and the environment, display,
documentation, and publicity.
In May 1994 the Government announced a
wide-ranging review of its policy on museums
and galleries in England. It is expected to
Table 28.2: Visitors to National
Museums and Galleries 1993-94 in
England
(million)
British Museum 6.25
Imperial War Museum 1.15
Museum of London 0.31
National Gallery 3.70
National Maritime Museum 0.51
National Museums and Galleries
on Merseyside 1.20
National Portrait Gallery 0.60
Natural History Museum 1.75
Science Museum 2.64
Tate Gallery 2.55
Victoria and Albert Museum 1.44
Wallace Collection 0.17
Source: Department of National Heritage Annual Report
1994
announce its conclusions later in the year.
The Government encourages the loan of
objects from national and regional collections
so that works of art can be seen by as wide a
public as possible.
The Museum Training Institute is
responsible for developing training standards
and programmes within museums; the Arts
Council of England supports an MA course
at the Royal College of Art for curating and
commissioning contemporary art and
promotes professional practice among artists
and curators.
Museums Association
The independent Museums Association, to
which many museums and art galleries and
their staffs belong, and which has many
overseas members, facilitates exchange of
information and discussion of matters relating
to museums and galleries. It provides training,
seminars and research; its publications
include the monthly Museums Journal.
National Collections
The national museums and art galleries,
many of them located in London, contain
some of the world’s most comprehensive
collections of objects of artistic, archeological,
scientific, historical and general interest.
They are:
• the British Museum (including the
ethnographic collections of the Museum
of Mankind);
• the Natural History Museum;
• the Victoria and Albert Museum (the V&A,
which displays fine and decorative arts);
• the Science Museum and its two regional
institutes—the National Railway Museum
(York) and National Museum of
Photography, Film and Television
(Bradford);
• the National Gallery (which houses
western painting from around 1260 to
1920);
• the Tate Gallery, London (British
painting and modern art);
• the Tate Gallery, Liverpool
454
THE ARTS
• the Tate Gallery, St Ives (St Ives School
and contemporary art)
• the National Portrait Gallery;
• the Imperial War Museum;
• the National Army Museum;
• the Royal Air Force Museum;
• the National Maritime Museum;
• the Wallace Collection (which includes
paintings, furniture, arms and armour;
and objets d’art); and
• the National Museums and Galleries on
Merseyside.
The new Sainsbury Wing of the National
Gallery provides a venue for major
international touring exhibitions and other
events. London is to be the location of the
Tate’s new museum of modern art. The V&A
plans to open a branch in Bradford.
In Scotland the national collections are held
by the National Museums of Scotland and the
National Galleries of Scotland. The former
include the Royal Museum of Scotland, the
National Museum of Antiquities of Scotland,
the Scottish United Services Museum and the
Scottish Agricultural Museum, in Edinburgh;
the Museum of Flight, near North Berwick;
and the Museum of Costume at Shambellie
House near Dumfries. A new Museum of
Scotland is being built next to the Royal
Museum to house the National Museums’
Scottish collection. The National Galleries of
Scotland comprise the National Gallery of
Scotland, the Scottish National Portrait Gallery
and the Scottish National Gallery of Modem Art.
The National Museum of Wales, which
has opened new galleries at its main building
in Cardiff, has a number of branches,
including the Welsh Folk Museum at St
Fagans and the Industrial and Maritime
Museum in Cardiff’s dockland.
Northern Ireland has two national
museums: the Ulster Museum in Belfast and
the Ulster Folk and Transport Museum in
County Down.
Other Collections
Other important collections in London
include the Museum of London; Sir John
Soane’s Museum; the Courtauld collection;
and the London Transport Museum. The
Queen’s Gallery in Buckingham Palace has
exhibitions of pictures from the extensive
royal collection. The Royal Armouries,
Britain’s oldest museum, has been housed in
the Tower of London for 900 years. A new
headquarters for the collection is being built
in Leeds. Due to open in 1996, the project
is a pioneering joint public and private
sector venture.
Most cities and towns have museums
devoted to art, archaeology and natural
history, usually administered by the local
authorities but sometimes by local learned
societies or by individuals or trustees. Both
Oxford and Cambridge are rich in
museums. Many are associated with their
universities, such as the Ashmolean
Museum in Oxford and the Fitzwilliam
Museum in Cambridge.
Many private collections of art and
antiques in historic family mansions,
including those owned by the National
Trusts and English Heritage (see p. 346), are
open to the public.
An increasing number of open air
museums depict the regional life of an area or
preserve early industrial remains. These
include the Weald and Downland Museum in
West Sussex, and the Ironbridge Gorge
Museum in Shropshire. Skills of the past are
revived in a number of ‘living’ museums,
such as the Gladstone Pottery Museum near
Stoke-on-Trent and the Quarry Bank Mill at
Styal in Cheshire.
Among the more recently opened
museums are:
• the Museum of Science and Industry in
Manchester;
• the Jorvik Viking Centre, a
reconstruction of the Viking settlement in
York;
• the Mary Rose Museum in Portsmouth,
housing the restored wreck of the
flagship of Henry VIII, which sank in
1545;
• the St Mungo Museum of Religious Life
and Art in Glasgow, containing artefacts
representing the world’s major religions;
and
455
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
• Eureka!, the first museum designed
specifically for children, in Halifax,
West Yorkshire.
The Burrell Collection in Glasgow houses
world-famous tapestries, paintings and objets
d’art. The Design Museum in London’s
Docklands contains a study collection of 20th
century mass-produced consumer objects.
There are also a number of national art
exhibiting societies, the most famous being
the Royal Academy of Arts at Burlington
House. The Academy holds an annual
Summer Exhibition, where the works of
hundreds of professional and amateur artists
can be seen, and important exhibitions during
the rest of the year. The Royal Scottish
Academy holds annual exhibitions in
Edinburgh. There are also children's
exhibitions, including the National Exhibition
of Children’s Art.
Crafts
The crafts in Britain have an annual turnover
estimated at £400 million. Government aid
for the crafts, amounting to an estimated
£3.2 million in 1994—95, is administered in
England and Wales by the Crafts Council.
The Council supports craftsmen and women
by promoting public interest in their work,
and encouraging the creation of works of
contemporary craftsmanship. Grants are
available to help with setting up workshops
and acquiring equipment. The Crafts Council
runs the national centre for crafts in London,
which houses a gallery, reference and picture
libraries, and a gallery shop. It organises the
annual Chelsea Crafts Fair, and co-ordinates
British groups at international trade fairs.
Crafts Council exhibitions tour nationally and
internationally, and grants are made to
encourage exhibitions, projects and
organisations. It also runs a craft shop at the
Victoria and Albert Museum.
Funding is given to the Regional Arts
Boards and the Welsh Arts Council for the
support of crafts, and to Contemporary
Applied Art, a membership organisation that
holds exhibitions and sells work through its
London gallery.
Craftworks, an independent company, is
the crafts development agency for Northern
Ireland, providing training, marketing and
business counselling for the crafts sector. The
Arts Council of Northern Ireland also
provides funding for crafts promotion.
Training in Art and Design
Most practical education in art and design is
provided in the art colleges and fine and
applied art departments of universities: these
include the Slade School of Art and
Goldsmiths College of Art, London; and in
further education colleges and private art
schools. Many of these institutions award
degrees at postgraduate level. Art is also
taught at an advanced level at the four
Scottish Central (Art) Institutions.
Courses at universities concentrate largely
on academic disciplines such as the history of
art. The leading institutions include the
Courtauld and Warburg Institutes of the
University of London and the Department of
Classical Art and Archaeology at University
College, London. The Open University also
offers courses in art history, and theory of
art. Art is one of the foundation subjects in
the National Curriculum. The Society for
Education through Art encourages, among
other activities, the purchase by schools of
original works of art by organising an annual
Pictures for Schools exhibition.
The Open College of the Arts offers
correspondence courses in art and design,
painting, sculpture, textiles, photography and
creative writing to people wishing to study
at home.
Export Control of Works of Art
London is a major centre for the international
art market, and sales of works of art take
place in the main auction houses (two of the
longest established being Sotheby’s and
Christie's), and through private dealers.
Certain items are covered by export control.
These are:
• works of art and collectors' items over
50 years old and worth £20,000 or more
(£5.000 or more in the case of British
historical portraits);
• photographic material over 50 years old
and valued at £500 or more an item; and
456
THE ARTS
• documents, manuscripts and archives
over 50 years old, irrespective of value.
A licence from the Department of
National Heritage is required before such
items can be exported. If the Department's
advisers recommend withholding a licence,
the matter is referred to the Reviewing
Committee on the Export of Works of Art. If
the Committee considers a work to be of
national importance it can advise the
Government to withhold the export licence
for a specified time to give a public museum,
art gallery, or private collector an opportunity
to buy at a fair price.
With the completion of the single
European market in January 1993, there is
concern that the removal of customs barriers
for intra-community trade may facilitate
the illicit export of national treasures.
Discussions on methods of preventing this
are in progress.
LITERATURE AND LIBRARIES
A number of literary activities receive public
subsidy through the Arts Councils. In 1994,
for example, this included continued support
for a programme of tours by writers from
other countries, innovative television films
promoting reading, and support for literary
magazines and independent publishers.
There are free public libraries throughout
Britain (see p. 460), private libraries and
several private literary societies. Book reviews
are featured in the press and on television
and radio, and numerous periodicals
concerned with literature are published
(see p. 479). Recognition of outstanding
literary merit is provided by a number of
awards, some of the most valuable being the
Booker and Whitbread prizes. In 1993 Sir
V.S. Naipaul was awarded the first David
Cohen British Literature Prize for a lifetime's
achievement by a living British writer. A part
of the £40,000 prize, to be awarded even
two years, will enable winners to commission
new works from younger writers. Other
awards to encourage young authors include
those of the Somerset Maugham Trust Fund
and the E. C. Gregory Trust Fund.
Many writers from overseas, often from
Commonwealth countries, also live and work
in Britain, writing books in English w hich have
a wide circulation in Britain and overseas.
Distinguished British poets include Ted
Hughes, the Poet Laureate (the Poet
Laureate is a member of the Royal
Household who receives an annual stipend
from the Civil List—see p. 48; he may write
commemorative verse if he w ishes); Geoffrey
Hill; Tony Harrison; James Berry; Seamus
Heaney; Gavin Ewart; Wendy Cope; and
Elizabeth Jennings.
Many British writers are
internationally recognised. Well-
known living novelists, with examples
of their works, include.
• Sir Kingsley Amis-Lucky Jim,
Stanley and the Women',
• Ian McEwan—The Child in Time,
Black Dogs;
• Dame Muriel Spark—The Prime of
-Miss Jean Brodie, and Memento Mori;
• A. S. Byatt—Possession: A Romance.
English literature is taught extensively at
schools, colleges and universities throughout
Britain. Creative writing is also taught at a
wide variety of institutions; one of the best
known is the University of East Anglia, in
Norwich, which also houses the British
Centre for Literary Translation.
Authors' Copyright and Performers’
Protection
Original literary, dramatic, musical or artistic
works, films, sound recordings and broadcasts
are automatically protected by copyright in
Britain. This protection is also given to works
from countries party to international
copyright conventions. The copyright owner
has rights against unauthorised reproduction,
public performance, broadcasting and issue to
the public of his or her work; and against
dealing in unauthorised copies. In most cases
the author is the first ow ner of the copyright,
and the term of copyright is the life of the
author and a period of 50 years after death
(50 years from the year of release for films
and sound recordings and 50 years from the
year of broadcast for broadcasts).
457
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Copyright, Designs and Patents Act
1988 reformed copyright law and introduced
the concept of moral rights, whereby authors
have the right to be identified on their works
and to object to derogatory treatment of
them. The Act also updated the rights which
protect performers against making and trading
in unauthorised recordings of live
performances, the term of protection for these
rights being 50 years from the year in which
the performance is given.
The term of protection will be extended
from 50 to 70 years by July 1995.
Literary and Philological Societies
Societies to promote literature include the
English Association and the Royal Society of
Literature. The leading society for studies in
the humanities is the British Academy for the
Promotion of Historical, Philosophical and
Philological Studies (the British Academy).
Other specialist societies are the Early
English Text Society, the Bibliographical
Society and several societies devoted to
particular authors, the largest of which is the
Dickens Fellowship. Various societies, such as
the Poetry Society, sponsor poetry readings
and recitals.
Libraries
The British Library
The British Library, the national library of
Britain, is one of the world’s greatest
libraries. Its collections comprise over 18
million items—monographs, manuscripts,
maps, newspapers, patents, stamps and
recorded sound. Publishers must deposit
there a copy of most items published or
available in Britain.
The National Bibliographic Service
processes material legally deposited at the
Library for inclusion in catalogues and
maintains a machine-readable database of
bibliographical records from which is derived
the British National Bibliography (a list of
new and forthcoming British Books) and a
range of automated bibliographical services.
The Research and Development
Department is a major source of funding
for research and development in library and
information services.
The Library’s Document Supply Centre at
Boston Spa (West Yorkshire) is the national
centre for inter-library lending within Britain
and between Britain and countries overseas.
It supplies 3.5 million requests a year, mostly
from its own stock of 7 million documents.
The Library also has the self-supporting
Centre for the Book, to promote awareness of
books and their role in British life.
The British Library’s new London
headquarters at St Pancras is being built at a
cost of £450 million, and will open in 1996.
It will provide reading rooms for most of the
Library’s London-based collections—
humanities, science, technology and industry;
it will also house 330 km (208 miles) of
shelves for 12 million books and specialist
reading areas. The new Library aims to offer
greatly improved services, including
exhibition galleries, a bookshop, a lecture
theatre and a conference centre.
Other Libraries
The National Libraries of Scotland and Wales,
the Bodleian Library of Oxford University and
the Cambridge University Library can also
claim copies of all new British publications
under legal deposit. The first phase of a new
building for the National Library of Scotland
was opened in 1989, accommodating a map
library, lending services and the Scottish
Science Library. The second stage is due to
be open in May 1995.
Some of the national museums and
government departments have important
libraries.
• The Public Record Office in London
and in Kew, Surrey, houses the records
of the superior courts of law of England
and Wales and of most government
departments, as well as famous historical
documents. The Office has many
millions of documents, dating from the
time of the Norman Conquest to the
present day. Public records, with few
exceptions, are available for inspection
by members of the public 30 years
after the end of the year in which they
were created.
458
THE ARTS
• The Scottish Record Office in
Edinburgh and the Public Record Office
of Northern Ireland, Belfast, serve the
same purpose.
Besides a number of great private
collections, such as that of the London
Library, there are the libraries of the
learned societies and institutions, such as the
Royal Institute of International Affairs, the
Royal Geographical Society and the Royal
Academy of Music. The Poetry Library in
the South Bank Centre, owned by the Arts
Council of England, is a collection of 20th-
century poetry written in or translated into
English.
University Libraries
The university libraries of Oxford and
Cambridge are unmatched by those of the
more recent foundations. However, the
combined library resources of the colleges
and institutions of the University of
London total 9 million volumes, the John
Rylands University Library of Manchester
contains 3.5 million volumes, Edinburgh 2.5
million, Leeds 2.3 million, and Birmingham,
Glasgow, Liverpool and Aberdeen each have
over 1 million volumes. Many universities
have important research collections in special
subjects—the Barnes Medical Library at
Birmingham and the British Library of
Political and Economic Science at the
London School of Economics, for example.
University libraries also have on-line access to
library information worldwide.
Special Libraries
Numerous associations and commercial and
industrial organisations run library and
information services. Although most are
intended primarily for use within the
organisation, many can be used, by
arrangement, by people interested in the area
covered, and the specialist publications held
are often available for inter-library lending.
Public Libraries
Local authorities in Great Britain and
education and library boards in Northern
Ireland have a duty to provide a free
lending and reference library service, and
Britain’s network of more than 4,100 public
libraries has a total stock of over 130 million
books. Public libraries issue an average of
ten books a year for every person in Britain.
Of these, 56 per cent are works of fiction
for adults. Over half of the total population
are members of public libraries. Some
areas are served by mobile libraries, and
domiciliary services cater for people unable to
visit a library
Many libraries have collections of compact
discs, records, audio- and video-cassettes,
and musical scores for loan to the public,
while a number also lend from collections of
works of art, which may be originals or
reproductions. Most libraries hold
documents on local history, and nearly all
provide children’s departments, while
reference and information sections and art,
music, commercial and technical
departments meet the growing demands in
these fields. The information role is one of
increasing importance for many libraries, and
greater use is being made of information
technology, including microcomputers and
reference databases.
The Government remains committed to
providing a free basic library service—the
borrowing and consultation of printed
materials—but believes there is scope for
greater private sector involvement. It makes
available £250,000 a year to encourage new
developments and increase efficiency.
Priority is given to projects involving
collaboration with other libraries and the
private sector.
Public libraries charge for some services,
such as research services and the lending of
non-printed materials.
The Government is advised on library and
information matters by four library and
information services councils or committees,
one for each constituent part of Britain. A
new Commission was set up in 1994 to
co-ordinate this advice.
The Government is reviewing the scope
and value of services provided by public
libraries in England and the feasibility of
contracting out the delivery of some parts of
their service.
459
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Library Association
The Library Association is the principal
professional organisation for those engaged in
library and information services. Founded in
1877, the Association has 25,000 members. It
maintains a Register of Chartered Librarians
and publishes books, pamphlets and an
official journal.
The Library Association is the designated
authority for the recognition of qualifications
gained in other EU member states.
Public Lending Right Scheme
The Public Lending Right Scheme, introduced
in 1979, gives registered authors the right to
receive payment from a central fund (totalling
£4.9 million in 1994—95) for the loans made
of their books from public libraries in Britain.
Payment is made in proportion to the number
of times the authors’ books are lent out. In
1992-93, 97 authors received the maximum
payment of £6,000.
Books
In 1993 British publishers issued some
83,800 separate titles. The British publishing
industry devotes much effort to developing
overseas markets, and in 1993 the value
of exports of British books amounted to
£616.9 million
Among the leading organisations
representing publishing and distribution
interests are the Publishers Association,
which has 200 members; and the
Booksellers’ Association, with 3,300 members.
The Publishers Association, through its
International Division, promotes the export
of British books.
Historical Manuscripts
The Royal Commission on Historical
Manuscripts, first established 1869, is the
central investigatory and advisory body on
manuscripts, records and archives other than
the public records. It maintains the
National Register of Archives and the
Manorial Documents Register and advises
owners, custodians and government; assists
researchers; and co-ordinates the activities
of bodies working in the field. It also
publishes a series of Guides to Sources for
British History.
The National Manuscripts Conservation
Trust, established by the Commission and
the British Library, provides grants to
record offices, libraries and other owners
of manuscripts and archives accessible to
the public.
Further Reading
The Arts. Aspects of Britain series, HMSO, 1993.
Annual Report 1994. Department of National Heritage. Cm. 2511.
460
29 The Media
M’
Television and Radio 461
Government Role 462
The BBC 463
Independent Broadcasting 465
Teletext, Cable and Satellite 468
Other Aspects 469
International Services 471
Technical Developments 473
The Press 474
National and Regional Titles 475
The Periodical Press 478
News Agencies 479
Press Institutions 480
Training and Education 480
Press Conduct and Law 481
Television viewing is by far Britain’s most popular leisure pastime:
94 per cent of households have a colour television set and 73 per cent a video
recorder. People spend an average of over three and a half hours a day
watching television, including video playbacks. The number of video tapes
hired has declined for the past three years to about 6 million a week.
More daily newspapers, national and regional, are sold for every person in
Britain than in most other developed countries. On an average day 60 per
cent of people over the age of 15 read a national morning newspaper; about 70
per cent read a Sunday newspaper.
Television and Radio
Broadcasting in Britain has traditionally been
based on the principle that it is a public
service accountable to the people through
Parliament. While retaining the essential
public service element, it now embraces the
principles of competition and choice.
Three public bodies have the main
responsibility for television and radio services
to which nearly everyone has access:
• the BBC (British Broadcasting
Corporation) broadcasts television and
radio programmes;
• the ITC (Independent Television
Commission) licenses and regulates
non-BBC television services, including
cable and satellite services; and
• the Radio Authority licenses and
regulates all non-BBC radio services,
including cable and satellite.
These authorities work to broad
requirements and objectives defined
by Parliament, but are otherwise independent
in their day-to-day conduct of business.
The government department responsible
for overseeing the broadcasting system is
the Department of National Heritage. The
Secretary of State for National Heritage
is answerable to Parliament on broad
policy questions.
Television
There are four terrestrial television channels,
offering a mixture of drama, light
entertainment, films, sport, educational,
461
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
children’s and religious programmes, news
and current affairs, and documentaries.
The BBC provides two complementary
national networks—BBC 1 and BBC 2—
which are financed predominantly by a
licence fee. The ITC regulates two television
services—ITV (Channel 3) and Channel 4—
which complement each other and are largely
funded by advertising. In Wales, S4C (Sianel
Pedwar Cymru) broadcasts programmes on the
fourth channel. All four channels broadcast
on 625 lines UHF (ultra-high frequency) and
over 99 per cent of the population live within
range of transmission.
British television productions continue to
win many international awards, and in 1993
film and television companies received
£170 million in export earnings.
Radio
Practically every home has a radio, and the
widespread ownership of portable sets
(including personal stereos) and car radios
means that people can listen to radio throughout
the day. About 70 per cent of the population
listen to the radio on a normal day and more
than 85 per cent do so over the week.
The BBC has five national networks,
which together transmit all types of music,
news, current affairs, drama, education, sport
and a range of features programmes. The
Radio Authority regulates two national
commercial radio stations; the award of the
franchise for a third station took place in
June 1994 (see p. 468).
There are 38 BBC local radio stations
serving England and the Channel Islands, and
regional and community radio services in
Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. About
150 independent local radio (ILR) services are
also in operation. More local stations are
planned. Stations supply a comprehensive
service of local news and information, sport,
music and other entertainment, education and
consumer advice. ‘Phone-in’ programmes
allowing listeners to express their views on air
are popular.
GOVERNMENT ROLE
During the last few years broadcasting in
Britain has seen radical changes. The
availability of more radio frequencies, together
with satellite, cable and microwave
transmissions, has made a greater number of
local, national and international services
possible. Moreover, the technical quality of
sound and pictures is improving.
In response to rapidly developing
technology and rising public demand for a
wide choice of programmes and services, the
Government introduced the Broadcasting Act
1990 with the aim of making the regulatory
framework for broadcasting more flexible and
efficient, and giving viewers and listeners
access to a wider range of services. At the
same time the Act aimed to promote
competition and to maintain high standards of
taste and decency.
Changes Introduced by the Broadcasting
Act
The Broadcasting Act 1990 overhauled the
regulation of independent television and radio
and opened the way for many more services.
In 1991 the IBA (Independent
Broadcasting Authority) was replaced by the
ITC (Independent Television Commission),
the Radio Authority and a new transmission
and engineering company, National
Transcommunications Limited (see p. 463).
At the same time the Cable Authority was
made part of the ITC and the Radio Authority.
The ITC and the Radio Authority issue
licences to commercial broadcasters and enforce
rules to ensure diversity of ownership:
• The ITC awards major broadcasting
licences by competitive tender to the
highest bidders satisfying stipulated
quality tests.
• The Radio Authority awards national
radio licences by competitive tender.
Local radio licences are not allocated by
competitive tender; the success of licence
applications is in part determined by
audience demand, and the extent to
which prospective stations would
increase variety.
The ITC does not have the former IBA’s
detailed involvement in scheduling but has
wider powers than the IBA to enforce licence
462
THE MEDIA
conditions and ownership rules. Both
organisations were initially able to take out
government loans, but are obliged to repay
these and to support themselves from
licensing fees at the earliest possible date.
The 1990 Act made provision for setting
up a new national independent television
station, Channel 5, and three national
commercial radio stations (see p. 467).
Opportunities now also exist for launching
hundreds of independent local radio and
television channels.
The Broadcasting Act also provided for
the former IBA’s television and radio
transmission networks to be privatised. In
1991 the IB A networks and other facilities
were transferred to a new public company—
National Transcommunications Limited
(NTL). NTL was then sold for £70 million
to a company formed for the purpose by
Mercury Asset Management. NTL transmits
television services for the independent
television companies, Channel 4, S4C, and
radio services for about 100 independent local
radio stations.
Programming Obligations
Licence-holders of the independent television
Channel 3 (and the proposed Channel 5) need
to pass demanding quality tests (see p. 466).
ITC regulations place a limit on the
proportion of non-European material
broadcast. Since January 1993 both the BBC
and commercial television licensees have been
required to ensure that at least 25 per cent of
their original programming comes from
independent producers.
Ownership Rules
The Broadcasting Act 1990 established clearer
and more extensive ownership rules. These
are designed to enable the ITC and the Radio
Authority to keep ownership of the
broadcasting media widely spread and to
prevent unhealthy concentrations and cross¬
media ownership. Controlling ownership from
outside the European Union is largely
prohibited, and national newspapers are
allowed relatively small stakes in direct
broadcasting by satellite (DBS) channels,
Channels 3 and 5, and national and local radio
(although these rules are being reviewed—see
p. 475). Public telecommunications operators
are not allowed to have controlling interests
in any Channel 3, Channel 5, national radio
or domestic satellite licence; and political
bodies and local authorities are barred from
holding licences.
From 1 January 1994, a limited
relaxation of the ITV (independent
television) ownership rules allows a
company to hold any two regional
licences (except in London), a 20 per
cent stake in a third company, and
5 per cent in any further licences.
Programme Standards
Recognising that broadcasting is an extremely
powerful medium with the potential to offend,
exploit and cause harm, the Act contains
guarantees on programme standards which
are extended to all British-based broadcasters.
These guarantees cover taste, decency,
accuracy and balance. Under the 1990 Act
the Government can proscribe unacceptable
foreign satellite services receivable in Britain.
Anyone in Britain supporting such a service
can now be prosecuted.
THE BBC
The constitution, finances and obligations of
the BBC are governed by a Royal Charter
and by a Licence and Agreement. The
Corporation’s board of 12 governors,
including the chairman, vice-chairman and a
national governor each for Scotland, Wales
and Northern Ireland, is appointed by the
Queen on the advice of the Government.
The board of governors is ultimately
responsible for all aspects of broadcasting by
the BBC. The governors appoint the
Director-General, the Corporation’s chief
executive officer, who heads the board of
management—the body in charge of the daily
running of the Corporation.
The BBC has a regional structure
throughout Britain. The three English
regions—BBC North, BBC Midlands & East
463
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and BBC South—and BBC Scotland, Wales
and Northern Ireland make programmes for
their local audiences as well as contributing to
the national network.
The National Broadcasting Councils for
Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland advise
on the policy and content of television and
radio programmes intended mainly for
reception in their areas. Ten Regional Councils
in England advise the Board of Governors on
the needs and concerns of audiences.
Finance
The domestic services of the BBC are
financed predominantly from the sale of
television licences. Households with a
television must buy an annual licence costing
£84.50 for colour and £28 for black and
white. Over 20 million licences were current
in May 1994; of these, around 19.5 million
were for colour.
Licence income is supplemented by profits
from trading activities, such as television
programme exports, sale of recordings,
publications and other merchandise connected
with BBC programmes, hire and sale of
educational films, film library sales, and
exhibitions based on programmes. The BBC
World Service (see p. 472) is financed by a
grant-in-aid from the Foreign &
Commonwealth Office (£175 million in
1994-95), while BBC World Service
Television (see p. 472) is self-financing.
TV Licensing, a subsidiary company of the
Post Office, undertakes the licence
administration on behalf of the BBC. Since
1988 annual rises in the licence fee have been
linked to the rate of inflation, and will
continue to be until the end of 1996; this is
intended further to improve the BBC’s
efficiency and encourage it to continue to
develop alternative sources of revenue.
Future of the BBC
A government White Paper, entitled The
Future of the BBC: Serving the Nation,
Competing Worldwide was published in July
1994. It considered the BBC’s future after the
expiry of its current Royal Charter at the end
of 1996 and proposed that:
• the BBC should remain a public
service broadcaster, maintaining its
current radio and television services,
and this should be its main role. A
new Royal Charter and Agreement
should provide the framework for
the BBC’s activities for ten years from
1997;
• the BBC should be more accountable
and responsive to its audiences,
publishing objectives for its programmes
and services;
• a reasonable proportion of the BBC’s
network programmes should be made in
Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and
the English regions;
• the licence fee should be the main source
of income for the BBC’s public services
in Britain until at least 2001;
• World Service Radio should continue,
funded by grant-in-aid;
• the BBC should develop its
commercial activities in Britain and
abroad, in partnership with the private
sector, and should evolve into an
international multimedia organisation.
These commercial activities should be
distinct from its public services, and
should not be subsidised from the licence
fee; and
• the Government and the BBC would
explore options for injecting private
finance into the Corporation’s
transmission services. Privatisation,
either in whole or in part, would
be among the options under
consideration.
BBC Television
The two channels, BBC 1 and BBC 2, are
scheduled in a complementary way to cater
simultaneously for different interests.
Although both services cover the whole range
of television output:
• BBC 1 presents a wide range of
programmes, including news and current
affairs, major documentaries, sport,
popular drama and light entertainment,
and children’s programmes;
464
THE MEDIA
• BBC 2 presents music and the arts, new
talent, innovative documentaries, sport,
international films and serious drama, and
is a forum for debate.
Apart from a break during the Second
World War, the BBC has been providing
regular television broadcasts since 1936.
Together, BBC 1 and BBC 2 transmit over
12,800 hours of programmes a year for
national and regional audiences.
Programmes for both networks are
produced mainly in London. In 1993-94,
25 per cent of the expenditure on programmes
shown nationally was represented by
commissions placed with the regions. The
BBC enters into agreements with overseas
television corporations in order to share the
cost of some new programmes.
BBC Select
BBC Select is the Corporation’s specialist
night-time television service. It is part of the
BBC’s Education Directorate and utilises the
night hours on BBC 1 and BBC 2 to
broadcast education, training, and professional
information and updating programmes to
specialist audiences.
BBC Select does not make any of the
programmes that it broadcasts, but works with
a variety of public bodies and charities to enable
them to communicate with specific groups of
people. Most programmes are ‘open access’
and free. They are designed for recording on
video and viewing at a later date.
BBC Network Radio
BBC Network Radio serves an audience of
30 million a week in Britain, broadcasting
around 38,000 hours of programmes each year
on its five networks:
• BBC Radio 1 (FM) broadcasts rock and
pop music 24 hours a day;
• BBC Radio 2 (FM) transmits popular
music and light entertainment, also for 24
hours a day;
• BBC Radio 3 (FM) broadcasts mainly
classical music, but presents jazz, drama,
poetry, short stories and talks as well;
• BBC Radio 4 (broadcast with some
differences on FM and LW) provides
news and current affairs coverage,
together with drama, comedy,
documentaries and panel games; it also
carries parliamentary coverage; and
• BBC Radio 5 Live (AM), which
superseded Radio 5 in March 1994, is a
24-hour news and sport network.
INDEPENDENT BROADCASTING
Independent Television Commission
Like the Radio Authority and S4C, the ITC’s
constitution and finances are governed by the
Broadcasting Act 1990. The ITC is
responsible for licensing and regulating non-
BBC television services operating in or from
Britain. These include:
• ITV (Channel 3);
• Channel 4;
• the proposed Channel 5;
• cable and other local delivery services;
• independent teletext services; and
• satellite services transmitted from Britain.
Since January 1993, when the new
Channel 3 licences came into effect, the ITC
has ceased to broadcast programmes. These
responsibilities have now passed to the new
licensees. The ITC monitors the licences and
licence conditions but is not involved in
detailed scheduling of programmes.
The ITC is advised by committees on
educational broadcasting, religious
broadcasting, charitable appeals and
advertising. Ten viewer consultative
councils also comment on the commercial
services’ programmes.
ITV Programmes
The first regular ITV programmes began in
London in 1955. ITV programmes are
broadcast 24 hours a day throughout the
country. About one-third of the output
comprises informative programmes—news,
465
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
documentaries, and coverage of current affairs,
education and religion. The remainder cover
sport, comedy, drama, game shows, films, and
a range of other programmes with popular
appeal. Over half the programmes are produced
by the programme companies and ITN
(Independent Television News—see below).
ITV (Channel 3) Programme Companies
ITV is made up of 15 regionally based
television companies which are licensed to
supply programmes in the 14 independent
television geographical regions. Two companies
share the contract for London, one providing
programmes during weekdays and the other at
the weekend. An additional ITC licensee
provides a national breakfast-time service,
transmitted on the ITV network.
The licensees operate on a commercial
basis, deriving most of their revenue from
selling advertising time. The financial resources,
advertising revenue and programme production
of the companies vary considerably, depending
largely on the population of the areas in which
they operate. Although newspapers may
acquire an interest in programme companies,
safeguards exist to ensure against
concentration of media ownership, thereby
protecting the public interest.
Each programme company plans the
content of the programmes to be broadcast in
its area. These are produced by the company
itself, or by other programme companies or
bought from elsewhere.
A common news service is provided by
ITN. ITN has been appointed to supply a
service of national and international news to
the ITV network for a ten-year period from
January 1993.
ITV Network Centre
The ITV Network Centre, which is wholly
owned by the ITV companies, independently
commissions and schedules those television
programmes which are shown across the ITV
network. Programmes are commissioned from
the ITV companies as well as independent
producers. The Centre also promotes the ITV
network and co-ordinates developments in
technology and training.
Licences
The ITV licences for Channel 3, which came
up for renewal at the end of 1992, were
awarded by the ITC in October 1991.
Twelve existing franchise holders and four
new companies were awarded licences.
Channel 3 licences are awarded for a
ten-year period by competitive tender to the
highest bidder who has passed a quality
threshold. In exceptional cases a lower bid
can be selected, for instance, where an
applicant is able to offer a significantly better
quality of service than that offered by the
highest bidder.
There are safeguards for quality
programming. Licensees are required to offer
a diverse programme service, a proportion of
good-quality programmes, as well as
high-quality regional and national news and
current affairs programmes, and children’s
and religious programmes. There is a
statutory duty to present programmes made
in and about the region. There is also a
requirement for district and regional
programming to be aimed at different areas
within regions. Channel 3 licensees are
obliged to operate a national programme
network. Networking arrangements are
subject to government approval so that
anti-competitive practices are avoided.
Channel 4 and S4C
Channel 4, which began broadcasting in 1982,
provides a national television service
throughout Britain, except in Wales, which
has a corresponding service—S4C (Sianel
Pedwar Cymru). In January 1993 Channel 4
became a public corporation, licensed and
regulated by the ITC, selling its own
advertising time and retaining the proceeds.
It was previously a public limited company
owned by the ITC.
Channel 4’s remit is to provide
programmes with a distinctive character
and to appeal to tastes and interests not
generally catered for by Channel 3. It
must present a suitable proportion of
educational programmes and encourage
innovation and experiment. Channel 4
commissions programmes from the ITV
466
THE MEDIA
companies and independent producers and
buys programmes from overseas. It
broadcasts for around 139 hours a week,
about half of which are devoted to
informative programmes.
In Wales programmes on the fourth
channel are run and controlled by S4C. Its
members are appointed by the Government.
S4C is required to see that a significant
proportion of programming, in practice about
23 hours a week, is in the Welsh language
and that programmes broadcast between
18.30 and 22.00 hours are mainly in Welsh.
At other times S4C transmits national
Channel 4 programmes.
Like Channel 4, S4C has sold its own
advertising since January 1993. S4C is
expected to cover only 10 per cent of its
costs from advertising, with the remainder
financed by the Government.
Gaelic TV Fund
The Gaelic Television Committee,
appointed by the ITC, was set up under the
Broadcasting Act 1990 to administer
government finance for making television
programmes in Gaelic. A fund of
£8.7 million has been created and
programmes thus financed came on screen
from January 1993. The Fund has increased
the output of Gaelic television programmes
from 100 to about 300 hours each year.
Channel 5
A new national terrestrial television channel—
Channel 5—was originally intended to come
into operation in late 1994, financed through
advertising, subscription or sponsorship. The
ten-year licence was to be awarded by
competitive tender. However, in December
1992 the ITC announced its decision not to
award a licence. It had received only one bid
and was not satisfied that the applicant would
be able to maintain its proposed service
throughout the period of the licence.
In mid-September 1994 the ITC
announced that it was again inviting
applications for the licence, the closing date
for which is 1 May 1995. Earlier, in July
1994, the Government announced new
frequency allocations for Channel 5 and for
up to 12 digital terrestrial television services.
Local Television
The Broadcasting Act 1990 makes provision
for the further development of local
television services. Local delivery licences
are awarded by competitive tender and there
is no quality threshold. ITC licence-holders
can supply national and local television
channels using both cable and microwave
transmission systems. Services delivered
could be aimed at communities such as
ethnic minorities.
The Radio Authority
Independent local radio (ILR) is based
on principles similar to those of ITV
(see p. 466). The programme companies
operate under licence to the Radio Authority
and are financed mainly by advertising
revenue. Licences for existing operators
expire between 1994 and 1996.
The Radio Authority, which took over
responsibility for independent radio from the
IB A in 1991, is required to ensure that
licensed services, taken as a whole, are of a
high quality and offer a range of programmes
calculated to appeal to a variety of tastes
and interests.
The Authority awards national radio
licences by competitive tender to the highest
bidder. The licence for the first independent
national radio service (INR1) was awarded to
Classic FM in 1991. The station, which
broadcasts mainly classical music, together
with news and information, began operating
in September 1992. The licence for the
second independent national service (INR2)
was awarded in 1992 to Virgin 1215. This
station began broadcasting in April 1993,
playing broad-based rock music. Talk Radio
UK was awarded the licence for the third
independent national service (INR3) in June
1994. The service must be speech-based and
will begin in early 1995.
In the course of the 1990s more local radio
stations will come on the air, some of which
could be neighbourhood and ‘community of
interest’ stations. Areas to be covered will
467
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
initially be those not adequately served by
independent local radio. Local radio licences
are not allocated by competitive tender; the
success of licence applications is in part
determined by the extent to which
applicants meet the needs and interests of the
people living in the area and whether they
have the necessary financial resources to
sustain programme plans for the eight-year
licence period.
Some of the locations have been selected
with small-scale ‘community radio’ in mind.
As part of its brief to develop a wide range of
radio services, the Authority aims to establish
a number of more specialist stations.
The Radio Authority also issues restricted
service licences. These are issued on demand
(subject to certain conditions and frequency
availability), usually for a maximum of
28 days. They enable local events—such as
sports events, arts festivals and conferences—
to be covered by a temporary radio service in
a limited area, for example, part of a city or
town or an arena.
TELETEXT, CABLE AND SATELLITE
SERVICES
Teletext
The BBC and independent television each
operate a teletext service, offering constantly
updated information on a variety of subjects,
including news, sport, travel, weather
conditions and entertainment. The teletext
system allows the television signal to carry
additional information which can be selected
and displayed as ‘pages’ of text and graphics
on receivers equipped with the necessary
decoders. Both the BBC and Channels 3 and
4 have a subtitling facility for certain
programmes for people with hearing
difficulties. These services are available
whenever the transmitters are on the air.
Around 50 per cent of households in Britain
have teletext sets.
Licences
The Broadcasting Act 1990 introduced a new
regulatory system for licensing spare capacity
within the lines of the television signal. This
allows more varied use of the capacity—data
transfer, for instance—but the position of
teletext and subtitling on commercial
television is safeguarded.
At the end of 1991 the ITC advertised
three teletext licences—a single public service
licence for teletext on Channels 3 and 4
(and S4C) and two separate licences for
additional commercial services to subscription
or closed user groups, using three lines of
spare capacity on each channel. These
ten-year licences are awarded by competitive
tender, with applicants having to satisfy
certain statutory requirements before their
cash bid can be considered. The ITC
awarded the main teletext licence to Teletext
Ltd, which replaced Oracle in January 1993,
and awarded one of the additional
commercial service licences on Channel 3 to
the only bidder, Data Broadcasting
International. The other additional
commercial service licence on Channel 4/S4C
was re-advertised in June 1994.
Channel 3 and Channel 4 are required
to offer subtitling services for at least
50 per cent of their programmes by 1998.
Cable Services
Cable services are delivered to consumers
through underground cables and are paid for
by subscription. The franchising of cable
systems and the licensing of cable television
services are carried out by the Cable and
Satellite Division of the ITC, while the Radio
Authority issues cable radio licences.
‘Broadband cable’, the cable systems
currently being designed and built, can carry
between 30 and 45 television channels,
including terrestrial broadcasts, satellite
television, and channels delivered to cable
operators by video. Cable systems usually
carry a local channel. Interactive services such
as home shopping, home banking, security
and alarm services, electronic mail and
remote meter readings are also possible.
Franchises have already been granted
covering areas which include two-thirds of all
homes and nearly all urban areas in Britain—
around 14.5 million households in total. In
April 1994, 66 broadband cable franchises
were in operation in Britain, eight of which
468
THE MEDIA
had been set up within the previous year.
Regulation is as light as possible to encourage
the development of a wide range of services,
and flexible enough to adapt to new
technology. The ITC is continuing the Cable
Authority’s practice of awarding only one
broadband cable franchise in each area so that
the new franchisee is protected from direct
competition in the early stages. At present
nearly 3 million homes are able to receive
broadband cable services and there are almost
650,000 subscribers.
ITC licences are required for systems
capable of serving more than 1,000 homes.
They are awarded for each area on the
basis of competitive tendering. Systems
extending beyond a single building and up to
1,000 homes require only an individual
licence from OFTEL (see p. 302). Cable
investment must be privately financed.
Direct Broadcasting by Satellite
Direct broadcasting by satellite (DBS), by
which television is transmitted directly by
satellite into people’s homes, has been
available throughout Britain since 1989. The
signals from satellite broadcasting are received
through specially designed aerials or ‘dishes’.
Several British-based satellite television
channels have been set up to supply
programmes to cable operators and viewers
with dishes in Britain and, in some cases,
throughout Europe. While some offer general
entertainment, others concentrate on specific
areas of interest, such as sport, music and
children’s programmes.
Licences are granted, on a non-competitive
basis, to programme services which are likely
to meet consumer protection standards and
are run by suitably qualified people.
The largest satellite programmer is BSkyB
(British Sky Broadcasting), which provides
nine channels devoted to light entertainment,
news, feature films, sport and home shopping
transmitted from the Astra satellite.
Other satellite channels available to British
viewers include Eurosport (sport), CNN
(news), MTV (pop videos), and TV Asia (for
Asian viewers). The choice available to
viewers is expanding steadily.
BBC International Television (see p. 472)
and Thames TV (one of the former ITV
franchisees) operate a joint entertainment
satellite channel—UK Gold—on the Astra
satellite. Programmes include drama, soaps,
comedy, children’s television and quizzes.
OTHER ASPECTS
Educational Broadcasting
Both the BBC and Channel 4 broadcast
educational programmes for schools and
Continuing Education programmes for adults.
Broadcasts to schools deal with all subjects of
the National Curriculum (see p. 418), while
programmes for adults cover many areas of
learning and vocational training. Books,
pamphlets, filmstrips, computer software, and
audio and video cassettes, are produced to
supplement the programmes. Around 90 per
cent of primary and secondary schools in
Britain use schools television. The ITC has a
duty to ensure that schools programmes are
presented on independent television.
During 1993 the BBC broadcast 181 hours
of radio and 687 hours of television on behalf
of the Open University (see p. 428).
Advertising and Sponsorship
The BBC may not obtain revenue or any
consideration in kind from the broadcasting
of advertisements or from commercial
sponsorship of programmes. The policy of
the BBC is to avoid giving publicity to any
firm or organised interest except when this is
necessary in providing effective and
informative programmes. It does, however,
cover sponsored sporting and artistic events.
Advertising and sponsorship are allowed
on independent television and radio subject
to controls. The ITC and the Radio
Authority operate codes of advertising
standards and programme sponsorship.
Advertisements on independent television
and radio are broadcast between programmes
as well as in breaks during programmes.
Advertisers are not allowed to influence
programme content. Advertisements must be
distinct and separate from programmes.
The time given to them must not be so great
as to detract from the value of the
469
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
programmes as a medium of information,
education or entertainment. Television
advertising is limited to an average of seven
minutes an hour during the day and seven and
a half minutes in the peak evening viewing
period. Advertising is prohibited in broadcasts
of religious services and in broadcasts to
schools. The service provided by Teletext Ltd
(see p. 468) carries advertisements.
The ITC and the Radio Authority’s codes
governing standards and practice in advertising
give regulations on the forms of advertisement
which are prohibited, alongside rules and
guidance on scheduling and creative matters.
Prohibited advertising includes
political advertising, betting and
advertisements for cigarettes and
cigarette tobacco and—on television
only—cigars and pipe tobacco.
Advertisements for the last two are
permitted on radio.
The Radio Authority, ITV and Channel 4
are permitted to screen religious advertisements,
provided they comply with the guidelines
issued by the ITC and the Radio Authority.
Both the ITC and the Radio Authority can
impose severe penalties on any television or radio
company failing to comply with their codes.
Sponsorship in Independent Broadcasting
In Britain sponsorship is a relatively new
way of helping to finance commercial
broadcasting, although the practice has long
been established in other countries. In return
for their financial contribution, sponsors
receive a credit associating them with a
particular programme.
The ITC’s Code of Programme
Sponsorship and the Radio Authority’s
Advertising and Sponsorship Code aim to
ensure that sponsors do not exert influence on
the editorial content of programmes and that
sponsorships are made clear to viewers. News
and current affairs programmes may not be
sponsored. Potential sponsors for other
categories of programme may be debarred if
their involvement could constrain the editorial
independence of the programme maker in any
way. References to sponsors or their products
must be confined to the beginning and end of
a programme and around commercial breaks;
they must not appear in the programme
itself. All commercial radio programmes other
than news bulletins may be sponsored.
Government Publicity
Government publicity material to support
non-political campaigns may be broadcast on
independent television and radio. This is paid
for on a normal commercial basis. The Central
Office of Information (COI) produces short
public service items, concerning health, safety
and welfare, for free transmission by the BBC
and independent television and radio. All
government advertisements and public service
information films are subtitled via electronic
text to support the deaf community.
Broadcasting Standards
The independence enjoyed by the
broadcasting authorities carries with it certain
obligations over programme content.
Programmes must display, as far as possible,
a proper balance and wide range of subject
matter, impartiality in matters of controversy
and accuracy in news coverage, and must not
offend against good taste. Broadcasters must
also comply with legislation relating to
obscenity and incitement to racial hatred.
The BBC, the ITC and the Radio
Authority apply codes providing guidance
on violence and standards of taste and
decency in television programmes,
particularly during hours when children are
likely to be viewing.
The BBC opened its own Programme
Complaints Unit in early 1994 to investigate
serious complaints about BBC television or
radio programmes.
Broadcasting Standards Council
The Broadcasting Standards Council
(BSC) was set up by the Government in
1988 to act as a focus for public concern
about the portrayal of violence and sex, and
about standards of taste and decency. Its
remit covers television and radio programmes
and broadcast advertisements, and
470
THE MEDIA
includes monitoring programmes broadcast
into Britain from abroad.
Under the Broadcasting Act 1990 the
Council was granted statutory powers
requiring the codes of practice of the BBC
and other broadcasting regulatory bodies to
reflect the BSC’s own code. The BSC
monitors programmes, examines complaints
from the public and undertakes research. In
1993-94 the Council received 2,390
complaints, of which 1,711 fell within its
remit. It has published the results of several
public attitude surveys.
Broadcasting Complaints Commission
The Broadcasting Complaints Commission, an
independent statutory body, deals with
complaints of unfair treatment in broadcast
programmes and of unwarranted
infringement of privacy in programmes or
in their preparation. In 1993-94 it received
1,049 complaints, 156 of which fell within
its jurisdiction.
The White Paper on the future of the
BBC (see p. 464) proposed that the
Broadcasting Standards Council and the
Broadcasting Complaints Commission be
merged in order to simplify the system of
broadcasting regulation.
Parliamentary and Political
Broadcasting
The proceedings of both Houses of Parliament
may be broadcast on television and radio, either
live, or more usually in recorded and edited
form on news and current affairs programmes.
The BBC and the commercial services
provide time on radio and television for an
annual series of party political broadcasts.
Party election broadcasts are arranged
following the announcement of a general
election. In addition, the Government may
make ministerial broadcasts on radio and
television, with opposition parties also being
allotted broadcast time.
Audience Research
Both the BBC and the independent sector
are required to keep themselves informed on
the state of public opinion about the
programmes and advertising that they
broadcast. This is done through the
continuous measurement of the size and
composition of audiences and their
opinions of programmes. For television, this
work is undertaken through BARB
(the Broadcasters’ Audience Research Board),
owned jointly by the BBC and the ITV
Network Centre. For radio, joint research is
undertaken for BBC radio and for
commercial radio by RAJAR (Radio Joint
Audience Research).
Both the BBC and the independent sector
conduct regular surveys of audience opinion
on television and radio services. Public
opinion is further assessed by the BBC and
ITC through the work of their advisory
committees, councils and panels. Regular
public meetings are also held to debate
services, and consideration is given to letters
and telephone calls from listeners and viewers.
Training
The BBC provides some non-fmancial
technical assistance, particularly in training
the staff of overseas broadcasting
organisations. The Government finances
overseas students on broadcasting training
courses at the BBC, the British Council and
the Thomson Foundation; the Foundation
also conducts courses overseas in broadcast
journalism, media management, radio and
television production, and technology.
INTERNATIONAL SERVICES
The BBC
In May 1994 the Corporation announced a
new organisational structure—BBC
Worldwide—for the development of its
international and commercial strategy. It
focuses the activities into three separate
divisions—BBC World Service, BBC
International Television and BBC
Publishing—operating across six distinct
regions of the world: Europe, the Americas,
Africa and the Middle East, South Asia,
Asia-Pacific, and the former Soviet Union
and South West Asia.
471
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
BBC World Service
The BBC World Service broadcasts radio
services into each of the six world regions,
using English and 38 other languages.
Programmes in Azeri and Uzbek are also
planned. Programme output amounts to
1,426 hours a week. News bulletins, current
affairs programmes, political commentaries
and topical magazine programmes form the
main part of the output. These are
supplemented by a sports service, music,
drama and general entertainment. Regular
listeners are estimated to number 130 million.
BBC World Service news bulletins and
other programmes are re-broadcast by about
900 radio and cable stations in almost
100 countries, most receiving the programmes
by satellite. Two World Service departments
also specialise in supplying radio material for
re-broadcast. BBC Transcription sells BBC
radio programmes to over 750 overseas radio
stations in 132 countries, while BBC
Topical Tapes airmails about 200 tapes of
original programmes to subscribers in over
50 countries each week.
BBC English specialises in teaching the
English language worldwide. Lessons are
broadcast by radio with explanations in
39 languages, including English, and
re-broadcast by many radio stations. BBC
English television programmes are also shown
in more than 100 countries. A range of
printed, audio and video material
accompanies these programmes.
Another part of the World Service,
BBC Monitoring, listens to and reports on
foreign broadcasts, providing a daily flow of
significant news and comment from overseas
to the BBC and the Government. This
information is also sold to the press,
businesses, academic staff and public bodies.
BBC International Television
This division is responsible for programme
sales and co-productions, non-news channel
sales, BBC World Service Television and
joint ventures with other companies.
World Service Television (WSTY) was
set up in 1991 to establish a worldwide
television service. The company is wholly
self-funding, receiving no revenue from
either the TV licence fees or from the
Government. In addition to established
satellite services in Europe, Asia, Africa and
Canada, in mid-1994 WSTV launched its
core news and information channel into
Japan and began what will become a 24-hour
Arabic language channel for the Middle
East and North Africa. The English
language news and information channel is
expected to become available in the United
States in 1995.
The BBC and Pearson pic, two of the
largest organisations in the international
media market, signed an agreement in May
1994 to develop satellite-delivered television
services in chosen markets around the world.
The first product of this alliance is a joint
venture providing two pan-European,
satellite-delivered BBC television channels—
one for entertainment (funded by
subscription) and the other for news and
information (funded by advertising). The
channels are expected to be launched before
the end of 1994.
BBC Publishing
BBC Publishing produces and distributes
consumer products—books, audio tapes,
videos, magazines, merchandising, multimedia
and interactive developments—for the British
and international markets.
COI Overseas Radio and Television
Services
The Central Office of Information, which
provides publicity material and other
information services on behalf of government
departments and other public agencies,
produces radio programmes for overseas.
Recorded material is sent to radio stations all
over the world. COI television services also
make available material such as documentary
and magazine programmes.
News Agencies
Reuters Television, the largest international
television news agency in the world, supplies
news pictures to over 200 broadcasters and
472
THE MEDIA
their networks in 84 countries. Reuters
Television is a wholly-owned subsidiary of
Reuters (see p. 479) and uses 120 Reuters
bureaux and a global satellite network to
gather and distribute its material.
WTN (Worldwide Television News),
owned by ITN, ABC (the American
Broadcasting Corporation) and Channel 9 in
Australia, supplies news and a wide range of
television services to about 1,000 broadcasters
in 93 countries, as well as to governments and
international corporations. It also produces
British Satellite News, an international
satellite news service, for the Foreign &
Commonwealth Office. The service, under
FCO editorial control, transmits programmes
five days a week. These are distributed,
mainly by satellite, free to television stations
throughout Eastern Europe, the Middle East
and Southern Africa for use in news bulletins.
WTN and Reuters both provide services
through the Eurovision network (see below)
and by satellite.
International Relations
European Agreements
In 1991 Britain implemented two important
European agreements on cross-border
broadcasting: the European Community
Directive on Broadcasting and the Council of
Europe Convention on Transfrontier
Television. Under these, countries have to
remove restrictions on the retransmission of
programmes originating from other
participating countries. They must also
ensure that their own broadcasters observe
certain minimum standards on advertising,
sponsorship, taste and decency and the
portrayal of sex and violence on television.
European Broadcasting Union
The BBC and the Radio Authority are
members of the European Broadcasting
Union, which manages Eurovision, the
international network of television news and
programme exchange. The Union is
responsible for co-ordinating the exchange of
programmes and news over the Eurovision
network and intercontinental satellite links. It
also maintains a technical monitoring station
where frequency measurements and other
observations on broadcasting stations are
carried out. The Union provides a forum
linking the major public services and national
broadcasters of Western Europe and other
parts of the world, and co-ordinates joint
operations in radio and television.
International Telecommunications Union
The BBC takes part in the work of the
International Telecommunications Union, the
United Nations agency responsible for
regulating and controlling all international
telecommunications services, including radio
and television. The Union also allocates and
registers all radio frequencies, and promotes
and co-ordinates the international study of
technical problems in broadcasting.
Other International Bodies
The BBC is an associate member of the Asia-
Pacific Broadcasting Union and also belongs
to the Commonwealth Broadcasting
Association, which meets every two years to
discuss public service broadcasting issues.
TECHNICAL DEVELOPMENTS
The introduction of computer-based digital
production equipment for both television
and radio is one of the most significant
technical advances affecting the broadcasting
industry in Britain. It allows programmes to
be made more quickly and more effectively
with the sound and vision information being
held and manipulated on computer disc
storage units. A significant proportion of
programmes produced by the BBC and
independent companies are edited on this
type of equipment.
Other recent advances include:
• the introduction of ‘all-digital’ studios
(including digital video recorders and
control desks) at both the BBC and
independent companies;
• the introduction of digital transmission
links, mainly based on optical fibre
technology, between studios and from
studios to the transmitters;
473
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
• the use of miniature cameras and
transmitters;
• the increased use of remote controlled
cameras in studios and at remote
locations; and
• an increasing use by radio broadcasters of
digital sound links using ‘dial-up’ ISDN
lines.
The BBC and the ITC also undertake
long-term research into broadcast
technology. The key topics under
investigation include:
• the transmission of digital radio (DAB)
from terrestrial transmitters and by
satellite;
• digital television transmission;
• widescreen and high definition television
(HDTV);
• surround sound for use with HDTV and
digital television; and
• audio descriptive systems for delivering
additional television sound channels that
can be used to describe the programme
for people with impaired sight.
The Press
Six out of ten adults regularly read a national
newspaper. A higher proportion—nine out of
ten—regularly read a paid-for regional or
local newspaper.
National papers have an average total
circulation of over 14 million on weekdays and
about 16 million on Sundays, although the total
readership is considerably greater. Men are
more likely to read newspapers than women,
and more people in the 45-64 age group read
a daily newspaper than in any other age group.
There are about 120 daily (Monday to
Saturday) and Sunday newspapers,
about 1,300 weekly paid-for and free
newspapers (including business, sporting
and religious newspapers), and over 6,600
periodical publications.
Several newspapers have had very long
and distinguished histories. The Observer, for
example, first published in 1791, is the oldest
national Sunday newspaper in the world, and
The Times, Britain’s oldest daily national
newspaper, began publication in 1785. The
weekly Berrow’s Worcester Journal claims to
be the world’s oldest newspaper in
continuous circulation, having been
established in 1690.
The press caters for a range of political
views, interests and levels of education.
Newspapers are almost always financially
independent of any political party. Where
they express pronounced views and show
obvious political leanings in their editorial
comments, these derive from proprietorial
and other non-party influences.
Nevertheless, during General Election
campaigns many newspapers recommend their
readers to vote for a particular political party.
Even newspapers which adopt strong political
views in their editorial columns include
feature and other types of articles by authors
of different political persuasions.
In order to preserve their character and
traditions, some newspapers and
periodicals are governed by trustee-type
arrangements. Others have management
arrangements to ensure their editors’
authority and independence.
In recent years working practices
throughout the newspaper industry have
undergone major changes in response to the
challenges posed by computer-based
technology and the need to contain costs.
Newsprint, about three-quarters of which is
imported, forms about a quarter of average
national newspaper costs; labour represents
over half. In addition to sales, many
newspapers and periodicals earn considerable
amounts from their advertising. Total yearly
spending of around £5,100 million on press
advertising makes the press by far the largest
advertising medium in Britain. Unlike most
of its European counterparts the British press
receives no subsidies and relatively few tax
and postal concessions.
New Printing Technology
Publishers have been able to reduce
production costs in recent years by using
advanced computer systems for editing and
production processes. The ‘single keying’
system, for example, allows journalists and
474
1
THE MEDIA
advertising staff to input copy directly into a
computer terminal, and then to transfer it
electronically into columns of type. Many
newspapers arrange page layouts on screen
and output full pages to photographic paper
bromides or film which are then used to
make plates for the printing press. A number
of newspapers still output columns in
bromide format from the computerised
typesetting operation; these are then pasted
up into pages before being sent to the camera
room for negatives to be produced from
which the plates are made.
News International, publisher of three
daily and two Sunday papers, has at its
London Docklands headquarters more than
500 computer terminals, one of the largest
systems installed at one time anywhere in the
world. The Financial Times runs its printing
plant in Docklands with about 170
production workers, compared with the 600
formerly employed in the City of London.
Associated Newspapers, at its Docklands
plant, is the only newspaper company to use
flexography, an advanced printing process.
Most other newspapers print by offset
lithography, a method whereby the printed
image is transferred, or offset, from the
printing plate to a rubber blanket (cylinder)
and then on to the paper. A number of the
national newspapers print their regional and
northern editions on regional newspaper presses.
There has been a tendency within Britain’s
regional and local press in recent years for
weekly newspapers to close ageing press
plants and contract out the printing of their
titles to larger groups. Many of these groups
have invested heavily in state-of-the-art full
colour printing plants to meet their own
requirements and those of a growing number
of contract customers.
NATIONAL AND REGIONAL TITLES
Newspaper Ownership
Ownership of the national, London and
regional daily newspapers lies in the hands of
a number of large press publishing groups.
There are also over 260 independent regional
and local newspaper publishers.
Although most enterprises are organised
as limited liability companies, individual
and partner proprietorship survives. The
large national newspaper and periodical
publishers are major corporations; many
are involved in the whole field of publishing
and communications. Some have shares
in independent television and radio
companies, while others have industrial and
commercial interests.
The law provides safeguards against the
risks inherent in undue concentration of
ownership. Government consent is needed to
transfer a newspaper or newspaper assets to a
proprietor whose newspapers have an average
daily circulation amounting, with that of the
newspaper to be taken over, to 500,000 or
more copies. Except in certain limited cases,
consent may be given only after the President
of the Board of Trade has referred the matter
to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission
and received its report.
Under the Broadcasting Act 1990 (see
p. 462) no proprietor of a national newspaper
or local newspaper is allowed more than a
20 per cent interest in direct broadcasting by
satellite channels, independent television
Channels 3 and 5, and national and local
radio within its circulation area. A local
newspaper can own a local radio station if the
station does not serve an area overlapping
that served by the newspaper. These rules are
under review by the Government in the light
of the technological advances and developments
in the international media market.
The National Press
The national press consists of 11 morning
daily papers and nine Sunday papers (see
Table 29.1). Formerly they were produced in
or near Fleet Street in central London with,
in some cases, northern editions being
printed in Manchester. All the national
papers have now moved their editorial and
printing facilities to other parts of London or
away from the capital altogether; some use
contract printing. The Independent, for
example, is printed in Bradford,
Northampton and Portsmouth. Scottish
editions of the Sun, Today, the News of the
World and the Sunday Times (Scottish
Section) are printed in Glasgow.
475
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Table 29.1: National Newspapers
Title and foundation date
Controlled by
Circulation^
average
February-July 1994
National dailies
‘Populars’
Daily Mirror (1903)
Daily Star (1978)
The Sun (1964)
‘Mid market’
Daily Mail (1896)
Daily Express (1900)
Today (1986)
‘Qualities’
Financial Times (1888)
The Daily Telegraph
(1855)
The Guardian (1821)
The Independent (1986)
The Times (1785)
Mirror Group Newspapers (1986) pic
United Newspapers
News International pic
Associated Newspapers Ltd
United Newspapers
News International pic
Pearson
The Telegraph pic
Guardian Media Group pic
Mirror Group consortium^
News International pic
2,497,076
671,373
4,101,988
1,796,795
1,358,246
595,468
296,634
1,013,860
400,856
275,447
507,894
National Sundays
‘Populars’
News of the World (1843)
Sunday Mirror (1963)
The People (1881)
‘Mid market’
The Mail on Sunday
(1982)
Sunday Express (1918)
‘Qualities’
Sunday Telegraph (1961)
The Independent on Sunday
(1990)
The Observer (1791)
The Sunday Times (1822)
News International pic
Mirror Group Newspapers (1986) pic
Mirror Group Newspapers (1986) pic
Associated Newspapers Ltd
United Newspapers
The Telegraph pic
Mirror Group consortium*
Guardian Media Group pic
News International pic
4,769,105
2,560,234
2,006,393
1,972,012
1,544,404
633,112
327,689
495,483
1,205,457
“Circulation figures are those of the Audit Bureau of circulations (consisting of publishers, advertisers and advertising agencies)
and are certified average daily or weekly net sales for the period.
*The consortium comprises Mirror Group Newspapers (1986) pic, Promotora de Informaciones and Espresso International
Holding.
476
THE MEDIA
In order to improve distribution and
sales overseas, editions of the Financial Times
are printed in Frankfurt, Roubaix
(northern France), New Jersey and Tokyo,
while the Guardian prints an international
edition in Frankfurt. The European, a
weekly English-language international
newspaper, is printed in Britain, France,
Germany and Hungary.
National newspapers are often described as
either ‘quality’, ‘popular’ or ‘mid-market’
papers on the basis of differences in style and
content. Five dailies and four Sundays are
usually described as ‘quality’ newspapers,
which are directed at readers who want full
information on a wide range of public matters.
Popular newspapers appeal to people wanting
news of a more entertaining character,
presented more concisely. ‘Mid-market’
publications cover the intermediate market.
Quality papers are normally broadsheet
(large-sheet) in format and mid-market and
popular papers tabloid (small-sheet).
Many newspapers are printed in colour
and most produce colour supplements as part
of the Saturday or Sunday paper, with
articles on travel, food and wine, and other
leisure topics.
The leading Scottish papers, The Scotsman
and the Herald, have considerable circulations
outside Scotland.
There is a growing market for news and
information in the electronic media, and
quality papers such as the Financial Times
provide material for use on databases and
videotext services.
Regional Newspapers
There are about 100 morning, evening and
Sunday newspapers and some 1,300 weekly
paid-for and free distribution newspapers,
publishing mainly regional and local news.
England
Of the morning papers the Yorkshire Post
(Leeds), the Northern Echo (Darlington) and
the Eastern Daily Press (Norwich), each has a
circulation of approximately 81,000, and two
provincial Sunday papers—the Sunday
Mercury (Birmingham) and the Sunday Sun
(Newcastle upon Tyne)—sell 146,500 and
124,200 copies respectively. Circulation
figures of evening papers start at about
10,000 and most are in the 20,000 to 100,000
range. Those with much larger sales include
the Manchester Evening News (210,600),
Wolverhampton’s Express and Star (215,300)
and the Birmingham Evening Mail (200,400).
Paid-for weekly papers have a mainly local
appeal and most have circulations in the
5,000 to 60,000 range.
London has one paid-for evening paper,
the Evening Standard, with a circulation
of 475,000. It covers national and
international news as well as local affairs. A
number of evening papers are published in
the outer metropolitan area. Local weeklies
include papers for every district in Greater
London, which are often local editions of
individual papers.
Wales
Wales has one daily morning newspaper, the
Western Mail, with a circulation of 68,500,
and Wales on Sunday, with a circulation of
61,700. Both are published in Cardiff.
Evening papers published in Wales are the
South Wales Echo, Cardiff; the South Wales
Argus, Newport; the South Wales Evening
Post, Swansea; and the Evening Leader,
Wrexham. Circulations range from 32,000 to
77,000. North Wales is served by the Daily
Post, published in Liverpool, and the
Liverpool Echo.
The weekly press (83 publications)
includes English-language papers, some of
which carry articles in Welsh; bilingual
papers; and Welsh-language papers. Welsh
community newspapers receive an annual
grant as part of the Government’s wider
financial support for the Welsh language.
Scotland
Scotland has six morning, five evening and
three Sunday newspapers. Local weekly
newspapers number 118. The daily morning
papers, with circulations of between
52,000 and 751,000, are The Scotsman
(published in Edinburgh); the Herald,
published in Glasgow; the Daily Record
477
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
(sister paper of the Daily Mirror); the
Scottish Daily Express; the Scottish edition of
the Sun; the Dundee Courier and Advertiser;
the Aberdeen Press and Journal; and the
Paisley Daily Express. The daily evening
papers have circulations in the range of
20,000 to 145,000 and include the Evening
News of Edinburgh, Glasgow’s Evening Times,
Dundee’s Evening Telegraph, Aberdeen’s
Evening Express and the Greenock Telegraph.
The Sunday papers are the Sunday Mail,
the Sunday Post and a quality broadsheet
paper, Scotland on Sunday. The national
Sunday Express has a Scottish edition (printed
in Manchester) and the Observer and the
Sunday Times carry Scottish supplements.
Northern Ireland
Northern Ireland has two morning
newspapers, one evening and two Sunday
papers, all published in Belfast, with
circulations ranging from 43,000 to 133,000.
They are the News Letter (unionist), the
Irish News (nationalist), the evening Belfast
Telegraph, Sunday Life and Sunday World
(Northern Ireland edition).
There are about 50 weeklies. Newspapers
from the Irish Republic, as well as the
British national press, are widely read in
Northern Ireland.
Free Distribution Newspapers
More than 750 free distribution newspapers,
mostly weekly and financed by advertising,
are published in Britain; over half are
produced by established newspaper
publishers. They have enjoyed rapid growth
in recent years and now have an estimated
total weekly circulation of about 31 million. A
free evening title for London, Tonight, was
launched in July 1994.
Ethnic Minority Publications
Many newspapers and magazines in Britain are
produced by members of ethnic minorities.
Most are published weekly, fortnightly or
monthly. A Chinese newspaper, Sing Tao, the
Urdu Daily Jang (see below) and the Arabic
Al-Arab, however, are dailies.
The Asian Times is an English language
weekly for people of Asian descent; the Sikh
Courier is produced quarterly. Afro-Caribbean
newspapers include the Gleaner and West
Indian Digest. The Voice and Caribbean Times,
both weeklies, are aimed at the black
population in general. The Weekly Journal,
the first ‘quality’ broadsheet aimed at
Britain’s black community, was launched in
1992. Leading ethnic language newspapers
include the Urdu Daily Jang, an offshoot of
the largest circulation paper in Pakistan, and
the weekly Gujarat Samachar, a Gujarati
tabloid. Publications also appear in Bengali,
Hindi and Punjabi.
Many provincial papers print special
editions for their local populations. The
Leicester Mercury, for example, publishes a
daily Asian edition, incorporating news from
the South Asian sub-continent.
THE PERIODICAL PRESS
The 6,600 periodical publications are
classified as ‘consumer general interest’,
‘special interest’ and ‘business-to-business’.
There are also several hundred ‘house
magazines’ produced by businesses or
public services for their employees and/or
clients. Directories and similar publications
number more than 2,000. The ‘alternative’
press comprises a large number of titles,
many of them devoted to radical politics,
community matters, religion, the occult,
science or ecology.
Consumer general and specialist
periodicals comprise magazines for a wide
range of interests. These include women’s
magazines; publications for children; religious
periodicals; fiction magazines; magazines
dealing with sport, motoring, gardening,
youth interests and music; humour;
retirement; and computer magazines. Learned
societies, trade unions, regiments,
universities and other organisations also
produce publications.
Weekly periodicals with the highest sales
are those which carry full details of the
forthcoming week’s television and radio
programmes, including the satellite
schedules. What’s on TUhas a circulation
figure of 1.6 million, followed by the
478
THE MEDIA
Radio Times with 1.5 million and TV Times
with 1 million.
Woman's Weekly, Woman’s Own, Woman,
Weekly News (which sells mainly in Scotland),
Woman's Realm, My Weekly and Me have
circulations in the 340,000 to 800,000 range.
In recent years several women’s magazines
from overseas have achieved large
circulations: Puma and Best, for instance,
each sell over 500,000 copies, while Bella and
Hello! are also widely read. Smash Hits, with
a circulation of 346,600, is a fortnightly
magazine dealing with pop music and teenage
lifestyles. Viz, a cartoon comic aimed at
young adults, sells 734,000 copies. Of
monthly magazines, Reader’s Digest has the
highest circulation (1.7 million).
The leading journals of opinion include
The Economist, an independent conservative
publication covering a wide range of topics.
The New Statesman and Society reviews
social issues, politics, literature and the arts
from an independent socialist point of
view, and the Spectator covers similar subjects
from an independent conservative standpoint.
New Scientist reports on science and
technology in terms that the non-specialist
reader can understand. Private Eye, a satirical
fortnightly, also covers public affairs. Weekly
‘listings’ magazines, such as Time Out,
provide details of cultural and other events in
London and other large cities.
Literary and political journals, and those
specialising in international and Commonwealth
affairs, appear monthly or quarterly, and
generally appeal to a more academic
readership. Many of the business, scientific
and professional journals, whose publication
ranges from twice weekly to quarterly, have a
considerable circulation overseas.
NEWS AGENCIES
The principal news agencies in Britain are
Reuters, based in London, the Press
Association and Extel Financial
Ltd/AFP-Extel News Ltd.
Reuters
Reuters is a publicly owned company,
employing over 11,000 staff in 80 countries.
It has more than 1,300 staff journalists and
photographers. The company serves
subscribers in 150 countries, including
financial institutions; commodities houses;
traders in currencies, equities and bonds;
major corporations; government agencies;
news agencies; newspapers; and radio and
television stations.
Reuters has developed the world’s largest
private leased communications network to
transmit its services. It provides the media
with a wide range of news, news pictures and
graphics. Services for business clients
comprise constantly updated financial news,
historical information, facilities for
computerised trading, and the supply of
communications and other equipment for
financial dealing rooms. Information is
distributed through video terminals and
teleprinters. Reuters wholly owns Reuters
Television, a television news agency
(see p. 472).
The Press Association
The Press Association operates through three
companies—PA News, PA Sport and PA
Data Design—as the national news agency for
Britain and the Irish Republic. It offers
newspapers and broadcasters a comprehensive
range of news and information services.
PA News provides editorial and
photographic coverage of the nation’s news to
the media via satellite, and supplies the news
and sports pages broadcast by Teletext on
ITV and Channel 4. It also offers an on-line
news and sport information service—
NewsFile—as well as extensive news cuttings
and picture libraries.
PA Sport distributes full coverage of
national sport, complemented by a fast results
service. PA Data Design creates camera-ready
complete pages of sports results, share prices,
racecards, TV listings and weather reports for
printing by newspapers.
Extel Financial Ltd/AFP-Extel News Ltd
This agency, a joint venture of Agence
France-Presse and Extel Financial Ltd,
supplies information and services to financial
and business communities throughout the
479
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
world. Based in London, and now part of the
Financial Times Group, Extel Financial has a
network of offices in Europe, the United
States and in the Asia Pacific region. Data is
collected from all the world’s major stock
exchanges, companies and the international
press. The company is a major source of
reference material on companies and
securities, and supplies up-to-the-minute
business and company news.
Other Agencies
News services are also provided by Associated
Press and United Press International, which
are British subsidiaries of United States news
agencies. A number of other agencies and
news services have offices in London, and
there are minor agencies in other cities.
Syndication of features is not as common in
Britain as in some countries, but a few
agencies specialise in this type of work.
PRESS INSTITUTIONS
Trade associations include the Newspaper
Publishers Association, whose members
publish national newspapers, and the
Newspaper Society, which represents regional
and local newspapers in England, Wales and
Northern Ireland. The Scottish Daily
Newspaper Society represents the interests of
daily and Sunday newspapers in Scotland; the
Scottish Newspaper Publishers’ Association
acts on behalf of the owners of weekly
newspapers in Scotland; and Associated
Northern Ireland Newspapers is made up of
proprietors of weekly newspapers in Northern
Ireland. The membership of the Periodical
Publishers Association includes most
independent publishers of business,
professional and consumer journals.
Organisations representing journalists are
the National Union of Journalists, with nearly
25,000 members, and the Chartered Institute
of Journalists, with about 1,500 members.
The main printing union is the Graphical,
Paper and Media Union, with a membership
of around 270,000.
The Foreign Press Association was
formed in 1888 to help the correspondents
of overseas newspapers in their work by
arranging press conferences, tours, briefings,
and other services and facilities.
The Guild of Editors is the officially
recognised professional body for newspaper
editors. It has approximately 420 members
and exists to defend press freedom and to
promote high editorial standards. The
British Association of Industrial Editors is
the professional organisation for editors of
house journals. The Association of British
Editors represents the whole range of
media, including radio, television, newspapers
and magazines.
TRAINING AND EDUCATION
The National Council for the Training of
Journalists (NCTJ), which represents many
regional newspaper publishers, sets and
conducts examinations, and organises short
training courses for journalists.
The two main methods of entry into
newspaper journalism are selection for a
one-year NCTJ pre-entry course at a college
of further or higher education or direct
recruitment by a regional or local newspaper.
Both types of entrant take part in ‘on-the-
job’ training. Block-release courses, preceded
by a period of distance learning, are
provided for those who have not attended a
pre-entry course. Similar courses exist for
press photographers.
The first undergraduate courses in
journalism in Britain started in 1991 at City
University, London, at the University of
Central Lancashire and at the London College
of Printing, which also provides GCE
(General Certificate of Education) Advanced
(A) level courses in journalism. Postgraduate
courses in journalism are available at the
University of Wales College of Cardiff;
City University, London; the London
College of Printing; Strathclyde
University/Glasgow Caledonian University;
and the Universities of Central Lancashire
and Bournemouth.
Courses for regional newspapers in such
subjects as newspaper sales, advertising, and
management are provided by the Newspaper
Society’s training service. Some newspaper
publishers carry out journalist training
independently of the NCTJ, awarding their
480
THE MEDIA
■
own certificates or diplomas. New National
Vocational Qualifications (see p. 425) are now
available in newspaper journalism.
Specialist training courses for journalists
and broadcasters from developing countries
and from Eastern Europe are offered by the
Thomson Foundation in Cardiff. The
Foundation runs training courses overseas
and provides consultants to assist
newspapers and news agencies in editorial
advertising as well as broadcast management.
It runs an international journalism training
centre in collaboration with Xinhua News
Agency in Beijing.
Newspapers in Education, a
worldwide scheme using newspapers
to improve standards of literacy
among young people, is run in Britain
by the Newspaper Society. The
scheme involves using newspapers in
schools for teaching a wide range of
subjects at all levels of education.
Launched in Birmingham in 1984, the
scheme has over 600 projects operated
by regional newspapers in partnership
with local schools.
Through its charitable trust, the Reuter
Foundation, Reuters offers assistance to
overseas journalists to study and train in
Britain and other parts of the world. The
Foundation awards fellowships to journalists
from developing nations to spend up to one
year at Oxford University. It also runs
shorter practical training programmes in
London for journalists from Eastern and
Central Europe.
The Periodicals Training Council is the
official training organisation in periodical
publishing. It offers a range of short courses
covering management, editorial work,
advertisement sales and circulation sales. It
has special responsibility for editorial training
and administers an editorial training scheme
for those already in employment.
PRESS CONDUCT AND LAW
There is no state control or censorship of
the newspaper and periodical press, although
newspaper proprietors, editors and
journalists are subject to the law in the
same way as any other citizen.
Readers’ representatives have been
appointed by most national papers to handle
complaints. They also help to guarantee
standards of accuracy, fairness and good
behaviour on the part of journalists.
The Press Complaints Commission
The Press Complaints Commission, a
non-statutory body, was established in 1991,
following recommendations in a report on
privacy and related matters by a government-
appointed independent committee.
The Commission was set up by the
newspaper and periodical industry in a final
attempt to make self-regulation of the press
work properly. It is funded by PRESSBOF
(the Press Standards Board of Finance),
which was set up in 1990 to co-ordinate and
promote self-regulation within the industry.
These measures were prompted by growing
criticism of press standards, with allegations
of unjustified invasion of privacy and
inaccurate and biased reporting, among other
abuses, resulting in calls for government
regulation of the press.
The Commission’s membership is drawn
from newspaper and magazine editors and
from people outside the industry. It deals
with complaints by members of the public
about the contents and conduct of
newspapers and magazines, and advises
editors and journalists. It operates a code of
practice agreed by editors governing respect
for privacy, opportunity to reply, corrections,
journalists’ behaviour, references to race and
religion, payments to criminals for articles,
protection of confidential sources and other
matters. The Commission publishes regular
reports of its findings.
In January 1993, a review of press self¬
regulation arrangements was published.
The Government is reluctant to introduce, as
the review recommended, a statutory
complaints tribunal, but is considering
possible legislative steps to deal with
intrusion into personal privacy.
The industry and the Press Complaints
Commission have reinforced voluntary
regulation through:
481
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
• measures to increase the number of
independent members of the Commission
to ensure a lay majority;
• a strengthening of the code of practice;
• the setting up of a helpline service for
members of the public who fear the code
of practice has been, or is about to be,
breached; and
• the appointment of a Privacy
Commissioner with special powers to
investigate urgent complaints about
privacy.
Advertising Practice
Advertising in all non-broadcast media, such
as newspapers, magazines, posters, sales
promotions, cinema and direct mail, is
regulated by the Advertising Standards
Authority, an independent body funded by a
levy on display advertising expenditure. The
Authority aims to promote and enforce the
highest standards of advertising in the
interests of the public through its supervision
of the British Codes of Advertising and Sales
Promotion Practice.
The Codes’ basic principles are to ensure
that advertisements:
• are legal, decent, honest and truthful;
• are prepared with a sense of responsibility
to the consumer and society; and
• conform to the principles of fair
competition as generally accepted in
business.
The Authority monitors advertisements to
ensure their compliance with the Codes and
investigates any complaints received.
The advertising industry has agreed to
abide by the Codes and to support them
with effective sanctions. Free and confidential
pre-publication advice is offered to assist
publishers, agencies and advertisers. The
Authority’s main sanction is the
recommendation that advertisements
considered to be in breach of the Code
should not be published. This is normally
sufficient to ensure that an advertisement is
withdrawn or amended. The Authority also
publishes monthly reports on the results of
its investigations.
The Authority is recognised by the Office
of Fair Trading as the established means of
controlling non-broadcast advertising. The
Authority can refer misleading advertisements
to the Director General of Fair Trading, who
has the power to seek an injunction to
prevent their publication.
The Press and the Law
The press generally has the same freedom as
the individual to comment on matters of
public interest. No laws governing the
content of the press are in operation, but
certain statutes include sections which apply
to the press.
There are laws governing:
• the extent of newspaper ownership in
television and radio companies
(see p. 475);
• the transfer of newspaper assets
(see p. 475); and
• the right of press representatives to be
supplied with agendas and reports for
meetings of local authorities and
reasonable facilities for taking notes and
telephoning reports.
There is a legal requirement to reproduce
‘the printer’s imprint’ (the printer’s name and
address) on all publications, including
newspapers. Publishers are legally obliged to
deposit copies of newspapers and other
publications at the British Library
(see p. 459).
Publication of advertisements is governed
by wide-ranging legislation, including public
health, financial services and fraud legislation.
Legal restrictions are imposed on certain
types of prize competition; copyrights come
under various copyright laws.
Laws on contempt of court, official secrets
and defamation are also relevant to the press.
A newspaper may not publish comments on
the conduct of judicial proceedings which are
likely to prejudice the reputation of the
courts for fairness before or during the actual
proceedings, nor may it publish before or
during a trial anything which might influence
the result. The unauthorised acquisition and
publication of official information in such
areas as defence and international relations
482
THE MEDIA
are offences under the Official Secrets Acts
1911 to 1989, where unauthorised disclosure
would be harmful. However, these are
restrictions on publication—that is, on
dissemination to the public by any means—
not just through the printed press.
Most legal proceedings against the press
are libel actions brought by private
individuals. In such cases, the editor,
proprietor, publishers, printer and distributor
of the newspaper, as well as the author, may
all be held responsible.
Defence Advisory Notices
Government officials and representatives of
the media form the Defence, Press and
Broadcasting Advisory Committee, which has
agreed that in some circumstances the
publication of certain categories of
information might endanger national
security. Details of these categories are
contained in Defence Advisory Notices (D
Notices) circulated to the media, whose
members are asked to seek advice from the
Secretary of the Committee, a retired senior
military officer, before publishing
information in these areas. Compliance with
any advice offered by the Secretary is
expected but there is no legal force behind
it and the final decision on whether to
publish rests with the editor, producer or
publisher concerned.
The Notices were published for the first
time in July 1993 to promote a better
understanding of the system and to
contribute to greater openness in
government (see p. 68).
Further Reading
The Future of the BBC: Serving the Nation, Competing World-wide. Cm 2621. HMSO, 1994.
Broadcasting. Aspects of Britain series, HMSO, 1993.
483
30 Sport and Active
Recreation
Participation 484
Sport in Schools 486
Televised Sport 486
Organisation and
Administration 487
National Sports Centres 490
Sponsorship and Other
Funding 491
Sports Medicine and Science 493
Spectator Safety 494
A to Z of Popular Sports 495
There is widespread participation in sport in Britain, with the most
popular activities ranging from swimming to snooker. Internationally,
British sportsmen and women compete in about 70 different sports, and in
1994 British teams took part in a number of major championships,
including the Commonwealth Games, the European Athletics Championships
and the Winter Olympics. Britain has more than 80 world champions in
over 30 sports.
PARTICIPATION
Improvements in facilities and growing
awareness of the importance of regular
exercise for good health have contributed to
increasing levels of participation in sport.
It is estimated that 29 million people over
the age of 16 regularly take part in sport or
exercise. The 1990 General Household Survey
found that almost two-thirds of those
interviewed had taken part in at least one
sporting activity during the previous four
weeks. The most popular participation sports
or activities are walking (including rambling
and hiking), swimming, snooker/pool, keep
fit/yoga and cycling.
Women and Sport
A major effort was made in the 1980s to
narrow the gap between men’s and women’s
participation in sport and active recreation.
This resulted in an increase between 1987
and 1990 of about 1 million in the number of
women taking part in sport, including
traditionally male-dominated sports, such as
football, rugby and snooker.
During the 1990s emphasis has switched
to encouraging women to adopt leadership
roles, such as coaches, officials and
administrators. Projects to promote coaching
opportunities have been established by the
Sports Councils (see p. 487) in partnership
with the National Coaching Foundation
(see p. 489) and the Women’s Sports
Foundation (WSF). Additional ways of
encouraging women to become involved in
sport at all levels and in all roles were
outlined by the Sports Council in
November 1993 in a policy document on
women and sport.
The WSF is a voluntary organisation
promoting the interests of women and girls in
sport and active recreation. With Sports
Council funding, the WSF encourages the
484
r
SPORT AND ACTIVE RECREATION
establishment of women’s sports groups
throughout Britain and organises a wide range
of events and activities. In 1986 it initiated
the Sportswomen of the Year Awards and in
1992 it launched an annual nationwide awards
scheme for girls and young women between
the ages of 11 and 19.
In May 1994 an international conference
on Women and Sport was held in Brighton.
The event, organised by the Sports Council
and the British Olympic Association, aimed to:
• discuss the best ways of bringing about
change at national and international level;
and
• agree international strategies for the
development of women and sport.
Ethnic Minorities
The Sports Councils are encouraging local
authorities and governing bodies to become
more sensitive to the needs of minority
groups in their communities. For example, in
Yorkshire a network of contacts has been
created within the black communities to
involve ethnic minorities in cricket. The project
is now being extended to some other sports.
Many sports, such as athletics, boxing,
football, rugby union and rugby league, have
already been successful in attracting
significant numbers of participants from the
ethnic minorities.
Young People
Special programmes of activity for young
people are run by the governing bodies of
individual sports. In addition, the four Sports
Councils organise local and national initiatives
to encourage more young people to take part
in sport (see p. 487). In 1993 the Sports
Council launched a new policy document—
Young People and Sport—which provides
practical advice to governing bodies, sports
clubs, local authorities and schools on how to
help young people take part in and enjoy sport.
The Sports Council is developing a
national programme for sport and young
people, which aims to develop sport at a local
level for young people between the ages of 5
and 18. It is due to be launched later in 1994.
In Northern Ireland a report on the
development of sporting opportunities for
young people was launched in 1993.
Sport for People with Disabilities
The governing bodies of sport are
increasingly taking responsibility for both
able-bodied participants and those with
disabilities. Close liaison takes place between
individual sports and the Sports Council,
which provides advice to governing bodies on
encouraging the integration of people with
disabilities.
The key organisations for people with
disabilities are the British Sports
Association for the Disabled (BSAD), the
United Kingdom Sports Association for
People with Learning Disability
(UKSAPLD), the British Paralympic
Association (BPA—see p. 489) and a range of
bodies concerned with individual disabilities
and single sports. These include the Riding
for the Disabled Association, which caters for
some 25,000 riders.
The BSAD is a national body working
across all the disabilities. It organises
regional and national championships in a
wide range of sports and also runs
training courses, coaching courses and
development days. The Scottish Sports
Association for the Disabled, the Federation of
Sports Associations for the Disabled (Wales)
and Disability Action (Northern Ireland) have
similar co-ordinating roles.
The UKSAPLD is a co-ordinating body
with a membership of over 20 national
organisations. The Association promotes and
develops opportunities in sport and recreation
for people with learning disability
throughout Britain. It is also responsible, in
partnership with the BPA, for the training
and preparation of the Great Britain team in
the Paralympics.
There are six national disability sports
organisations concerned with individual
disabilities. These organisations provide
coaching and help to organise national
competitions in conjunction with the national
governing bodies of sport and the BSAD.
They comprise:
• the British Amputee Sports Association;
485
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
• British Blind Sport;
• the British Deaf Sports Council;
• the British Wheelchair Sports
Foundation;
• Cerebral Palsy Sport; and
• the British Les Autres Sports
Association, which caters for those whose
disabilities are not covered by other
organisations.
SPORT IN SCHOOLS
All schools (except those solely for infants)
are expected to have a playing field or the use
of one, and most secondary schools have a
gymnasium. Some have other amenities such
as swimming pools, sports halls and halls
designed for dance and movement.
National Curriculum
The Government believes that all young
children should have the opportunity to learn
basic sports skills. It has therefore made
physical education (PE), which includes sport,
a compulsory subject in the National
Curriculum (see p. 418) for all pupils aged 5
to 16 in state-maintained schools in England
and Wales. Pupils will also be required from
autumn 1994 to have been taught to swim at
least 25 metres by the age of 11.
In Scotland the Secretary of State for
Scotland has issued National Guidelines
which contain programmes of study and
attainment targets for physical activity for
pupils aged 5 to 14.
Partnerships with the Local Community
The Government is encouraging stronger
links between schools and the wider
community to ensure that children have
access to the sports amenities which clubs
and associations can make available outside
school hours.
In Scotland an initiative aimed at
strengthening the links between schools, clubs
and the community was launched by the
Scottish Sports Council in 1991. ‘Team Sport
Scotland’ seeks to promote the development
of school-aged team sport and has been
supported in its first three years through
Scottish Office assistance of over £400,000.
In 1993 more than 5,000 youngsters took
part in Team Sport festivals, and 4,250
coaches, teachers and leaders benefited from
coaching courses in the nine sports covered
by the initiative.
In 1991 the Government launched a new
guide—A Sporting Double: School and
Community—to encourage and assist the
sharing of school facilities with the local
community. The Education Act 1993
includes new provisions to allow school
governors to enter into agreements for the
joint management of school premises for
community purposes.
TELEVISED SPORT
Most of the major sporting events throughout
the year, such as the Wimbledon lawn tennis
championships and the Open Golf
Championship, receive extensive television
coverage and are watched by millions of
viewers. The biggest television audiences for
a single event in 1993 were for:
1 Horse racing: the Grand National
(16.5 million viewers);
2 Boxing: Chris Eubank v. Nigel Benn
(16.4 million);
3 World Cup football: Holland v. England
(14.1 million);
4 Boxing: Frank Bruno v. Hank Williams
(14.0 million); and
5 FA (Football Association) Cup Final
replay: Arsenal v. Sheffield Wednesday
(13.4 million).
The biggest ever audience for a
sporting event shown on one channel
was achieved in February 1994, when
some 23 million viewers watched
Jayne Torvill and Christopher Dean
take part in the ice dance competition
at the Winter Olympics (see p. 500).
Following the introduction of direct
broadcasting by satellite (DBS) and the
greater availability of cable, the amount of
televised coverage has increased substantially.
486
SPORT AND ACTIVE RECREATION
Important sporting occasions (‘listed events’),
such as the Olympic Games, may not be
shown exclusively by DBS or cable and must
be made generally available to television viewers.
On terrestrial television the sports which
receive the most coverage are football, horse
racing, snooker and cricket.
ORGANISATION AND
ADMINISTRATION
Responsibility for government policy on sport
and active recreation in England rests with
the Secretary of State for National Heritage.
The Secretaries of State for Wales, Scotland
and Northern Ireland are responsible for
sport in their countries.
Responsibility for the organisation and
promotion of sport is largely decentralised,
and many sport and recreation facilities are
provided by local authorities. The main
mechanism by which the Government
directly channels financial assistance to sport
is through the Sports Councils.
Sports Councils
The Sports Councils, appointed and directly
funded by the Government, are the
Government’s principal advisers on sporting
matters. The Government works closely with
them in implementing its sports policies.
There are four Councils:
• the Sports Council—for general matters
affecting Great Britain and specifically
English matters;
• the Sports Council for Wales;
• the Scottish Sports Council; and
• the Sports Council for Northern Ireland.
The Councils make grants for sports
development, coaching and administration to
the governing bodies of sports and other
national organisations, and administer the
National Sports Centres (see p. 490). Grants
and loans are also made to voluntary
organisations, local authorities and
commercial organisations to help them
provide sports facilities. For 1994—95 the
Councils have been allocated government
funds of approximately £67 million.
Facilities receiving support from the
Sports Councils include sports halls, indoor
swimming pools, intensive-use pitches, indoor
tennis halls and school facilities.
In 1992-93 the Sports Council contributed
more than £1 million towards the
construction of sports halls in England.
Twenty-four were completed during the year
and a further 14 were under construction.
Other recent support includes a grant of
£1.5 million towards the development of a
National Hockey Stadium at Milton Keynes.
In Scotland a number of national, regional
and demonstration projects were completed
in 1993 with support from the Scottish
Sports Council. These include the opening of
a national water skiing centre at Town Loch
near Dunfermline.
The Sports Council for Wales provided
some £350,000 in grants for capital purposes
in 1992-93. In Northern Ireland the
Department of Education transferred its
capital grants role to the Sports Council for
Northern Ireland in April 1994.
Development of Sport
Strategies for the development of sport have
been drawn up by the four Sports Councils.
The aims are broadly to ensure that:
• all young people have the opportunity to
acquire basic sports skills;
• everyone has the opportunity to take part
in the sports or active recreation of their
choice; and
• everyone with the interest and the ability
has the opportunity to improve their
standard of performance in sport and
fulfil their potential.
Much of the Sports Councils’ budget is
directed at increasing participation by the
general public. The Councils are
concentrating in particular on raising
participation rates among young inner city
dwellers and people with disabilities.
Restructuring
In July 1994 the Government announced that
the Sports Council covering Great Britain
and English matters would be replaced
487
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
during 1995-96 by two new bodies: the
United Kingdom Sports Council (UKSC)
and the English Sports Council. The UKSC
would have ten members: an independent
chairman; the chairmen of the four other
sports councils; representatives of the British
Olympic Association, of amateur
non-Olympic sport and of professional sport;
and two independent members, one from a
professional and one from an amateur
sporting background.
The UKSC would represent Britain and
seek to increase its influence in international
sport, with a co-ordinating role for bringing
major international events to Britain. It would
not have a supervisory role, but instead would
oversee areas where the Government
considers that there is a need for a policy
covering the whole of Britain. These include
doping control, sports science, sports
medicine and coaching. The Government
would be inviting the UKSC to consult and
then introduce proposals for the
establishment of an effective confederation of
non-governmental sports interests in Britain.
The Government’s intention is that the
new English Sports Council would have a
sharper focus and concentrate its resources on
an increased programme of direct support to
sporting governing bodies, to help the ‘grass
roots’ of sport, and on services in support of
sporting excellence, such as the National
Sports Centres in England. The new council
would be expected to give greater support to
the pursuit of high standards of sporting
achievement, concentrating a greater
proportion of its funding on fewer sports than
at present. Governing bodies would be
required to prepare plans with specific targets
for the development of their sports, from the
grass roots to the highest competitive levels.
Local Authorities
Local authorities are the main providers of
basic sport and recreation facilities for the
local community. In England local authorities
manage over 1,500 indoor centres, largely
built in the last 20 years, as well as numerous
outdoor amenities. The facilities include
parks, lakes, playing fields, sports halls, tennis
courts, golf courses, swimming pools,
gymnasiums and sports centres catering for
a wide range of activities.
There has been a rapid growth in the
provision of artificial pitches—largely for
hockey—and a similar increase in the number
of leisure pools, which offer wave machines,
waterfalls, jacuzzis and other leisure
equipment. Gross annual expenditure by local
authorities on sport and recreation amounts
to over £1,000 million in England alone.
National Sports Associations
The Central Council of Physical Recreation
(CCPR) is the largest sport and recreation
federation in the world. It comprises 202
British bodies and 66 English associations,
most of which are governing bodies. Similar
associations in Scotland, Wales and Northern
Ireland are the Scottish Sports Association,
the Welsh Sports Association and the
Northern Ireland Council of Physical
Recreation (NICPR). Their primary aim is to
represent the interests of their members to
the appropriate national and local authorities,
including the Sports Councils, from which
they receive funding. Award schemes run by
the associations include the CCPR’s
Community Sports Leaders Award scheme
and the NICPR’s Service to Sport Awards.
In 1985 the CCPR set up the Institute of
Sports Sponsorship (ISS). Comprising some
80 British companies involved in the
sponsorship of sport, the ISS aims to develop
sponsorship at local, national and
international level.
Sports Governing Bodies
Individual sports are run by over 400
independent governing bodies, whose
functions include drawing up rules, holding
events, regulating membership, selecting and
training national teams. Governing bodies
receiving grant in aid from the Sports
Council are required to produce four-year
development plans for their sports. There are
also organisations representing people who
take part in more informal physical
recreation, such as walking and cycling. The
majority of the sports clubs in Britain belong
to the appropriate governing body.
488
SPORT AND ACTIVE RECREATION
Sports Clubs
A wide variety of recreational facilities are
provided by local sports clubs. Some cater
for indoor recreation, but more common are
those providing sports grounds, particularly
for cricket, football, rugby, hockey, tennis
and golf. There are approximately 150,000
sports clubs in Britain, with about 6.5
million members. Many clubs linked to
business firms cater for sporting activities.
Commercial facilities include tenpin
bowling centres, ice and roller-skating rinks,
squash courts, golf courses and driving
ranges, riding stables, marinas and,
increasingly, fitness centres. In all, the
private sector owns and runs some 500
major sports facilities.
Countryside Bodies
The Countryside Commission (for
England), the Countryside Council for
Wales and Scottish Natural Heritage are
responsible for conserving and improving
the natural beauty of the countryside, and
for encouraging the provision of facilities
for open-air recreation. The three bodies
assist in the provision or improvement of
recreational parks, country parks and picnic
sites and the opening up of rights of way
and National Trails.
In Northern Ireland the Ulster
Countryside Committee advises the
Department of the Environment on the
preservation of amenities and the
designation of ‘areas of outstanding
natural beauty’.
British Waterways
British Waterways is a publicly owned body
responsible for managing and developing
much of Great Britain’s inland waterways.
Many leisure and recreational pursuits, such
as angling and various types of sailing and
boating, are enjoyed on waterways and
reservoirs. British Waterways, which is
responsible for approximately 2,000 miles
(3,220 km) of canals and water navigations,
actively promotes water safety and organises
community activities.
National Coaching Foundation
The National Coaching Foundation
(NCF) works closely with national governing
bodies of sport, local authorities, and higher
and further education. Supported by the
Sports Councils, it provides a comprehensive
range of coach education and coaching
development services for coaches in all sports.
The NCF network has 15 national coaching
centres in Britain.
The NCF also runs Champion Coaching,
a scheme which provides after-school
coaching in 16 sports throughout Britain for
those aged 11 to 14. In 1993-94 there were
65 projects, with about 50,000 children and
6,000 coaches participating.
British Olympic Association
The British Olympic Association (BOA)
is the National Olympic Committee for
Britain and comprises representatives of the 33
governing bodies of Olympic sports. Its primary
function is to organise the participation of
British teams in the Olympic Games, but it is
also responsible for nominating British cities
for staging the Olympics.
The BOA determines the size of British
Olympic teams and sets standards for
selection, raises funds and makes all
necessary arrangements. It also makes
important contributions in the fields of
coaching, drug testing and control, and
sports medicine. The Association’s British
Olympic Medical Centre at Northwick Park
Hospital in north London supplies a medical
back-up service for competitors before and
during the Olympic Games.
The BOA is supported by sponsorship
and by donations from the private sector and
the public.
British Paralympic Association
Britain’s participation in the Paralympics is
organised by the BPA, which liaises closely
with the BOA. The BPA assists in the
preparation and training of Paralympic and
other international teams, and advises the
Sports Council on the distribution of grants
for all international disabled sports events.
489
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
National Playing Fields Association
The National Playing Fields Association
(NPFA) is a registered charity which aims to
ensure that there are adequate playing fields
and playspace available for use by the
community. There are affiliated associations
in the English and Welsh counties and
independent organisations in Scotland and
Northern Ireland.
A major study of England’s recreational
land was completed in 1993 as part of a
strategy to safeguard playing fields. The
£500,000 project, funded by the Department
of National Heritage, was commissioned by
the Sports Council, the NPFA and the
CCPR. The Register of Recreational Land is
the first comprehensive record of England’s
sports pitches and their facilities. It reveals
that England has over 73,000 pitches on
about 24,000 sites, about half of which are
owned by education authorities. The Register
will be used in future sports planning and
management and will be regularly updated.
Commonwealth Games Bid by
Manchester
Manchester has been selected as England’s
candidate for the Commonwealth Games of
2002. A number of the facilities are already
under construction, including an indoor
arena. Britain’s first indoor velodrome—the
National Cycling Centre—was opened in
September 1994. Both facilities were assisted
by government grants of £35 million and £8
million respectively and had originally been
planned as part of Manchester’s ultimately
unsuccessful bid to stage the 2000 Olympic
Games. Manchester is seeking additional
public and private sector support to build a
£187 million stadium.
The Commonwealth Games Federation
will decide the host of the 2002 event in
November 1995. Britain last staged the
Games in 1986, when they were hosted
by Edinburgh.
NATIONAL SPORTS CENTRES
The four Sports Councils operate a total of
12 National Sports Centres, which provide
world-class facilities for training and
competition at the highest level. First priority
at the Centres is given to the governing
bodies of sport for national squad training
and for the training of coaches. However, the
Centres also make their facilities available to
top sportsmen and women for individual
training and to the local community. All of
the Centres provide residential facilities.
England
In England the Sports Council operates four
major National Centres and a minor National
Centre for climbers at Harrison’s Rocks in
Kent. A fifth major National Sports Centre—
the National Cycling Centre—was opened in
Manchester in 1994 (see above).
Crystal Palace in London is a leading
competition venue for a wide range of sports
and a major training centre for national
squads, clubs, schools and serious enthusiasts.
Its facilities are used by over 20 separate
governing bodies of sport, and the Centre is a
regional centre of excellence for athletics,
netball, weightlifting and swimming. Crystal
Palace stadium is Britain’s major international
athletics venue, with capacity for 17,000
spectators. Other facilities include an
Olympic-size swimming pool and a Sports
Injury Centre.
Bisham Abbey in Berkshire caters for a
number of sports, including tennis, football,
hockey, weightlifting, squash, rugby and golf.
The England football, rugby and hockey
squads all train at the Centre. Bisham Abbey
has long-standing partnerships with the
British Amateur Weightlifters Association and
the Lawn Tennis Association, which has
helped to develop the Abbey as the National
Tennis Training Centre.
Lilleshall National Sports Centre in
Shropshire offers extensive sports facilities,
which are used by a variety of national teams.
Facilities include a world-class gymnastic
training centre, regularly used by the British
gymnastic squads, and extensive playing
fields for football and hockey. The Football
Association uses Lilleshall as its base for
major coaching activities and has established
a training school there.
The National Watersports Centre at
490
SPORT AND ACTIVE RECREATION
Holme Pierrepont in Nottinghamshire is one
of the most comprehensive water sports
centres in the world, with facilities for
rowing, canoeing, water skiing, powerboating,
ski-racing, angling and sailing. Its main
feature is a 2,000-metre regatta course.
Wales
The Sports Council for Wales runs two
National Sports Centres: the Welsh Institute
of Sport and the National Watersports
Centre. A further Centre—Plas y Brenin—is
run by the Sports Council.
The Welsh Institute of Sport in Cardiff is
the country’s premier venue for top-level
training and for competition in a large
number of sports. Facilities include a world-
standard gymnastics hall, a sports science
laboratory and a sports injury clinic.
The National Watersports Centre at Plas
Menai in north Wales is primarily a centre of
excellence for sailing and canoeing, with an
extensive range of activities including dinghy
and catamaran sailing, offshore cruising and
powerboat training.
Plas y Brenin National Mountain Centre,
situated in Snowdonia National Park in north
Wales, offers a variety of courses in rock
climbing, mountaineering, sea and river
canoeing, orienteering, skiing and most other
mountain-based activities.
Scotland
Scotland has three National Sports Centres,
which are operated by the Scottish Sports
Council.
The National Outdoor Training Centre at
Glenmore Lodge near Aviemore caters for a
wide range of activities, including hill
walking, rock climbing, mountaineering,
kayaking, skiing and canoeing. Its main
purpose is to provide top-quality training for
those who intend to lead or instruct others in
outdoor activities. The Centre recently
underwent a £1.6 million refurbishment.
The Inverclyde National Sports Training
Centre at Largs has a large number of
facilities, including a gymnastics hall, a
purpose-built golf training facility and a
laboratory for fitness assessment. The
Centre also acts as an important competition
venue for major national and international
championships. Facilities were improved
during 1993 with the assistance of major
investment from the Scottish Sports Council.
The Cumbrae National Water Sports
Training Centre on the island of Great
Cumbrae in the Firth of Clyde offers an
extensive range of courses catering for all
levels of ability. The Centre has a
comprehensive range of modern craft for a
wide variety of sailing activities, as well as
sub-aqua diving equipment.
Northern Ireland
The Northern Ireland Centre for Outdoor
Activities at Tollymore in County Down,
run by the Sports Council for Northern
Ireland, offers courses in mountaineering,
rock climbing, canoeing and outdoor
adventure. Also available are leadership and
instructor courses leading to nationally
recognised qualifications.
A new Northern Ireland Sports Centre
is being built at Upper Malone, Belfast,
with the assistance of a £1 million grant from
the Foundation for Sport and the Arts
(see p. 492). The Centre’s first facilities
(synthetic pitches) are expected to be ready in
autumn 1994.
SPONSORSHIP AND OTHER
FUNDING
Sport is a major industry in Britain. In
addition to professional sportsmen and
women, over 450,000 people are employed
in the provision of sports clothing,
publicity, ground and club maintenance and
other activities connected with sport. In total
an estimated £9,750 million is spent on
sport annually in Britain. The private
sector makes a substantial investment in
sports sponsorship, contributing over
£250 million a year. This involves more than
2,000 British companies.
Sponsorship may take the form of
financing specific events, or of grants to
individual sports organisations or sportsmen
and women. Investment includes sponsorship
of cricket and football leagues, sporting
491
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
events such as horse races, and of individual
performers. Motor sport and football receive
the largest amounts of private sponsorship.
Sponsorship of sport is encouraged by a
number of bodies, including:
• the Institute of Sports Sponsorship
(ISS—see p. 488);
• the Sports Sponsorship Advisory Service,
administered by the CCPR and funded
by the Sports Council, which has helped
sporting bodies to raise over £\ million
in England over the last three years;
• the Scottish Sports Council’s
Sponsorship Advisory Service, which has
raised almost £3 million directly for
Scottish sport over the last ten years; and
• the Sports Council for Wales’s
Sponsorship Advisory Service, which
generated about £158,000 for Welsh sport
in 1992-93.
Successive governments have negotiated
voluntary agreements with the tobacco
industry to regulate tobacco companies’
sponsorship of sport.
Business Sponsorship Incentive Scheme
In 1992 the Government launched the
Business Sponsorship Incentive Scheme,
known as Sportsmatch. The purpose of the
scheme is to increase the amount of business
sponsorship going into ‘grass roots’ sport and
physical recreation. The scheme offers
matching funding for new sponsorships and
extension of existing sponsorships. In
England funding is subject to a minimum of
£1,000 and a maximum of £75,000; in
Scotland and Wales the minimum is £500
and in Wales the maximum is £25,000.
Government funds for the scheme total £4.1
million in 1994—95. Priority is given for
projects involving groups such as the young,
disabled people, ethnic minorities and for
projects in deprived areas.
In England the ISS runs the scheme on
behalf of the Department of National
Heritage. In Scotland and Wales the scheme
is administered by the appropriate Sports
Council. Northern Ireland has its own sports
sponsorship incentive scheme, which is
currently being reviewed.
Sports Aid Foundation
The Sports Aid Foundation raises and
distributes funds from industry, commerce
and private sponsors in order to assist the
training of talented individuals. Grants are
awarded on the recommendation of the
appropriate governing bodies of sport to
British competitors who need help preparing
for Olympic, World and European
championships. The Scottish and Welsh
Sports Aid Foundations and the Ulster Sports
and Recreation Trust have similar functions.
Foundation for Sport and the Arts
The Foundation for Sport and the Arts was
set up by the football pools promoters in
1991 to channel funds into sport and the arts.
The pools promoters are providing the
Foundation with some £43.5 million a year.
A further £21.8 million a year is received as
a result of the 2.5 per cent reduction in pool
betting duty in the 1990 Budget. About
£43.5 million a year is available for sport.
The Foundation works closely with the
Sports Councils and other sports bodies, and
makes numerous grants to sports clubs and
sporting organisations.
Recent assistance includes:
• a grant of £36,000 to the Lodge Moor
Spinal Unit Sports Club in Sheffield to
provide two racing sail yachts and a
sailing yacht for cruises; and
• £75,000 to the Sports Council for
Northern Ireland Trust to assist with the
refurbishment of the National Sports
Centre at Tollymore (see p. 491).
Horserace Betting Levy
Most betting in Britain takes place on horse
racing and greyhound racing. Bets may be
made at racecourses and greyhound tracks, or
through over 9,000 licensed off-course betting
offices, which take about 90 per cent of the
money staked. A form of pool betting—
totalisator betting—is organised on racecourses
by the Horserace Totalisator Board (the
Tote). Racecourse bets may also be placed
with independent on-course bookmakers.
492
SPORT AND ACTIVE RECREATION
Bookmakers and the Tote contribute an
annual levy—a fixed proportion of their
turnover—to the Horserace Betting Levy
Board. The amount of levy payable is
decided by the racing and bookmaking
industries or, in cases where agreement
cannot be achieved, by the Home Secretary.
The Levy Board promotes the improvement
of horse breeds, advancement of veterinary
science and the improvement of horse racing.
In 1991-92 the total money staked in all
forms of gambling, excluding gaming
machines, was estimated at £24,594 million.
National Lottery
The National Lottery is expected to generate
substantial additional funds for sport when it
comes into operation in November 1994. In
accordance with the National Lottery etc. Act
1993, the Lottery will be run by a private
sector company which was chosen through a
competitive tendering process by the
regulator, the Director General of the
National Lottery.
Camelot Group pic has been selected
to operate the National Lottery. It
estimates that the annual turnover
could rise to a peak of £5,500 million,
with £1,600 million being available
for distribution to good causes.
The net proceeds will be equally
divided between charities, the arts, sport,
heritage and projects to mark the
millennium. Independent bodies have been
given the responsibility for distributing these
funds within each sector. For sport the
national Sports Councils will make the
funding decisions, in accordance with
directions issued by the Secretary of State for
National Heritage.
SPORTS MEDICINE AND SCIENCE
Sports Medicine
The National Sports Medicine Institute was
set up by the Sports Council in 1991 to
provide clinical services aimed at assessing
and improving fitness as well as treating and
preventing sports injuries. Based at St
Bartholomew’s Hospital, London, its facilities
include a physiology laboratory and an
information centre.
Work is in progress to develop a network
of regional centres to provide both clinical
and educational services, which will be linked
with new support services at the National
Sports Centres. The Sports Council is
allocating £575,000 towards sports medicine
in 1994—95. In Scotland a network of about
30 sports medicine centres has been created.
Sports Injuries
The adult population of England and Wales
experience 19 million sports injuries a year,
according to a report published by the Sports
Council in 1993. Based on research
undertaken at Sheffield University Medical
School, Injuries in Sport and Exercise aims to
identify for the first time the extent of sports
injuries in Britain and some of the possible
causes. The Sports Council plans to use the
research to improve sports medicine services.
The report reveals that:
• three-quarters of sports injuries are
suffered by men;
• half of the injuries occur in the age
group 16 to 25; and
• the largest number of injuries occur in
association football—however, the sport
with the highest risk rate is rugby (one
injury for every 20 playing occasions).
Sports Science
The development of sports science support
services for the national governing bodies of
sport is being promoted by the Sports
Councils, in collaboration with the BOA
and the NCF, in an effort to raise the
standards of performance of national squads.
Some 34 sports governing bodies receive
financial support. In 1994—95 the Sports
Council is contributing £672,000 in support
of sports science studies. The Sports
Council for Wales received £250,000 from
the Welsh Office in 1992-93 to establish a
sports science service at the Welsh Institute
of Sport (see p. 491).
493
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Drug Abuse in Sport
The Sports Council introduced a new
independent drug testing regime in 1988. This
provides for random testing in and out of
competition by independent sampling officers,
and the publication of adverse findings. The
Council also funds an international laboratory,
accredited by the International Olympic
Committee, at King’s College, London
University, which carries out analysis and
research into methods of detection for new
drugs which unfairly aid performance.
The Sports Council has intensified its
drugs-testing programme, with greater
emphasis being placed on out-of-competition
tests. There were 47 positive reports in
1993-94, compared with 58 in 1992-93.
Anabolic agents continue to be the substance
most regularly discovered. Funding in Britain
by the four Sports Councils for the
programme exceeded £910,000 in 1993—94.
The Sports Council for Northern Ireland
launched a Schools’ Education Pack in 1993,
aimed at 9- to 16-year-olds, as part of its
campaign against drug abuse in sport.
International Action
In 1990 the Council of Europe developed an
Anti-doping Convention to tackle the problem
of drug abuse in sport. Its main aim is to
provide an international framework within
which national anti-doping campaigns can
work effectively. Britain has fully
implemented the provisions of the convention.
The Fourth Permanent World Conference
on Anti-doping in Sport took place in
London in 1993. The conference was
organised by the Sports Council in association
with the IOC Medical Commission and
brought together more than 200 experts on
drugs in sport from 60 countries. The
conference examined anti-doping
developments throughout the world, why
competitors take drugs and how they obtain
them, and the views of the next generation of
competitors on drug abuse.
SPECTATOR SAFETY
Safety at sports grounds is governed by
legislation. The main instrument of control is
a safety certificate which is issued by the
relevant local authority. When determining
the conditions of a safety certificate, the local
authority is expected to comply with the
Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds. This was
revised in 1990 to include the relevant safety
recommendations of the Taylor Report on
the Hillsborough stadium disaster in
Sheffield in 1989, which resulted in the death
of 96 spectators.
The Taylor Report
The Taylor Report, published in 1990,
contained 76 recommendations for promoting
better and safer conditions at all sports
grounds. Its major recommendation was that
standing accommodation should be eliminated
at all grounds designated under the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act 1975. The Government
accepted the report but limited the all-seating
requirement to football in view of the
particular problems of safety and crowd
control in that sport. It set a timetable for all-
seater football stadiums.
Following a review of the policy in 1992,
the timetable was modified. Clubs in the
Second and Third Divisions of the Football
League are permitted to keep some standing
accommodation, providing that the terracing
is safe. In England and Wales the all-seater
policy is being enforced through licences
issued by the Football Licensing Authority.
Conditions in these licences require Premier
League and First Division clubs to have
all-seater grounds by a specified date; in the
majority of cases this is 1 August 1994.
In Scotland the all-seating policy is
being implemented through a voluntary
agreement under the direction of the Scottish
football authorities.
The Football Trust
The Football Trust was founded in 1990 by
the football pools companies, and provides
grant aid to help football clubs at all levels.
Its income is about £37 million a year and it
is funded partly by the pools companies from
their spot-the-ball competition and partly
from a 2.5 per cent reduction in pool betting
494
SPORT AND ACTIVE RECREATION
duty. This concession was announced in the
1990 Budget and was originally for five years.
By 1995 the concession will have provided
over £100 million to football on the
understanding that the money is used to
assist clubs in the Premier League, the
Football League and the Scottish Football
League to finance projects to improve the
comfort and safety of spectators in line with
the Taylor Report recommendations.
The Government has agreed to extend the
concession for a further five years from
March 1995 in order to help clubs in the
lower divisions of the Football League and
the Scottish Football League to meet the safe
terracing requirements.
Crowd Control
The Government has worked closely with the
police, football authorities and the
governments of other European countries to
implement crowd control measures.
Legislation has made it an offence in
England and Wales to throw objects at
football matches, run onto the playing area or
chant indecent or racist abuse. There are also
controls on the sale and possession of alcohol
at football grounds and on transport to and
from grounds.
Courts in England and Wales have the
power to prohibit convicted football hooligans
from attending football matches. They also
have powers to impose restriction orders on
convicted football hooligans to prevent them
travelling abroad to attend specified matches.
The National Criminal Intelligence Service
Football Unit co-ordinates police intelligence
about football hooligans and liaises with
overseas police forces.
A TO Z OF POPULAR SPORTS
Some of the major sports in Britain are
described below. Additional information on
these and other sports not covered here can
be found in A Digest of Sports Statistics for
the UK, published by the Sports Council.
Angling
One of the most popular countryside sports
is angling, of which there are three main
types: coarse, game and sea.
Angling is an overwhelmingly male sport,
with an estimated ten times as many male as
female participants among Britain’s 4 million
anglers. Many fish for salmon and trout,
particularly in the rivers and lochs of
Scotland and in Wales. In England and
Wales the most widely practised form of
angling is for coarse fish. Separate
organisations represent game, coarse and sea
fishing clubs in England, Wales, Scotland and
Northern Ireland.
The National Federation of Anglers in
England organises national championships for
coarse fishing and enters a team in the world
angling championships.
Athletics
Athletics is governed in Britain by the British
Athletic Federation (BAF), which is affiliated
to the International Amateur Athletic
Federation. The BAF is responsible for the
selection of British teams for international
events, and also administers coaching
schemes. For the Olympic Games and the
World and European championships one
team represents Britain.
Athletics is attracting increasing numbers
of participants. In recent years there has been
a significant growth in mass participation
events, such as marathons and half
marathons. The London Marathon, which
takes place every spring, regularly attracts
over 25,000 runners.
Recent successes at international level
include two gold medals at the 1993 World
Indoor Athletics Championships in Toronto,
Canada—Yvonne Murray in the 3,000 metres
and Tom McKean in the 800 metres—and
three gold medals at the 1993 World Athletics
Championships in Stuttgart. Britain’s gold
medallists were Linford Christie in the 100
metres, Colin Jackson in the 110 metres
hurdles (in a new world record) and Sally
Gunnell in the 400 metres hurdles, also in a
world record. Britain won a total of ten
medals in Stuttgart and finished fourth in the
overall medals table. Britain’s men’s team was
second in the World Cup, held at Crystal
Palace in September 1994.
495
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Badminton
Badminton is organised by the Badminton
Association of England and the Scottish,
Welsh and Irish (Ulster branch) Badminton
Unions. Around 5 million people play
badminton in Britain and there are over
5,000 clubs. Most clubs do not own their own
facilities but hire courts from local authority
sports centres, schools and churches.
Badminton -was introduced into the Olympics
in 1992.
In 1994 the world’s major team event—the
Thomas and Uber Cup—held its preliminary
rounds in Glasgow.
Basketball
In Britain over 750,000 people participate in
basketball. The English Basket Ball
Association is the governing body in England,
and there are similar associations in Wales,
Scotland and Northern Ireland. All the
associations are represented on the British
and Irish Basketball Federation, which acts as
the co-ordinating body for Britain and the
Irish Republic.
The leading clubs play in the National
Basketball Leagues. Mini-basketball and
micro-basketball are versions of the game
which have been developed for players under
the age of 13.
Wheelchair basketball is played under the
same rules, with a few basic adaptations, and
on the same court as the running game. Over
30 teams play in the National League.
Bowls
The two main forms of bowls are lawn (flat
green and crown green) and indoor bowls.
The game is increasingly enjoyed by adults of
all ages. In recent years the most notable
increases have been in the number of women
taking part. Bowls is also popular among
people with disabilities.
About 4,000 lawn bowling clubs are
affiliated to the English, Scottish, Welsh and
Irish (Northern Ireland Region) Bowling
Associations, which, together with Women’s
Bowling Associations for the four countries,
play to the rules of the International Bowling
Board. The British Crown Green Bowling
Association is the governing body of crown
green bowls and the indoor game in England
is administered by the English Indoor
Bowling Association. Similar associations
exist for Scotland, Wales and Northern
Ireland and there are separate women’s
associations in each country.
In 1993 Richard Corsie won the world
indoor singles championships for the third
time in five years.
Boxing
Boxing in Britain is both amateur and
professional, and in both strict medical
regulations are observed.
All amateur boxing in England is
controlled by the Amateur Boxing
Association of England. There are separate
associations in Scotland and Wales, and
boxing in Northern Ireland is controlled by
the Irish Boxing Association. The associations
organise amateur boxing championships as
well as training courses for referees, coaches
and others. The wearing of headguards is now
compulsory in all British amateur competitions.
Professional boxing is controlled by the
British Boxing Board of Control. The
Board appoints inspectors, medical officers
and representatives to ensure that
regulations are observed and to guard
against overmatching and exploitation.
Britain currently has three world champions:
Chris Eubank (World Boxing Organisation—
WBO—super-middleweight champion),
Nigel Benn (World Boxing Council
super-middleweight) and Steve Robinson
(WBO featherweight).
Cricket
The Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC), which
frames the laws of the game, and the Test
and County Cricket Board (TCCB), which
represents first-class cricket, are both based at
Lord’s cricket ground in north London, the
administrative centre of the world game.
Men’s cricket in Britain is governed by the
Cricket Council, consisting of representatives
of the TCCB, the National Cricket
Association (NCA—representing club and
496
SPORT AND ACTIVE RECREATION
junior cricket), the Minor Counties
Association, the Scottish Cricket Union, the
Irish Cricket Union and the MCC.
Following an inquiry in 1993-94 into the
organisation of cricket, the Griffiths Working
Party recommended the setting up of a single
body to guide the development of the game
at both professional and amateur level. This
would replace the Cricket Council, the
TCCB and the NCA.
Cricket is played in schools, colleges and
universities, and amateur teams play weekly
games in cities, towns and villages from late
April to the end of September. Throughout
Britain there is a network of league cricket,
minor counties and club games.
The main competition in professional
cricket is the Britannic Assurance County
Championship, played by 18 first-class
county teams in four-day matches. There
are also three one-day competitions: the
Benson and Hedges Cup, the National
Westminster Trophy and the AX A Equity &
Law Sunday League.
Every year there is a series of five-day
Cornhill Insurance Test matches played
between England and one or more touring
teams from Australia, India, New Zealand,
Pakistan, South Africa, Sri Lanka or the
West Indies. A team representing England
usually tours one or more of these countries
in the British winter. A World Cup
competition takes place every four years.
The governing body of cricket for women
and girls is the Women’s Cricket Association.
Women’s cricket clubs have regular local
fixtures and there are regular county matches
as well as an area championship. Test match
series and a World Cup competition are also
played. In 1993 England won the Women’s
World Cup for the second time.
Cycling
Cycling, one of Britain’s fastest growing
outdoor activities, includes road and track
racing, time-trialling, cyclo-cross (cross
country racing), touring and bicycle moto-
cross (BMX). All-terrain or mountain bikes
have grown significantly in popularity.
The British Cycling Federation has 17,360
members and is the governing body for
cycling as a sport. The Cyclists’ Touring
Club (CTC), with 40,000 members, is the
representative body for recreational and
urban cycling. The Scottish Cyclists’ Union
controls the sport in Scotland, with control in
Wales resting with the Welsh Cycling Union.
In Northern Ireland the sport is controlled by
the Ulster Cycling Federation and the
Northern Ireland Cycling Federation.
In the last two years two British cyclists—
Chris Boardman and Graeme Obree—have
broken the one-hour world record; in 1993
Chris Boardman became the first man to
break through 52 km. Graeme Obree also
broke a world record when winning the
world 4,000 metres pursuit title at Hamar,
Norway, in 1993.
Major cycling events taking place each
year in Britain include the Kelloggs Tour
of Britain and the CTC rally at York. In
July 1994 Britain hosted two stages of the
Tour de France, which were based in Dover
and Portsmouth and attracted large numbers
of spectators.
Equestrianism
Equestrian activities include recreational
riding, endurance riding, carriage driving,
one- and three-day eventing and show
jumping. The arts of riding and driving are
promoted by the British Horse Society,
which is concerned with the welfare of
horses, road safety, riding rights of way and
training. It runs the British Equestrian
Centre at Stoneleigh in Warwickshire. With
some 60,000 members, the Society is the
parent body of the Pony Club and the Riding
Club movements, which hold rallies,
meetings and competitions culminating in
annual national championships.
Leading horse trials, comprising dressage,
cross-country and show jumping, are held
every year at a number of locations,
including Badminton (Avon) and Gatcombe
Park (Gloucestershire).
Show jumping is regulated and promoted
by the British Show Jumping Association.
The major show jumping events each year
include the Royal International Horse Show
at Hickstead (West Sussex) and the Horse of
the Year Show at Wembley in London.
497
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The authority responsible for equestrian
competitions (other than racing) at
international and Olympic level is the
British Equestrian Federation, which
co-ordinates the activities of the British
Horse Society and the British Show
Jumping Association.
In July 1994 the British team of
Charlotte Bathe, Karen Dixon,
Kristina Gifford and Mary Thomson
won the three-day event team title at
the World Equestrian Games in The
Hague. Karen Dixon won a bronze
medal in the individual competition.
Football
Association football is controlled by separate
football associations in England, Wales,
Scotland and Northern Ireland. In England
340 clubs are affiliated to the English
Football Association (FA) and more than
42,000 clubs through regional or district
associations. The FA, founded in 1863,
and the Football League, founded in 1888,
were both the first of their kind in the
world.
In England and Wales a major change
occurred in 1992 when a new FA Premier
League was started, comprising 22 clubs.
The remaining 70 full-time professional
clubs play in three main divisions run by the
Football League. Three Welsh clubs play in
the Football League, while the National
League of Wales contains 20 semi-
professional clubs. In Scotland the Scottish
Football League has been increased for
1994-95 to 40 clubs, equally divided into
four divisions. In Northern Ireland, 16 semi-
professional clubs play in the Irish Football
League. During the season, which lasts from
August until May, over 2,000 English
League matches are played.
The major annual knock-out competitions
are the FA Challenge Cup and the
Coca-Cola Cup (the League Cup) in
England, the Tennents Scottish Cup, the
Coca-Cola Cup (the Scottish League Cup),
the Irish Cup and the Welsh FA Cup.
England is to host the European
Championships finals in 1996.
Golf
The Royal and Ancient Golf Club (R & A),
situated at St Andrews in Scotland, is the
ruling authority of the sport for most of the
world. The Golfing Union of Ireland and
parallel unions in Wales, Scotland and
England are the national governing bodies for
men’s amateur golf. These bodies co-operate
with the R & A and are represented on the
Council of National Golf Unions, which is
the British co-ordinating body responsible for
handicapping and organising international
matches. Women’s amateur golf is governed
by the Ladies’ Golf Union.
Club professional golf is governed by the
Professional Golfers’ Association (PGA) and
the Women’s PGA. For tournament
professionals the governing bodies are the
PGA European Tour and the Women
Professional Golfers’ European Tour Ltd.
The main event of the British golfing year
is the Open Championship, one of the world’s
leading tournaments. Other important events
include the Walker Cup and Curtis Cup
matches for amateurs, played between Great
Britain and Ireland and the United States, and
the Ryder Cup match for professionals, played
between Europe and the United States.
There are about 1,900 golf courses in
Britain. Among the many famous courses,
where the British Open Championship is
held, are Turnberry (which hosted the 1994
Open), Muirfield, St Andrews, Troon, Royal
Birkdale, Royal Lytham St Annes and Royal
St George’s (at Sandwich). Three of the top
20 players in the men’s world rankings are
British: Nick Faldo, Ian Woosnam and
Colin Montgomerie.
Greyhound Racing
Greyhound racing is one of Britain’s most
popular spectator sports and takes place at
37 major tracks. Meetings are usually held
three times a week at each track, with at least
ten races a meeting. The main event of the
year is the Greyhound Derby, run in June at
Wimbledon Stadium, London. There are also
about 50 mainly small tracks which operate
independently. Like the major tracks, they
are licensed by local authorities.
498
SPORT AND ACTIVE RECREATION
The rules for the sport are drawn up by
the National Greyhound Racing Club, the
sport’s judicial and administrative body. The
representative body is the British Greyhound
Racing Board.
Gymnastics
Gymnastics is divided into four main
disciplines: artistic (or Olympic) gymnastics,
rhythmic gymnastics, sports acrobatics and
general gymnastics. Both men and women
compete in artistic gymnastics, although the
apparatus used differs. Rhythmic gymnastics is
for women only and consists of routines
performed to music with ribbon, balls, clubs,
hoop and rope. Sports acrobatics is gymnastics
with people rather than apparatus. General
gymnastics is non-competitive and is
available to all age groups and to people
with special needs.
The governing body for the sport is the
British Amateur Gymnastics Association
(BAGA). Over the past decade the number of
clubs affiliated to the BAGA has nearly
doubled. The sport is particularly popular
with schoolchildren and young adults, and it is
estimated that between 3 and 4 million
schoolchildren take part in some form of
gymnastics every day.
At the 1993 World Gymnastics
Championships in Birmingham Neil Thomas
became the first British medallist ever in
world-class gymnastics when he won the silver
medal in the floor exercise.
Highland Games
Scottish Highland Games cover a wide range
of athletic competitions in addition to activities
such as dancing and piping competitions. The
main events include running, cycling,
throwing the hammer, tossing the caber and
putting the shot.
Over 70 gatherings of various kinds take
place throughout Scotland, the most famous of
which include the annual Braemar Gathering
and the Argyllshire and Cowal Gatherings.
The Scottish Games Association is the
official governing body responsible for athletic
sports and games at Highland and Border
events in Scotland.
Hockey
The modern game of hockey was started by
the Hockey Association (of England), which
acts as the governing body for men’s hockey.
Parallel associations serve in Wales and
Ireland. In Scotland an association covers
both men’s and women’s hockey.
Levels of sponsorship and participation
have increased in recent years following
British success at the 1988 and 1992
Olympics. Cup competitions and leagues exist
at national, divisional or district, and club
levels, both indoors (six-a-side) and outdoors,
and there are regular international matches.
The controlling body of women’s hockey
in England is the All England Women’s
Hockey Association; separate associations
regulate the sport in Scotland, Wales and
Ireland. League, county, club and school
championships for both outdoor and indoor
hockey are played annually in England.
Regular international matches are also played.
Traditionally hockey has been played on
grass pitches, but recently there has been an
increase in the use of artificial pitches, which
allow a faster, more free-flowing game. All
major competitions are now played on an
artificial surface.
Horse Racing
Horse racing takes two forms—flat racing,
and National Hunt (steeplechasing and hurdle
racing). The main flat race season runs from
late March to early November, but following
the introduction of all-weather racing in 1989
flat race meetings now take place throughout
the year. The Derby, run at Epsom, is the
outstanding event in the flat racing calendar.
Other classic races are: the Two Thousand
Guineas and the One Thousand Guineas,
both run at Newmarket; the Oaks (Epsom);
and the St Leger (Doncaster). Floodlit racing
was introduced in December 1993 at
Wolverhampton all-weather racecourse.
Britain has 59 racecourses and about
12,000 horses currently in training.
The National Hunt season runs from
late July/early August to early June, but
in 1995 for the first time there will be
some meetings in the period from early
499
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
June to late July. The most important
meeting is the National Hunt Festival held at
Cheltenham in March, which features the
Gold Cup and the Champion Hurdle. The
Grand National, run at Aintree, near
Liverpool, is the world’s best-known
steeplechase and dates from 1839. In 1994
Richard Dunwoody became only the fourth
National Hunt jockey to ride over 1,000
winners in Britain.
In 1993 the British Horseracing Board was
established as the governing authority for
racing in Britain. Its responsibilities include
the fixture list, race programmes, the financing
of racing administration, relations with the
Government and the betting industry, and
central marketing. The Jockey Club, as the
regulatory authority, remains responsible for
licensing, discipline and security.
Ice Skating
Ice skating takes three main forms: figure
skating (solo and pairs), ice dancing and
speed-skating (indoor and outdoor). The
governing body is the National Ice Skating
Association of United Kingdom Ltd.
Participation in ice skating is concentrated
among the under-25s, and is one of the few
sports that attracts more female than male
participants as individuals. There are over
70 rinks in Britain; almost half have opened
since 1985.
British couples have won the world ice
dance championship 17 times. Jayne Torvill
and Christopher Dean, who won four
consecutive world championships between
1981 and 1984, returned to amateur
competition for a short time in 1994
following a rule change regarding
professional status. The couple won a gold
medal at the European Championships in
Copenhagen and a bronze medal at the
1994 Winter Olympics in Lillehammer,
Norway. A bronze was also won by Nicky
Gooch in the indoor speed skating, making it
Britain’s best performance at a Winter
Olympics since 1948.
Judo
Judo, an individual combat sport derived
from the ancient Japanese art of ju-jitsu, is
popular not only as a competitive sport and
self-defence technique, but also as a means of
general fitness training. An internationally
recognised grading system is in operation
through the sport’s governing body, the
British Judo Association.
In the 1992 Olympics women’s judo was
included for the first time, and Britain won a
total of four medals in the women’s and
men’s events. Britain has won medals for
judo at every Olympic Games since 1972.
At the 1993 World Judo Championships
Nicola Fairbrother won a gold medal in the
lightweight category.
Keep Fit
Various forms of movement and exercise
activities are practised in Britain. In March
1994 the Sports Council launched the
Exercise Association of England, as an
impartial advisory authority for the
organisations involved in these activities. The
Keep Fit Association, one of the largest
governing bodies in England, receives
funding from the Sports Council to
promote physical fitness and a positive
attitude to health in England. Its national
certificated training scheme for keep fit
teachers is recognised by local education
authorities throughout Britain. Autonomous
associations serve Scotland, Wales and
Northern Ireland.
Martial Arts
A broad range of martial arts, mainly derived
from Japan, the People’s Republic of China,
Taiwan, Hong Kong and Korea, has been
introduced into Britain during the 20th
century. There are recognised governing
bodies responsible for their own activities in
karate, ju-jitsu, aikido, Chinese martial arts,
kendo, taekwondo and tang soo do. The most
popular martial art is karate, with over
100,000 participants.
Following a review of martial arts
organisations undertaken in 1990, the Sports
Council has set up an Advisory Group on
Martial Arts to provide a forum for
discussing martial arts issues.
500
SPORT AND ACTIVE RECREATION
Motor-car Sports
The main four-wheeled motor sports include
motor racing, autocross, rallycross, rallying
and karting. In motor racing the Grand Prix
Formula 1 World Championship is the major
form of the sport.
The governing body for four-wheeled
motor sport in Britain is the RAC (Royal
Automobile Club) Motor Sports Association.
The Association issues licences for a variety
of motoring competitions and organises the
Network Q^RAC Rally, an event in the
contest for the World Rally Championship,
and the British Grand Prix, which is held
at Silverstone as part of the Formula 1
World Championship.
In 1993 Nigel Mansell became the
first person to win the IndyCar
World Series Championship in his
debut year and the only driver to win
the Formula 1 world championship
and IndyCar titles in successive years.
By October 1994 Damon Hill had
recorded eight Grand Prix victories
in his first two full seasons of
Formula 1 racing.
British car constructors, including Lotus,
McLaren and Williams, have enjoyed
outstanding success in Grand Prix racing
and many other forms of racing, and Britain
has had seven world champion motor
racing drivers.
Motor-cycle Sports
Motor-cycle sports include road racing,
moto-cross, grass track, speedway, trials, drag
racing and sprint. It is estimated that there
are between 40,000 and 50,000 competitive
motor cyclists in Britain.
The governing bodies of the sport are the
Auto-Cycle Union in England and Wales, the
Scottish Auto-Cycle Union and Motor Cycle
Union of Ireland (in Northern Ireland). The
major events of the year include the Isle of
Man TT races and the British Road Race
Grand Prix. The Auto-Cycle Union provides
off-road training by approved instructors for
riders of all ages.
Mountaineering
All forms of mountaineering, which includes
mountain walking and rock-climbing, are
growing in popularity. A recent survey
estimated that there were 700,000 climbers
in Britain. The representative body is
the British Mountaineering Council
(BMC), which works closely with the
Mountaineering Councils of Scotland and
Ireland. The main areas of work include
access and conservation. There are over
300 mountaineering and climbing clubs in
Britain, and four National Centres for
mountaineering activities run by the Sports
Councils (see pp. 490-1).
British mountaineers have played a leading
role in the exploration of the world’s great
mountain ranges. The best-known is Chris
Bonington, who has climbed Everest and led
many other successful expeditions. Some of
the world’s hardest rock climbs are found on
cliffs in Britain, and leading British climbers,
such as Jerry Moffat and Ben Moon, have set
new standards of difficulty on cliffs overseas.
The BMC sends a team to international
competitions on artificial climbing walls, and
the first world champion in this relatively
new sport was Simon Nadin in 1989.
Netball
More than 60,000 adults play netball
regularly in England and a further 1 million
participants play in schools. The sport is
played almost exclusively by women and girls
both indoors and outdoors.
The All England Netball Association is the
governing body in England. Scotland, Wales
and Northern Ireland have their own
governing bodies. The number of clubs
affiliated to the All England Association has
more than doubled in recent years.
The 1995 World Netball Championships
are to be held at the National Indoor Arena
in Birmingham.
Rowing
Rowing is taught in many schools,
universities and rowing clubs throughout
Britain. The main types of boats are single,
501
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
pairs and double sculls, fours and eights. The
governing body in England is the Amateur
Rowing Association; similar bodies regulate the
sport in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.
The University Boat Race, between eight-
oared crews from Oxford and Cambridge, has
been rowed on the Thames almost every
spring since 1836. The Head of the River
Race, also on the Thames, is the largest
assembly of racing craft in the world, with
more than 420 eights racing in procession. At
the Henley Regatta in Oxfordshire crews
from all over the world compete each July in
various kinds of race over a straight course of
1 mile 550 yards (about 2.1 km).
At the World Rowing Championships in
September 1994 Britain won three gold
medals: the coxless pairs (Steven Redgrave
and Matthew Pinsent), lightweight single
sculls (Peter Haining), and the men’s
lightweight eights.
Rugby Football
The amateur sport of rugby union football (a
15-a-side game) has been played in Britain
since the first half of the 19th century. It is
played under the auspices of the Rugby
Football Union in England and parallel
bodies in Wales, Scotland and Ireland (for the
Irish Republic and Northern Ireland).
The Five Nations Championship between
England, Scotland, Wales, Ireland and France
is contested each year, and in 1994 was won
by Wales. Overseas tours are undertaken by
the national sides and by the British Lions, a
team representing Great Britain and Ireland.
Tours are also made to Britain by teams
representing the major rugby-playing nations.
There are important domestic competitions
such as the divisional and county
championships in England and the league and
national club knock-out competitions in
England and Wales.
The Rugby World Cup is held every four
years and in 1991 England were runners-up
in the final at Twickenham. In April 1994
England won the Women’s World Cup.
Tournaments of seven-a-side rugby union
take place, the most famous being the
Middlesex Sevens, held every year at
Twickenham. An inaugural World Cup
Sevens, held in Edinburgh in 1993, was won
by England. Youngsters aged six and
upwards are often introduced to the game
through mini rugby, which is played on
smaller pitches and involves a minimum of
physical contact.
Rugby league (a 13-a-side game) has its
own distinct set of rules, but has kept many
of the features of the union game. However,
unlike rugby union, which is played
nationally, it is concentrated in the north of
England, although an amateur version of the
game is played throughout the country.
The governing body of the professional
game is the Rugby Football League, which
sends touring teams representing Great
Britain to Australia, New Zealand and Papua
New Guinea; annual matches are also played
against France. The Challenge Cup Final, the
major club match of the season, is played at
Wembley Stadium in London. There are two
divisions of the League, each with 16 teams.
The amateur game is governed by the British
Amateur Rugby League Association.
Skiing
Skiing takes place in Scotland from
December to May and also at several English
locations when there is sufficient snow. The
five established winter sports areas in
Scotland are Cairngorm, Glencoe, Glenshee,
the Lecht and Nevis Range, all of which have
a full range of ski-lifts, prepared ski runs and
professional instructors.
There are over 115 artificial or dry
ski-slopes located throughout Britain, and it
is estimated that 1.5 million people in Britain
take part in the sport. The sport’s governing
body is the British Ski Federation.
Snooker and Billiards
Snooker has greatly increased in popularity in
recent years and become a major spectator
sport as a result of extensive television
coverage of the professional tournaments. It
is estimated that between 7 and 8 million
people now play the game.
British players have an outstanding record
in snooker and have dominated the major
professional championships. The main
502
SPORT AND ACTIVE RECREATION
tournament is the annual Embassy World
Professional Championship, held in Sheffield.
In the 1980s Steve Davis won the world title
six times and in 1994 Stephen Hendry
became world champion for the fourth time.
The controlling body for the non¬
professional game in England is the English
Association for Snooker and Billiards.
Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland have
separate associations. The World Professional
Billiards and Snooker Association is
responsible for professional players, organises
all world-ranking professional events and
holds the copyright for the rules.
A growing number of women play snooker
and billiards. Their representative body is the
World Ladies’ Billiards and Snooker
Association, with around 250 members. A
women’s world snooker championship is
played every year in London. The Embassy
World Professional Championship was
opened to women in 1992.
Squash
The governing body for squash in England is
the Squash Rackets Association; there are
separate governing bodies in Wales, Scotland
and Northern Ireland. The British Open
Championships is one of the major world
events in the sport.
The number of players in Britain is
estimated at over 2 million, of whom more
than 500,000 compete regularly in inter-club
league competitions. There are nearly
9,000 squash courts in England. The main
providers of facilities are member clubs,
commercial organisations and local
authorities.
Swimming
Swimming is enjoyed by millions of people
with a wide range of abilities from all age
groups. All forms of competitive swimming
are governed by the Amateur Swimming
Association (ASA) in England and by similar
associations in Scotland and Wales. These
three associations combine to form the
Amateur Swimming Federation of Great
Britain, which acts as the co-ordinating body
for the selection of Great Britain teams and
the organisation of international competitions.
Northern Ireland forms part of the Irish
Amateur Swimming Association. Instruction
and coaching are provided by qualified
teachers and coaches who hold certificates
awarded mainly by the ASA.
Britain won eight medals at the inaugural
World Short Course Championships in
Palma, Mallorca, in December 1993 and
finished fourth in the overall medals table.
Gold medals were won by Nick Gillingham
in the 200 metres breaststroke, Karen
Pickering in the 200 metres freestyle and
Mark Foster in the 50 metres freestyle.
Table Tennis
Table tennis is played by a broad range of
adults, with men far outnumbering women.
The sport is particularly popular in schools
and youth clubs, and is also a major
recreational and competitive sport for people
with disabilities.
The governing body in England is the
English Table Tennis Association. There are
separate governing bodies in Scotland, Wales
and Northern Ireland.
Tennis
The controlling body for tennis in Great
Britain is the Lawn Tennis Association
(LTA), to which the Welsh and Scottish
LTAs are affiliated. The equivalent body
covering Northern Ireland is Tennis Ireland
(which covers the whole of Ireland).
The main tournament is the annual
Wimbledon fortnight, one of the four tennis
‘Grand Slam’ tournaments. This draws large
crowds to the All England Club, and the
tournament is covered extensively on
television. Prize money has increased
dramatically over the last decade and totalled
£5.1 million in 1994. Since 1981 the All
England Club has donated over £100 million
to the LTA.
There are national and county
championships and national competitions for
boys’ and girls’ schools. Short tennis has
been introduced to encourage children aged
five and over to take part in the sport. The
game uses a court of similar size to a
503
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
badminton court and is played in over 3,000
schools and in leisure centres. In all, about
3 million people play tennis in Britain. There
has been a big increase in the number of
indoor courts in the last decade.
Tenpin Bowling
It is estimated that about 4.8 million people
take part in tenpin bowling every year in
Britain. There are over 200 national
tournaments and an annual National
Championship.
Britain has over 200 indoor bowling
centres, the first having opened in 1960.
More than 30,000 people belong to the
sport’s governing body, the British Tenpin
Bowling Association.
Volleyball
Volleyball is played both indoors and
outdoors, and is particularly popular among
schoolchildren and college students. Mini¬
volley is a version of the game adapted for
children under 13.
The English Volleyball Association and
parallel associations in Scotland, Wales and
Northern Ireland act as the sport’s
governing bodies. The British Volleyball
Federation meets regularly to discuss
interests of common concern and to draw
up policies.
Yachting
Yachting comprises sailing, powerboating and
windsurfing on both inland and offshore
waters. Offshore racing takes place between
one-design classes or under handicap, which
provides level racing for boats of different
size and shape. The most well-known ocean
races include the Whitbread Round The
World Yacht Race and the Fastnet Race.
Powerboat racing has two main forms:
inland circuit racing and offshore racing.
Events take place at many locations, including
Liverpool and Cardiff docks.
The Royal Yachting Association is the
governing body for all yachting in Britain. It
is estimated that about 3 million people
participate in the sport.
Further Reading
Sport and Leisure. Aspects of Britain series, HMSO, 1994.
A Digest of Sports Statistics for the UK. The Sports Council. £25.
504
Appendices
and Index
Government Departments
and Agencies
An outline of the principal functions of the main government departments
and executive agencies (see p. 64) is given below.
Cabinet ministries are indicated by an asterisk. Executive agencies for
which the Secretaries of State for Northern Ireland, Scotland or Wales are
responsible appear in italics. Executive agencies are normally listed under the
relevant department, although in some cases they are included within the
description of the departments’ responsibilities.
The work of many of the departments and agencies listed below covers Britain
as a whole. Where this is not the case, the following abbreviations are used:
• (GB) for functions covering England, Wales and Scotland;
• (E,W & NI) for those covering England, Wales and Northern Ireland;
• (E & W) for those covering England and Wales; and
• (E) for those concerned with England only.
The principal address and telephone number of each department are given. For
details of the addresses of executive agencies see the Civil Service Year Book.
The Cabinet Office and the responsibilities of the Office of Public Service
and Science—OPSS—are described on p. 63.
Cabinet Office (Office of Public Service
and Science)
70 Whitehall, London SW1A 2AS
Tel: 0171 271 1234
Executive Agencies
Chessington Computer Centre
Civil Service College
Civil Service Occupational Health Service
Recruitment and Assessment Services Agency
Two further agencies report to the
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster but are
departments in their own right rather than
part of OPSS. They are:
Central Office of Information (see p. 512)
HMSO (Her Majesty’s Stationery Office—
see p. 512)
Economic Affairs
^Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and
Food
Whitehall Place, London SW1A 2HH
Tel: 0171 270 3000
Policies for agriculture, horticulture, fisheries
and food; responsibilities for related
environmental and rural issues (E); food policies.
Executive Agencies
ADAS (Agricultural Development and
Advisory Service)
Central Science Laboratory
Central Veterinary Laboratory
Intervention Board
Pesticides Safety Directorate
Veterinary Medicines Directorate
507
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
^Department of Employment
Caxton House, Tothill Street, London
SW1H 9NF Tel: 0171 273 3000
Employment policy; training policy, youth
education and business start-up; vocational
qualifications; health and safety at work;
industrial relations; equal opportunities;
co-ordinating government policy on issues
of particular concern to women; statistics
on labour and industrial matters (GB); the
Careers Service (E); international representation
on employment and training matters.
Executive Agency
Employment Service
*Department of Trade and Industry
Ashdown House, 123 Victoria Street, London
SW1E 6RB Tel: 0171 215 5000
Industrial and commercial affairs; promotion of
new enterprise and competition; information
about new business methods and opportunities;
investor protection and consumer affairs.
Specific responsibilities include innovation
policy; regional industrial policy and inward
investment promotion; small businesses;
management best practice and business/education
links; deregulation; international trade policy;
commercial relations and export promotion;
competition policy; company law;
insolvency; radio regulation; patents and
copyright protection (GB); the development of
new sources of energy and the Government’s
relations with the energy industries.
Executive Agencies
Accounts Services Agency
Companies House
Insolvency Service
Laboratory of the Government Chemist
NEL (National Engineering Laboratory)
National Physical Laboratory
National Weights and Measures Laboratory
Patent Office
Radiocommunications Agency
*Department of Transport
2 Marsham Street, London SW1P 3EB
Tel: 0171 276 3000
Land, sea and air transport; domestic and
international civil aviation; international
transport agreements; shipping and the ports
industry; marine pollution; regulation of
drivers and vehicles (including road safety);
regulation of the road haulage industry;
transport and the environment. Motorways
and trunk roads; oversight of local authority
transport (E). Sponsorship of London
Transport (E), British Rail (GB) and the
Civil Aviation Authority.
Executive Agencies
Coastguard Agency
Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency
Driving Standards Agency
Highways Agency
Marine Safety Agency
Transport Research Laboratory
Vehicle Certification Agency
Vehicle Inspectorate
#HM Treasury
Parliament Street, London SW1P 3AG
Tel: 0171 270 3000
Oversight of tax and monetary policy;
planning and control of public spending;
international financial relations; supervision
of the financial system; and responsibility for
a range of Civil Service management issues.
HM Customs and Excise
New King’s Beam House, 22 Upper Ground,
London SE1 9PJ Tel: 0171 620 1313
Collecting and accounting for Customs and
Excise revenues, including value added tax;
agency functions, including controlling
certain imports and exports and compiling
trade statistics.
ECGD (Export Credits Guarantee
Department)
2 Exchange Tower, Harbour Exchange
Square, London E14 9GS Tel: 0171 512 7000
Provision of insurance for project
exporters against the risk of not being paid
for goods and services; access to bank finance
for exports; insurance cover for new
508
GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES
investment overseas; reinsurance to private
sector insurance companies offering export
credit insurance.
Board of Inland Revenue
Somerset House, London WC2R 1LB
Tel: 0171 438 6622
Administration and collection of direct taxes;
valuation of property (GB).
Executive Agency
Valuation Office
PAYMASTER: Office of HM Paymaster
General
Sutherland House, Russell Way, Crawley,
West Sussex RH10 1UH Tel: 01293 560999
An executive agency providing banking
services for government departments other
than the Boards of Inland Revenue and
Customs and Excise, and the administration
and payment of public service pensions.
Central Statistical Office
Great George Street, London SW1P 3AQ
Tel: 0171 270 3000
Preparing and interpreting key economic
statistics needed for government policies;
collecting and publishing business
statistics; publishing annual and monthly
statistical digests.
REGULATORY BODIES
The Office of Electricity Regulation
(OFFER)
Hagley House, Hagley Road, Birmingham
B16 8QG Tel: 0121 456 2100
Regulating and monitoring the electricity
supply industry; promoting competition in
the generation and supply of electricity;
ensuring that companies comply with the
licences under which they operate; protecting
customers’ interests (GB).
Office of Gas Supply (OFGAS)
Stockley House, 130 Wilton Road, London
SW1V lLQ_Tel: 0171 828 0898
Regulating and monitoring British Gas to
ensure value for money for customers, and
granting authorisations to other suppliers of
gas through pipes; enabling development of
competition in the industrial market.
Office of the National Lottery
(OFLOT)
PO Box 4465, London SW1Y 5XL
Tel: 0171 240 4624
Responsible for the grant, variation and
enforcement of licences to run the
National Lottery and promote lotteries as
part of it.
Office for Standards in Education
(OFSTED)
Elizabeth House, York Road, London
SE1 7PH Tel: 0171 925 6800
Monitoring standards in English schools;
regulating the work of independent registered
schools inspectors (E).
Office of Telecommunications
(OFTEL)
50 Ludgate Hill, London EC4M 7JJ
Tel: 0171 634 8700
Monitoring telecommunications operators’
licences; enforcing competition legislation;
representing users’ interests.
Office of Water Services
(OFWAT)
Centre City Tower, 7 Hill Street,
Birmingham B5 4UA Tel: 0121 625 1300
Monitoring the activities of companies
appointed as water and sewerage undertakers
(E & W); regulating of prices and
representing customers’ interests.
Legal Affairs
#The Lord Chancellor’s Department
Trevelyan House, 30 Great Peter Street,
London SW1P 2BY Tel: 0171 210 8500
Administration of the Supreme Court
(Court of Appeal, High Court and Crown
Court), the county courts, ministerial
responsibility for the locally administered
509
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
magistrates’ courts (E & W), together
with certain tribunals and the Council on
Tribunals, and the Official Solicitor’s
Department.
All work relating to judicial and quasi¬
judicial appointments (see p. 104). Overall
responsibility for civil and criminal legal aid,
for the Law Commission and for the
promotion of general reforms in the civil
law. Lead responsibility for private
international law. The Legal Services
Ombudsman and the Advisory Committee
on Legal Education and Conduct are
independent of the Department but report
to the Lord Chancellor. The Lord
Chancellor also has responsibility for the
Northern Ireland Court Service; national
archives (maintained by the Public Record
Office—see below) and the Public Trust
Office. Except for the Northern Ireland
Court Service, the Lord Chancellor’s remit
covers England and Wales only.
Executive Agencies
HM Land Registry
Public Record Office
Public Trust Office
Crown Prosecution Service
50 Ludgate Hill, London EC4M 7EX
Tel: 0171 273 8000
An independent organisation responsible for
the prosecution of criminal cases resulting
from police investigations, headed by the
Director of Public Prosecutions and
accountable to Parliament through the
Attorney General, superintending minister
for the service (E & W).
Legal Secretariat to the Law Officers
Attorney General’s Chambers, 9
Buckingham Gate, London SW1E 6JP
Tel: 0171 828 7155
Supporting the Law Officers of the Crown
(Attorney General and Solicitor General) in
their functions as the Government’s
principal legal advisers (E, W & NI).
The Attorney General, who is also
Attorney General for Northern Ireland, is
the Minister responsible for the Treasury
Solicitor’s Department (see below), and has
a statutory duty to superintend the Crown
Prosecution Service (see above), the
Serious Fraud Office (see below), and the
Director of Public Prosecutions for
Northern Ireland.
Parliamentary Counsel
36 Whitehall, London SW1A 2AY
Tel: 0171 210 6633
Drafting of government Bills (except those
relating exclusively to Scotland); advising
departments on parliamentary procedure
(E, W & NI).
HM Procurator General and Treasury
Solicitor’s Department
Queen Anne’s Chambers, 28 Broadway,
London SW1H 9JS Tel: 0171 210 3000
Provision of a legal service for a large number
of government departments. Duties include
instructing Parliamentary Counsel on Bills
and drafting subordinate legislation;
providing litigation and, through an executive
agency, conveyancing services; and giving
general advice on interpreting and applying
the law (E & W).
Executive Agency
The Government Property Lawyers
Lord Advocate’s Department and Crown
Office (see p. 514)
Serious Fraud Office
Elm House, 10-16 Elm Street, London
WC1X OBJ Tel: 0171 239 7272
Investigating and prosecuting serious and
complex fraud under the superintendence of
the Attorney General (E, W & NI).
External Affairs and
Defence
^Ministry of Defence
Main Building, Whitehall, London SW1A
2HB Tel: 0171 218 9000
Defence policy and control and
administration of the armed services.
510
GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES
Defence Agencies
Army Base Repair Organisation
Chemical and Biological Defence Establishment
Defence Accounts Agency
Defence Analytical Services Agency
Defence Animal Centre
Defence Operational Analysis Centre
Defence Postal and Courier Services Agency
Defence Research Agency
Duke of York’s Royal Military School
Hydrographic Office
Meteorological Office
Military Survey
Naval Aircraft Repair Organisation
Queen Victoria School
RAF Support Command’s Maintenance
Group Defence Agency
RAF Training Group
Service Children’s Schools (North West Europe)
Foreign & Commonwealth Office
King Charles Street, London SW1A 2AH
Tel: 0171 270 3000
Conduct of Britain’s overseas relations,
including advising on policy, negotiating with
overseas governments and conducting business
in international organisations, promoting
British exports and trade generally;
administering aid (see below). Presenting
British ideas, policies and objectives to the
people of overseas countries; administering the
remaining dependent territories; and
protecting British interests abroad, including
the welfare of British citizens.
Executive Agency
Wilton Park Conference Centre
*Overseas Development Administration
94 Victoria Street, London SW1E 5JL
Tel: 0171 917 7000
Responsibility for Britain’s overseas aid to
developing countries, for global environmental
assistance, and also for the joint
administration, with the Foreign &
Commonwealth Office, of assistance to
Eastern Europe and the countries of the
former Soviet Union. Responsibility for
overseas superannuation.
Executive Agency
Natural Resources Institute
Social Affairs, the
Environment and Culture
^Department for Education
Sanctuary Buildings, Great Smith Street,
London SW1P 3BT Tel: 0171 925 5000
Formulates and promotes policies for
education (E); responsibility for the
Government’s relations with universities (GB).
Executive Agency
Teachers’ Pensions Agency
^Department of the Environment
2 Marsham Street, London SW1P 3EB
Tel: 0171 276 0900
Policies for local government finance and
structure; land use planning; housing;
construction industry; energy efficiency;
environmental protection; water industry and
the British Waterways Board; urban and rural
regeneration; countryside and wildlife
protection (E); and the management of the
Government estate, through Property
Holdings (GB).
Executive Agencies
Building Research Establishment
The Buying Agency
Planning Inspectorate
Queen Elizabeth II Conference Centre
The Security Facilities Executive
The Ordnance Survey (see p. 512) is not part
of the Department of the Environment, but
reports to the Secretary of State for the
Environment.
^Department of Health
Richmond House, 79 Whitehall, London
SW1A 2NS Tel: 0171 210 3000
National Health Service; personal social services
provided by local authorities; and certain
aspects of public health, including hygiene (E).
511
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Executive Agencies
Medicines Control Agency
Medical Devices Agency
NHS Estates
NHS Pensions Agency
Home Office
50 Queen Anne’s Gate, London SW1H 9AT
Tel: 0171 273 3000
Administration of justice; criminal law;
treatment of offenders, including probation and
the prison service; the police; crime prevention;
fire service and emergency planning; licensing
laws; regulation of firearms and dangerous
drugs; electoral matters and local legislation (E
& W). Gaming (GB). Passports, immigration
and nationality; race relations; royal matters.
Responsibilities relating to the Channel Islands
and the Isle of Man.
Executive Agencies
Fire Service College
Forensic Science Service
HM Prison Service
United Kingdom Passport Agency
^Department of National Heritage
2-4 Cockspur Street, London SWD SDH
Tel: 0171 211 6000.
The arts; public libraries; national museums
and galleries; tourism; sport; heritage—
including listing and scheduling buildings, and
royal parks and palaces (E);
broadcasting; press regulation; film industry;
export licensing of antiques; the National Lottery.
Executive Agencies
Historic Royal Palaces Agency
Royal Parks Agency
^Social Security Department
Richmond House, 79 Whitehall, London
SW1A 2NS Tel: 0171 210 3000
The social security system (GB).
Executive Agencies
Benefits Agency
Child Support Agency
Contributions Agency
Information Technology Services Agency
Resettlement Agency
War Pensions Agency
Central Office of Information
Hercules Road, London SE1 7DU
Tel: 0171 928 2345
An executive agency procuring publicity
material and other information services on
behalf of government departments and
publicly funded organisations.
HMSO (Her Majesty’s Stationery Office)
St Crispins, Duke Street, Norwich NR3 1PD
and Sovereign House, Botolph Street,
Norwich NR3 1DN Tel: 01603 622211
An executive agency providing stationery,
office machinery and furniture, printing and
related services to Parliament, government
departments and other public bodies.
Publishing and selling government documents.
Ordnance Survey
Romsey Road, Maybush, Southampton SO 16
4GU Tel: 01703 792000
An executive agency providing official
surveying, mapping and associated scientific
work covering Great Britain and some
overseas countries.
Office of Population Censuses and
Surveys
St Catherine’s House, 10 Kingsway, London
WC2B 6JP Tel: 0171 242 0262
A department responsible for
administration of the marriage laws and local
registration of births, marriages and deaths;
provision of population estimates and
projections and statistics on health and other
demographic matters; Census of Population
(E & W). Surveys for other government
departments and public bodies (GB).
Northern Ireland
Northern Ireland Office
Stormont, Belfast BT4 3ST
Tel: 01232 520700
Whitehall, London SW1A 2AZ
Tel: 0171 210 3000
512
GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES
Department of Agriculture for Northern
Ireland
Development of agricultural, forestry and
fishing industries; veterinary, scientific and
development services; food and farming
policy; and rural development.
Department of Economic Development
for Northern Ireland
Promotion of inward investment and
development of larger home industry;
promotion of enterprise and small business;
development of tourism; training and
employment through the Training and
Employment Agency; promotion of
industrially relevant research and
development; energy; minerals; company
regulation; consumer protection; health and
safety at work; industrial relations; and equal
opportunity in employment.
Department of Education for Northern
Ireland
Control of the five education and library
boards and education from nursery to further
and higher education; youth services; sport
and recreation; the arts and culture (including
libraries); and the development of community
relations within and between schools.
Department of the Environment for
Northern Ireland
Environmental protection; housing;
planning; roads; transport and traffic
management; vehicle licensing and taxation
(including the Driver and Vehicle Testing
Agency)-, harbours, water and sewage;
Ordnance Survey of Northern Ireland',
maintenance of public records; certain
controls over local government; and the Rate
Collection Agency.
Department of Finance and Personnel
Control of public expenditure; liaison with
HM Treasury and the Northern Ireland
Office on financial matters, economic and
social research and analysis; EC co¬
ordination charities; Valuation and Lands
Agency; policies for equal opportunities
and personnel management; and
management and control of the Northern
Ireland Civil Service.
Department of Health and Social
Services for Northern Ireland
Health and personal social services and social
legislation. Responsibility for the Northern
Ireland Child Support Agency. The Social
Security Agency (Northern Ireland) has
responsibility for the administration of all
social security benefits and the collection of
National Insurance contributions.
Scotland
#The Scottish Office
St Andrew’s House, Edinburgh EH1 3DG
Tel: 0131 556 8400
Dover House, Whitehall, London SW1A 2AU
Tel: 0171 270 3000
The Scottish Office’s responsibilities are
discharged principally through its five
departments (which include six executive
agencies). There are also four smaller
departments: the Registers of Scotland and the
Scottish Record Office; the General Register
Office for Scotland and the Scottish Courts
Administration, which is also responsible to
the Lord Advocate for certain legal functions.
Scottish Office Agriculture and Fisheries
Department
Promotion and regulation of the agricultural
and fishing industries; safeguarding public,
plant and animal health welfare; enforcement
of fisheries laws and regulations through the
Scottish Fisheries Protection Agency.
Scottish Office Education Department
Education; student awards (through the
Student Awards Agency for Scotland); the arts,
libraries, museums and galleries, Gaelic
language; sport and recreation.
Scottish Office Environment Department
Environment, including environmental
protection, nature conservation and the
countryside; land-use planning; water
supplies and sewerage; local government,
including finance; housing; building control;
protection and presentation to the public of
historic buildings and ancient monuments
through Historic Scotland.
513
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Scottish Office Home and Health
Department
Central administration of law and order
(includes police service, criminal justice, legal
aid and the Scottish Prison Service)', National
Health Service; fire, home defence and civil
emergency services; social work services.
Scottish Office Industry Department
Industrial and regional economic development
matters; co-ordination of Scottish Office
European interests; employment; training;
energy; tourism; urban regeneration; new
towns; roads and certain transport functions,
particularly in the Highlands and Islands.
Central Services
Services to the five Scottish departments.
These include the Office of the Solicitor to
the Secretary of State, The Scottish Office
Information Directorate, Finance, Personnel,
Management and Office Management
Divisions.
Lord Advocate’s Department
Fielden House, 10 Great College Street,
London SW1P SSL Tel: 0171 276 3000
Provision of legal advice to the Government
on issues affecting Scotland; responsibility for
drafting government primary legislation
relating to Scotland and adapting for
Scotland other primary legislation. Provision
of advice in matters of parliamentary
procedure affecting Scotland.
Crown Office
25 Chambers Street, Edinburgh EH1 12A
Tel: 0131 226 2626
Control of all prosecutions in Scotland.
These are directly responsible to the Law
Officers and are not part of The Scottish
Office.
Wales
*Welsh Office
Cathays Park, Cardiff CF1 3NQ
Tel: 01222 825111
Gwydyr House, Whitehall, London SW1A
2ER Tel: 0171 270 3000
Many aspects of Welsh affairs, including
health, community care and personal social
services; education, except for terms and
conditions of service, student awards and the
University of Wales; Welsh language and
culture; agriculture and fisheries; forestry;
local government; housing; water and
sewerage; environmental protection; sport;
land use, including town and country
planning; countryside and nature
conservation; new towns; and ancient
monuments and historic buildings (through
CADW: Welsh Historic Monuments).
The Department’s responsibilities also
include roads; tourism; enterprise and
training; selective financial assistance to
industry; the Urban Programme and urban
investment grants in Wales; the operation of
the European Regional Development Fund in
Wales and other European Union matters;
women’s issues; non-departmental public
bodies; civil emergencies; all financial
aspects of these matters, including Welsh
revenue support grant; and oversight
responsibilities for economic affairs and
regional planning in Wales.
514
Britain’s Economy:
Statistical Annex
All the following statistics, apart from some relating to the labour market and retail sales, cover
England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland. Some figures may be subject to revision at a
later stage.
Gross Domestic Product IGDP1
1986
1991
£ million
1992 1993
GDP at market prices
GDP at factor cost
GDP at factor cost
at 1990 prices
Value indices at current prices
—GDP at factor cost
(1990 = 100)
Percentage change since
previous year
Volume indices at 1990
prices—GDP at factor cost
384,843 575,321 597,121 630,023
328,272 495,900 516,027 546,120
424,214 468,913 466,564 475,889
68.5
+6.5
88.6
103.6
+3.6
97.9
107.8 114.0
+4.1 +5.8
97.4
99.4
^Market prices are the prices people pay for goods and services.
Factor cost is the cost of goods and services before adding taxes and subtracting subsidies.
Output
1986
1991
1992
1993
Output of production^
industries (1990 = 100)
90.1
96.1
95.9
97.9
Output per person
employed (1990 = 100)
Whole economy
Percentage change since
previous year
Manufacturing
Percentage change since
previous year
96.3
84.6
100.4
+0.4
101.2
+1.2
102.6
+2.2
105.8
+4.5
105.9
+3.2
109.8
+3.8
Consists of the mining and quarrying, manufacturing and electricity, gas and water supply industries.
515
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Labour Market
1988
1991
1992
1993
Thousands
June
1994
Employees in employment 22,266 22,220 21,851 21,493 21,397
Self-employed 3,204 3,383 3,196 3,166 3,266
Unemployment 2,273 2,286 2,765 2,901 2,643
Percentage of workforce 8.0 8.0 9.7 10.3 9.4
Percentage increase in earnings
on previous year n.a. +8.0 +6.1 +3.4 +3.5
a Figures for employees in employment and self-employment are for June each year and are seasonally adjusted. Other figures
are annual averages, except for June 1994. The figures for unemployment are seasonally adjusted, while those for earnings are
not seasonally adjusted and are for Great Britain,
n.a. = not available.
Retail Sales in Great Britain
1989
1991
1992
1993
Volume index (average 1990 prices)
1990 =100
Percentage change since previous year
Value in current prices (1990 = 100)
Percentage change since previous year
99.3
93.5
98.9
-1.1
104.7
+4.7
99.5
+0.6
108.5
+3.6
103.0
+3.5
114.7
+5.7
Prices
(Jan 1987 = 100)
1990
1991
1992
1993
June
1994
Retail Prices Index (RPI)
Percentage change since
previous year
RPI excluding mortgage
interest payments
Percentage change since
previous year
126.1
+9.5
122.1
+8.1
133.5
+5.9
130.3
+6.7
138.5
+3.7
136.4
+4.7
140.7
+1.6
140.5
+3.0
144.7
+2.6
144.4
+2.4
Sources
The following Central Statistical Office publications:
United Kingdom National Accounts 1994 Edition
Monthly Digest of Statistics
CSO press notices
Department of Employment Employment Gazette
516
Recent Legislation
The public Acts of Parliament passed since autumn 1993 are listed below.
Fourteen Acts were introduced by Private Members; these are indicated by
asterisks. All are available from HMSO.
1993
Cardiff Bay Barrage Act 1993. Ch 42. £7.
Consolidated Fund (No 3) Act 1993.
Ch 52. 65p.
Crofters (Scotland) Act 1993. Ch 44. £8.45.
European Economic Area Act 1993.
Ch 51. £1.50.
European Parliamentary Elections Act 1993.
Ch 41. £1.50.
Health Service Commissioners Act 1993.
Ch 46. £4.30.
* Noise and Statutory Nuisance Act 1993.
Ch 40. £4.30.
Pension Schemes Act 1993. Ch 48. £16.45.
Pension Schemes (Northern Ireland) Act 1993.
Ch 49. £15.10.
Probation Service Act 1993. Ch 47. £4.30.
Railways Act 1993. Ch 43. £18.
Scottish Land Court Act 1993. Ch 45. £1.90.
Statute Law (Repeals) Act 1993.
Ch 50. £8.45.
1994
* Antarctic Act 1994. Ch 15. £3.30.
Appropriation Act 1994. Ch 24. £7.
* Chiropractors Act 1994. Ch 17. £7.
Coal Industry Act 1994. Ch 21. £15.10.
Consolidated Fund Act 1994. Ch 4. 65p.
Education Act 1994. Ch 30. £4.85.
Finance Act 1994. Ch 9. £30.50.
* Firearms (Amendment) Act 1994. Ch 31. 65p.
* Inshore Fishing (Scotland) Act 1994.
Ch 27. £1.10.
Insolvency Act 1994. Ch 7. £1.90.
^Insolvency (No 2) Act 1994. Ch 12. £1.90.
Intelligence Services Act 1994. Ch 13. £3.80.
*Land Drainage Act 1994. Ch 25. £1.90.
Local Government (Wales) Act 1994.
Ch 19. £15.10.
* Mental Health (Amendment) Act 1994.
Ch 6. 65p.
* Merchant Shipping (Salvage and Pollution)
Act 1994. Ch 28. £4.30.
*New Towns (Amendment) Act 1994.
Ch 5. 65p.
Non-Domestic Rating Act 1994. Ch 3. £1.50.
* Parliamentary Commissioner Act 1994.
Ch 14. 65p.
Police and Magistrates’ Courts Act 1994.
Ch 29. £11.
*Race Relations (Remedies) Act 1994.
Ch 10. £1.10.
*Road Traffic Regulation (Special Events) Act
1994. Ch 11. £1.90.
Social Security (Contributions) Act 1994.
Ch 1. 65p.
Social Security (Incapacity for Work) Act
1994. Ch 18. £6.30.
* State Hospitals (Scotland) Act 1994.
Ch 16. 65p.
Statutory Sick Pay Act 1994. Ch 2. £1.10.
Sunday Trading Act 1994. Ch 20. £4.30.
Trade Marks Act 1994. Ch 26. £8.40.
Transport Police (Jurisdiction) Act 1994.
Ch 8. £1.10.
Value Added Tax Act 1994. Ch 23. £16.40.
Vehicle Excise and Registration Act 1994.
Ch 22. £9.25.
517
The Citizen’s Charter
Initiative
A detailed account of the Citizen’s Charter
initiative is given on pp. 66-8. The
publications which launched the initiative and
the most recent follow-up report are:
• The Citizen’s Charter. Raising the
Standard. Cm 1599. HMSO, 1991, £8.50.
(See p. 66.)
• The Citizens ’ Charter for Northern Ireland.
HMSO, 1992, £8.50.
• The Citizen's Charter Second Report: 1994.
Cm 2540. HMSO, 1994, £12.50. (See
p. 66.)
A White Paper on Open Government was
published in July 1993—see p. 68. {Open
Government. Cm 2290. HMSO, £11.)
INDIVIDUAL CHARTERS
The 40 Charters for individual public
services, published as part of the Citizen’s
Charter initiative, with the name of the
department or organisation responsible in
brackets,1 are:
Benefits Agency Customer Charter (Benefits
Agency)
Charter for Further Education—see p. 423
(Department for Education)
Charter for Higher Education—see p. 423
(Department for Education)
Child Support Agency Charter (Child Support
Agency)
Contributors’ Charter (Contributions Agency)
Council Tenant’s Charter (Department of the
Environment)
Courts Charter—see p. 90 (Lord Chancellor’s
Department, Home Office, Crown
Prosecution Service)
'The addresses and telephone numbers of government
departments are given on pp. 507-14.
Employers’ Charter (Contributions Agency)
Jobseeker’s Charter—see p. 182 (Employment
Service)
London Bus Passenger’s Charter (London
Buses Ltd)
London Underground Customer Charter—see
p. 294 (London Underground Ltd)
Parent’s Charter (Department for Education)
Passenger’s Charter—see p. 292 (British Rail)
Patient’s Charter—see p. 370 (Department of
Health)
Redundancy Payments Service Charter
(Department of Employment)
Road Users’ Charter—see p. 286 (Department
of Transport)
Taxpayer’s Charter—see p. 162 (Inland
Revenue)
Taxpayer’s Charter (HM Customs and Excise)
Travellers’ Charter (HM Customs and Excise)
Northern Ireland
Bus Passenger’s Charter (Ulsterbus)
Charter for Patients and Clients (Northern
Ireland Office—Department of Health and
Social Services)
Social Security Agency Charter (Northern
Ireland Social Security Agency)
Child Support Agency Charter (Northern
Ireland Child Support Agency)
Council Tenant’s Charter (Northern Ireland
Housing Executive)
Courts Charter (Northern Ireland Court
Service)
518
THE CITIZEN’S CHARTER INITIATIVE
Parent's Charter (Northern Ireland Office—
Department of Education)
Railway Passenger's Charter (Northern Ireland
Railways)
RUC Charter (Royal Ulster Constabulary)
Training and Employment Agency Customer's
Charter (Training and Employment Agency,
Northern Ireland)
Scotland
Charter for Further Education (see p. 423)
Charter for Higher Education (see p. 423)
Justice Charter (see p. 90)
Parent's Charter
Patient’s Charter
Council Tenant’s Charter
(All published by The Scottish Office)
Wales
Charter for Further Education (see p. 423)
Charter for Higher Education (see p. 423)
Council Tenant's Charter
Parent’s Charter
Patient’s Charter
(All published by the Welsh Office in English
and Welsh)
Further Information
Information about the charters, including
telephone numbers and addresses, can be
obtained by calling 01345 223242 (all calls are
charged at local rates). The service is
available 24 hours a day. For copies of the
guide to the Charter Mark awards (see p. 67),
ring 0171 270 6304.
519
Obituaries
Sir Harold Acton, CBE
Historian and aesthete
Born 1904, died February 1994
The Rt Rev Lord Blanch, PC
Archbishop of York, 1975-83
Born 1918, died June 1994
Anthony Burgess
Novelist and critic
Born 1917, died November 1993
Sir Matt Busby, CBE
Football manager
Born 1909, died January 1994
Elias Canetti
Nobel Prize for Literature, 1981
Born 1905, died August 1994
John Curry, OBE
Ice skater and actor
Born 1949, died April 1994
Roy Castle, OBE
Comedian, musician, dancer
Born 1932, died September 1994
Lord Delfont
Theatrical impresario
Born 1909, died September 1994
Alec Dickson, CBE
Founder of Voluntary Service Overseas and
Community Service Volunteers
Born 1914, died September 1994
Lord Farrer-Brown, CBE
First director of the Nuffield Foundation,
Born 1904, died April 1994
Professor Dorothy Hodgkin, OM, FRS
Nobel Prize for Chemistry, 1964
Born 1910, died July 1994
The Earl of Inchcape
Chairman of P&O, 1973-83
Born 1917, died March 1994
Brian Johnston, CBE, MC
Broadcaster and cricket commentator
Born 1912, died January 1994
Sir Wylie McKissock, OBE
Pioneer in neurosurgery
Born 1906, died October 1994
Professor Sir Karl Popper, CH, FRS
Philosopher
Born 1902, died September 1994
Dennis Potter
Television playwright, author and journalist
Born 1935, died June 1994
Brian Redhead
Broadcaster and journalist
Born 1929, died January 1994
Lord Shackleton, KG, OBE, FRS, PC
Leader of the House of Lords and Lord
Privy Seal, 1965-70
Born 1911, died September 1994
John Smith, PC, QC, MP
Leader of the Labour Party and of the
Opposition, 1992-94
Born 1938, died May 1994
Professor Richard Synge, FRS
Nobel Prize for Chemistry, 1952
Born 1914, died August 1994
Jessica Tandy
Stage and film actress
Born 1909, died September 1994
Air Commodore Frederick ‘Tommy’
Thompson, CBE, DSO, DFC, AFC
Battle of Britain pilot and later AOC Military
Air Traffic Operations
Born 1914, died July 1994
Lord Thorneycroft, CH (formerly Peter
Thorneycroft)
Conservative MP and Government Minister
Born 1909, died June 1994
Billy Wright, CBE
England football captain 90 times
Born 1924, died September 1994
520
Principal Abbreviations
AC AS: Advisory, Conciliation and
Arbitration Service
BBC: British Broadcasting Corporation
BR: British Rail
BT: British Telecommunications pic
CAA: Civil Aviation Authority
CAP: Common Agricultural Policy
CBI: Confederation of British Industry
CCW: Countryside Council for Wales
C02: carbon dioxide
CPS: Crown Prosecution Service
DFE: Department for Education
DTI: Department of Trade and Industry
EC: European Community
ECGD: Export Credits Guarantee
Department
EFTA: European Free Trade Association
ESAs: Environmentally Sensitive Areas
EU: European Union
FCO: Foreign & Commonwealth Office
GATT: General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade
GDP: gross domestic product
GNP: gross national product
GPs: general practitioners
HMIP: Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of
Pollution
HMSO: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
HSE: Health and Safety Executive
IPC: integrated pollution control
ITC: Independent Television Commission
ITV: independent television
LEAs: local education authorities
LECs: Local Enterprise Companies
LT: London Transport
MAFF: Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries
and Food
MFA: Multi-Fibre Arrangement
MP: Member of Parliament
NATO: North Atlantic Treaty Organisation
NHS: National Health Service
NOx: oxides of nitrogen
NRA: National Rivers Authority
ODA: Overseas Development Administration
OECD: Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development
OPSS: Office of Public Service and Science
pic: public limited company
PSBR: public sector borrowing requirement
RAF: Royal Air Force
R & D: research and development
RPI: Retail Prices Index
SIB: Securities and Investments Board
SNH: Scottish Natural Heritage
SO,: sulphur dioxide
TECs: Training and Enterprise Councils
TUC: Trades Union Congress
TWh: terawatt hours
UKCS: United Kingdom Continental Shelf
UN: United Nations
VAT: value added tax
WEU: Western European Union
521
Index
A
Abortion 382
Accidents
industrial 190
road 288
Adoption 396-7
Adult education 429
Advertising 229, 469-70, 482
Advisory bodies to Government 65
Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration
Service (ACAS) 189-90
Africa, sub-Saharan 122-3
Agriculture 267-79
Common Agricultural Policy 275—6
conservation schemes 277-8
crops 273
diseases and pests, control of 279
diversification 278
exports 274
grants and subsidies 276
hill farming 276
horticulture 273-4
landholding 268-9
less-favoured areas 276
livestock 269-73
marketing 274-5
policy 268, 274, 275-9
production 269-74; table 272
professional, scientific and
technical services 279
training 278-9
welfare 273
see also Countryside; Fisheries;
Forestry
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food,
Ministry of 268, 275-9, 507
Aid
to developing countries 127-30, 511
East-West 121
EU regional 118-19
AIDS 386-7
Air pollution 360-4
Aircraft and aviation
aero-engine manufacture 239-40
aeronautics, research 316
aerospace industry 239 40
air safety 300
air traffic 299
aircraft 239-40, 299
airlines 299
airports 300-1; table 301
and the environment 364—5
aviation, civil 298-301
aviation equipment 240
Alcohol misuse 384—5
Alcoholic drinks industry 241-2
Ambulance services 380
Ancient monuments 346
Anglican Communion 436
Angling 495
Anti-competitive practices 204
Appeals
civil 102
criminal 93
Apprenticeships 181
Architecture 345
Armed forces 135-6, 139
Arms control 123-5
Army 139
Arrest and detention 86-7
Arts
business sponsorship 441-2
centres 443
festivals 444
finance 441
galleries 454—6
policies 440-1
training 447, 448, 450, 452, 456
Arts Councils 442
Asia-Pacific region 123
Assisted areas, map 199
Association of Commonwealth
Universities 131
Astronomy 312
Athletics 495
Atomic energy see Nuclear power
Auction houses 225
Authors’ copyright 457-8
Aviation see Aircraft and Aviation
Awards to Industry and Commerce 208
B
Badminton 496
Bail system 88
Balance of payments 172-4; table 173
Ballet see Dance
Baltic Exchange 223
Bank of England 212-13
Banks 214-17
Basketball 496
Bathing waters 359-60
Benefits, social security 400-8
Billiards 502-3
Biofuels 262
Biological weapons 124—5
Biomass, energy from 262
Biotechnology 234—5
Biotechnology and Biological Sciences
Research Council 312-13
Birth rates 26
Blood transfusion 379
Books 460
Bosnia 120
Botanic gardens 322
Bowls 496
Boxing 496
British Airways 299
British Broadcasting Corporation
(BBC) 461, 462, 463-5, 468, 469,
470, 471-2, 473-4
British Coal 256-7
British Council 130-1, 443
British Film Institute 451-2
British Gas 254—6
British Library 458
British Nuclear Fuels 260-1
British Olympic Association 489
British Overseas Trade Board 172
British Paralympic Association 489-90
British Rail 291-3
British Technology Group 320-1
British Telecommunications see BT
British Tourist Authority 228
British Waterways 489
Broadcasting 461-74
and the arts 461-2
audience research 471
complaints 471
educational 469
government role 462-3
international relations 473
Parliamentary and political 471
standards 470-1
technical developments 473-4
see also Radio; Television
BT (British Telecommunications) 302-4
Buddhism 439
Budget 156
Building see Construction industry
Building regulations 245
Building societies 215-16
522
INDEX
Bus services 290
Business see Financial services;
Industry and commerce;
Manufacturing; Construction
industry; Trade, overseas
Business-education links 195, 423
Business Links 197
Business sponsorship 441-2, 491-3
c
Cabinet 61-2
Cabinet Office 62, 507
Cable & Wireless 305
Cable television 305, 468-9
Cadw 347
Canals and waterways 295, 489
Cancer
care 387
screening 387-8
Capital Gains Tax 160
Careers education and guidance 195
Careers service 423
Cargo services by sea 295-6
Caribbean territories 115
Cars see Motor vehicles
Catering trade 226-7
Central Bureau for Educational Visits
and Exchanges 131
Central Council of Physical
Recreation 488
Central Office of Information 512
overseas radio and television 472
Central Statistical Office 459
Ceramics 232-3
Ceremonial 47
Channel Islands 5
Channel Tunnel 293-4
Charities 38, 320
Chemical weapons 124
Chemicals industry 233-5, 311-12
Children
abuse 395
adoption 396-7
benefits 402-3
day care for 394—5
in care 395-6
films for 452
health and welfare 381-2, 416
and sport 485
as witnesses 91-2
Child Support Agency 403
Christian churches 434—8
Church of England 434—5
Church of Scotland 435-6
Cinema 450-3
Citizen’s Charter 66-8
Charter Mark awards 67-8
list of charters 518-19
principles of public service 66-7
City Challenge 335
City Grant 336
City Pride 337
City Technology Colleges 412
Civil aviation see Aircraft and
Aviation
Civil courts 101-4
Civil law 101-4
Civil Service 68-72
Climate 3, 361-2
Clinical audit 378
Clothing industry 242-3
Coal industry 256-7
Coasts 350
Commerce see Industry and
commerce
Commission for Racial Equality 32
Commodity composition, overseas
trade 164—6; table 165
Commodity markets 223
Commonwealth 46, 112-14
Communications 301-6
Community relations, and police 85-6
Community service 95-6
Compacts 336
Competitiveness White Paper 194
Complaints
broadcasting 471
local government 76-7
maladministration 60
National Health Service 376
press 481-2
Computers 236-7, 421-2
Computing services 229
Confederation of British Industry
(CBI) 189, 193
Conference centres 228-9
Conference on Security and
Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) 125
Conservation 345-54
Constitution 44
Construction industry 243-6
Consumer protection 204—5
Co-operatives, agricultural 305
Copyright 457-8
Coroners’ courts 94
Council of Europe 126
Council tax 162
Corporation tax 160
Countryside 276-7, 348-54
Countryside Commission 348
Countryside Council for Wales 348-9
Couriers, private 306
Courts
civil 101-4
criminal 88-93
Crafts 356
Credit cards 215
Cricket 496
Crime
international 127
prevention 80-1
statistics 80
victims 81
Criminal law 80-101
Croatia 120
Crofts 276-7
Crops see Agriculture
Crown see Monarchy
Crown Office (Scotland) 514
Crown Prosecution Service 88—9, 510
Cultural and social affairs 10, 16, 21, 25
Curriculum see National curriculum
Custody 94—5
Customs and Excise, HM 161-2, 508
Cycling 497
D
Dance 449-50
Defence 132-41
allies 135-6
armed forces 132, 139
arms control 123-5
dependencies 134-5
equipment programme 138-9
finance and management 139-40
NATO strategy' 133-4
policy 134-7
procurement 140
research 317
Defence, Ministry of 110, 317, 510
Defence notices 483
Dependent territories 114—15, 134—5
Deregulation 196-7, 290
Design 207, 456
Development co-operation 127-30
Development plans 342-3
Diet 33-1, 388-9
Diplomatic service 70
Disabled people
and the arts 443
benefits 403-5
services for 392—3
and sport 485-6
Discount houses 217
Distribution 223
Divorce 27
Drama 445-7
Drink see Food and drink
Drug misuse 382-3
Duchy of Lancaster 48n
Durable goods, availability 35
E
Earnings 184-5
Eating and drinking habits 33-4, 388-9
Economic and monetary union
(EMU) 117
Economic and social pattern 32-9
Economic and Social Research
Council 315
Economy 145-52
background 145-9
government policies 149-51
523
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
indicators, table 146
management 151
national income and expenditure
151-2
strategy 149-51
see also Balance of payments;
Expenditure; Finance; Trade,
overseas
Education 409-32
administration 410
after 16 423-9
broadcasting 469
finance 410-11, 426-7
overseas links 131
post-compulsory 423-9
prisoners 98
religious 420
research 429
schools 410-18
youth service 431-2
see also Training, education and
enterprise
Education, Department for 410, 511
Education, Office for Standards in
422, 509
Elderly people, services for 392, 400-2
Elections
general 51-3; table 53
local government 73-4
Electrical engineering 236-8
Electricity supply industry 257-61
Electricity Regulation, Office of
259, 509
Electronics, research and development
308
Emergency relief 130
Emission of dangerous gases 362-4
Employees
conditions of employment 183-5
involvement 186
share schemes 185
Employers’ organisations 189
Employment 148, 175-91
and European Union 119
and productivity 147
by industry, table 176
patterns 175-8
rights 183^1
services 182-3
table 176
terms and conditions 183-5
training 178-82
workforce 175
Employment, Department of 176, 508
Energy 149, 247-63
consumption 248; table 249
efficiency 249
fossil fuel levy 260
interconnectors 260
policy 248
renewable sources 262-3
see also under the types of energy
Energy Saving Trust 248
Engineering 235-41, 311
Engineering and Physical Sciences
Research Council 311
England
cultural life 10
description 7-10
economy 9
government 7, 9
history 7
map 4
statistics (general) 5
English Heritage 346
English language 30
English Nature 348-9
English Partnerships 336
Enterprise Initiative 197-8
Enterprise zones 338-9
Environment 20
departments and agencies 327,
343, 356, 511
and European Union 118
improvement schemes 354
overseas aid 129
research 314—15, 366
see also Conservation; Countryside;
Planning
Environment, Department of the 327,
343, 356, 511
Environmental health 389
Environmentally sensitive areas
(ESA) 277-8
Equal opportunities 36, 184
Equestrianism 497-8
Estate Action programme 332-3
Estate Partnership 333
Ethnic and national minorities 30-2
arts 443
education 415
and police 85-6
press 478
and sport 485
Euromarkets 221-2
Europe
defence and security 132-3
Central and Eastern Europe 120-2
European Broadcasting Union 473
European Economic Area (EEA) 118
European Union (EU)
agriculture 118, 275-6
Association Agreements 121
Common Agricultural Policy
274-5
Common Fisheries Policy 280—1
crime, action against 127
economic and monetary union 117
employment and social affairs 119
environment 118
finance 117
fisheries 280-1
and government 58
and insurers 218
law 79-80
Maastricht Treaty 116
map 111
regional policy and aid 118-19
research and development 119
select committees on EU affairs 58
single European market 117, 170,
195
trade agreements 118, 121, 169
UK membership 116
European Energy Charter 248
Eurotunnel 293
Examinations and qualifications
419-20, 425-6, 428
Excise see Customs and Excise, HM
Executive agencies 69
Exhibition and conference centres
228-9
Expenditure
personal 151-2; table 153
public 154—8; table 154
Export controls, works of art 456-7
Export Credits Guarantee
Department 172, 508
Exports see Trade, overseas
Express services 306
Extel Financial 479
External affairs, departments and
agencies 510-11
External assets 174
Eye services 390-1
F
Factoring companies 220
Falkland Islands 115
Families, help for 394
Family credit 406-7
Family health services 376-7
Family planning 382
Farming see Agriculture
Festivals, arts 444
Fibres, synthetic 235
Films 450-3
Finance
local government 162
public 153-63
Finance companies 220
Financial futures and options 222
Financial markets 220-3
Financial services 210-23
supervision 211-12
Fines 95
Fiscal policy 150
Fishing (angling) 495
Fishing industry 280-82
Food
exports 274
government role 275-6
marketing 275-6
research 282-3, 312-13
safety 274, 389
Food and drink industries 241-2
Food, farms, land and leisure (ADAS)
279
Football 494-5, 498
524
INDEX
Footwear industry 242
Foreign & Commonwealth Office 511
Foreign exchange markets 222
Foreign policy, administration of
109-10
Forensic Science Service 85
Forestry 283-4
schemes 283
tree planting and preservation 350
Forestry Commission 283^1
Foundation for Sport and the Arts
442, 492
Fraud 89, 92
Free churches 436-7
Freight
market 223
railway 293
sea cargo 295-6
Friendly societies 216
Fuel see Coal; Electricity; Energy;
Gas; Nuclear power
Further education 425, 429
G
Gardens 322
Gas 250-1, 253-6; map 254
see also Oil industry
Gas Supply, Office of 254, 509
General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade 169, 275
Genetically modified organisms 366
Geothermal energy 263
Gibraltar 115
Gold-mining 265
Golf 498
Government 43-78
and civil aviation 299
departments and agencies 64-6,
507-14
development of 43-44
and food 275-9
and industry 194—8
local 72-77
national 48-72
overseas 128
publicity and broadcasting 462-3
GP fundholders (NHS) 377
Green belts 343^1
Greyhound racing 498
Gross domestic product, tables 146,
147, 152, 515
Gross national product, table 152
Groundwork trusts 338
Gymnastics 499
H
Handicapped people see Disabled
people
Health
education 388
environment 389
prisoners 98-9
private medical treatment 381
professions 390^1
see also National Health Service;
Social welfare
Health and safety at work 190-1
Health, Department of 374
Helicopters 240
Higher education 423, 426-9
Charter 423
Highland games 499
Hindu community 438-9
Historic buildings 346-8
Historic Scotland 346-7
Historical manuscripts 460
History 3-6
HMSO (Her Majesty’s Stationerv
Office) 512
Hockey 499
Holidays 38-9, 227-8
Home improvement grants 333
Home Office 512
Home ownership 328
Homelessness 334
Hong Kong 115
Honours 47
Horse racing 499
Horserace Betting Levy 492-3
Horticulture 273-4
Hospices 380-1
Hospitals and specialist services
378-89
Hotel and catering trade 226-7
House of Commons 44, 51, 53-60
House of Lords 48, 49, 50, 56-7
Housing 34, 327-35
administration 327-8
construction industry 245
improvements 332—4
privately rented 332
rural 331-2
sheltered 331
social 329-32
Housing Action Trusts 333
Housing associations 330-1
Housing benefit 406
Housing renewal areas 333—4
Hovercraft 296
Human fertilisation 382
Human rights 125-7
Hydro power 263
I
Ice skating 500
Immigration 29
Imports see Trade, overseas
Income
national 151-2
sources 152
support 405-6
taxes on 159-60
and wealth 32-3
Independent schools 416-7
Independent Television Commission
462-3, 465-7
Industrial and intellectual propertv
208-9
Industrial associations 193—4
Industrial financing 192-3
Industrial innovation programmes
208-9
Industrial relations 185-90
legal framework 188 9
Industrial research establishments
316-17
Industrial training 178-82, 194—5
Industry and commerce 192-209
awards 208
and government 194-8
regional development 198-201
structure and organisation 192-3
Infectious diseases 387
Inflation 145-6
Information, Central Office of see
Central Office of Information
Information technology
in schools 421-2
Inheritance tax 160
Inland Revenue, Board of 159, 509
Inland waterways 295, 489
Inner cities see Urban regeneration
Innovation 208-9
Institute of Directors 193-4
Instrument engineering 236-8
Insurance 217-19
Intellectual property 208-9
International organisations 110-14
International Telecommunications
Union 473
Investment 147-8
funds and trusts 219-20
inward 173, 201-2
outward 173
Investors in People initiative
179-80
Invisible trade 167-8
Ireland, history 11-12
see also Northern Ireland
Irish Republic 13
Isle of Man 5
J
Jewish community 438
Jobcentres 182
Journalism, training for 480-1
Judges 105
Judo 500
Juries 92
Justice see Law
525
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
K
Keep fit 500
Know How Fund 121
L
Labour market
policy 176-7
table 516
see also Employment
Land
pollution 358-9
reclamation and use 336
use of agricultural 268-9
Latin America 123
Law 79-106
administration 104—6
centres 106
civil law 101-4
company 205-6
criminal law 80-101
personnel 105
and press 482-3
see also Legal
Learned societies 321-2
Learning difficulties, people with
393
Leasing companies 220
Legal affairs, departments and
agencies 409 10
Legal aid 105—6
Legal profession 105
Legal Secretariat to the Law Officers
510
Legislation 55-7
list of recent 517
Leisure trends 38
Libraries 458-60
Library Association 460
Life expectancy 26-7
Literature 457-8
Litter control 358
Livestock 269-73; table 269
Living standards 32-3
Lloyd’s 218
Lobby, Parliamentary 65-6
Local government 72—7
and the arts 441
complaints 76-7
finance 76
functions and services 74—5
revenue 162
and sport 488
London, railways 294
London Bullion Market 222-3
London International Financial
Futures and Options Exchange
222
London Metal Exchange 223
London Stock Exchange 220-1
Lord Advocate’s Department 514
Lord Chancellor’s Department
509-10
Lottery, National 493
Lottery, National, Office of the 509
M
Maastricht Treaty 116
Management consultancy 229
Management iniatives, government
206-7
Manpower see Employment
Manufacturing 230^13
Marine
engineering 238
environment 360
safety 298
Market research 229
Markets
overseas 164—8; table 165
regulation 202-6
Marriage and divorce 27
Martial arts 500
Measurement standards 207
Mechanical engineering 235-6
Media see Broadcasting; Films; Press
Medical Research Council 313-14
Medicine see Health
Medicines, safety of 389
Mentally ill, services for 99, 393-4
Merchant banks 216
Merchant shipping 296
Mercury Communications 304
Mergers 203
Metal products 231-2, 235-6
Middle East 122
Migration 28
Milk 34, 270
Mineral and metal products 231-3,
263-5; map 264
Ministers, government 62-3
Minorities see Ethnic and national
minorities
Mobile communications 304—5
Monarchy 44—8, 56
Monetary policy 149-50
Money markets 221
Monopolies 203
Mortality 26-7
Mortgage loans 329
Motor-car sports 501
Motor-cycle sports 501
Motor vehicles 238
emissions 363-4
retailing 226
Mountaineering 501
Museums 322-3, 454—6
Museums Association 454
Music 447-9
training 448-9
Muslim community 438
N
National Coaching Foundation 489
National Council for Vocational
Qualifications (NCVQ) 425-6
National Curriculum 418-19, 486
National Health Service (NHS)
373-91
recent developments 377-8
National Heritage, Department of
440, 487, 512
National income and expenditure
151-2
National Insurance 162, 398-4-00
National Lottery see Lottery
National minorities 30-2
National Parks 350-2
National Playing Fields Association 490
National Rivers Authority 266
National Savings Bank 217
Nationalised industries 196
Nationality 28-9
NATO see North Atlantic Treaty
Organisation
Natural Environment Research
Council 314—15, 366
Natural resources 247-67
Nature conservation 348-54
Navy see Royal Navy
Netball 501 ’
News agencies 472-3, 479-80
Newspapers 475-8
Next Steps programme 69
Noise, pollution 364—5
Non-departmental public bodies 65
North Atlantic Treaty Organisation
(NATO) 133-8
North Sea oil 250
Northern Ireland
administration 66
agriculture 270, 273-9, 282
appeals 93
armed forces in 135
civil courts 102
civil proceedings 103
criminal courts 89, 90-1
cultural and social affairs 16
custodial sentences 95
departments 513
description 11-16
direct rule 12-13
Downing Street declaration 13-14
economy 15-16
education 411, 412, 418, 419-420,
422
electricity 259
equal opportunities 184
fishing 280, 282
forestry 284
geography 11
government 12-14, 513
health and safety at work 191
history 11-12
526
INDEX
human rights 14—15
industrial development 201
law administration 104—5
local taxes 162
press 478
prisons 97
prosecutions 89
Royal Ulster Constabulary 83, 135
schools 412-13
security policy 15
teacher training 418
terrorism, fight against 82, 135
trade unions 187—8
training and employment 181-2
urban regeneration 182-3
water supply 267
young offenders 101
Northern Ireland Office 513
Nuclear power 260-1
Nuclear forces 124, 137-8
o
Offenders, treatment 94—101
Oil industry 250-53
map 252
Old people see Elderly people
Ombudsman see Parliamentary
Commissioner
Open College 429
Open University 428
Opera 449
Ordnance Survey 512
Organ transplants 379
Organic food 273
Organisations, international 110-14
Output 146-7
tables 146, 515
Overseas Development Administration
(ODA) 109, 128-30, 318
Overseas educational links 429-31
Ozone layer 362
P
Parents
Charter 518
and children, benefits 402-3
and children, services 394
rights 414
Parliament 48-61
broadcasting 471
committees 57-9
elections 51-2
financial control 59-60
functions 49
legislation 55-7
meeting 49-50
origins 48-9
party system 52-4
powers 49
privilege 60-1
procedure 54—5
see also House of Commons;
House of Lords
Parliamentary Commissioner for
Administration 60
and NHS 376
Parliamentary Counsel 510
Particle Physics and Astronomy
Research Council 312-13
Passenger services
air 299
rail 292^1
road 290-1
sea 296
Patents 208-9
Patients’ Charter 370
Pay bargaining 185-6
Paymaster General’s Office 509
Payment systems, banks 215
Peacekeeping 119-20
Pension funds 219
Pensions 400-2, 403, 404, 407-8
Performing arts 445-53
Periodical press 478-9
Personal Investment Authority 212
Personal social services 391-7
Pesticides 279
Petroleum 251-3
retailing 226
revenue 160
Pharmaceuticals 234
Photovoltaics 262
Physical geography 3
Planning 342-5
see also Urban regeneration
Plants, disease control 279
Plastic card technology 215
Plastics 234
Police service 83—88
Political party system 52-4
broadcasts 471
Pollution control 355-66
Population 26-9
age and sex structure 27-8
distribution 28
Office of Population Censuses and
Surveys 512
Ports 296-8
traffic, table 297
Post Office specialist services 306
Post-compulsory education 423-9
Postal services 305-6
Power see Energy
Press 474-83
Press Association 479
Pressure groups 77-8
Prices, table 516
Prime Minister 61
Printing technology 474—5
Prisons 96-9
Privatisation 195
Privy Council 63-4
Probation 95
Procurator General and Treasury
Solicitor, HM 510
Productivity 147
Professional institutions 321-2
Prosecution 88-9
Public Accounts Committee 158
Public expenditure see Expenditure,
public
Publishing 243, 457, 460
Q.
Quality and standards 207-8
Quangos 65
Quarrying 265
Queen see Monarchy
R
Race relations 32, 184
see also Ethnic and national
minorities
Radio
BBC 461, 465, 469, 470, 472
Radio Authority 461, 462, 467-8,
469, 470, 473
Radioactivity and pollution 365-6
Railway services 292-4; tables 292
Rainfall 3
Recreation see Sport
Recycling 358-9
Regional arts boards 442-3
Regional newspapers 477-8
Regions
EC aid 118-19
industrial development 198-201
Regulation of markets 202-6
see also Deregulation
Rehabilitation 380
Religion 433-9
Religious education 420
Renewable sources of energy 262-3
Renewal areas 333-4
Research and development
academic 319-20
agriculture, fisheries and food
282-3
astronomy 312-13
coal industry 257
construction industry 245
defence 317
education 429
environment 314—5, 366
European Union 323
expenditure on 308-9
food 282-3, 312-13
forestry 284
gas industry 250, 256
industrial 308-9, 316-17
527
BRITAIN 1995: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
medical 313-14, 389-90
nuclear industry 261
offshore oil and gas 250
public sector 311-19
science and technology 307-24
social 315
space 319
water industry 266
Research councils 311-15
Restrictive trade practices 204
Retailing 224—7
table 224
Reuters 472-3, 479
Revenue 158-62; diagram 157
Rights of way 352-3
Roads 285-9
Roman Catholic Church 437
Rowing 501
Royal Air Force 132, 134, 136
Royal family see Monarchy
Royal Navy 132, 135
Royal Society 321
Rugby football 502
Rural Development Commission 200,
338
s
Safety
air 300
of food 274, 389
health and, at work 190-1
of medicines 389
nuclear 261
offshore 250-51
radioactivity 365-6
road 288
at sea 298
sports grounds 494—5
Salvation Army 436
Satellite broadcasting 468-9
Satellite equipment 240-1
Schools 410-23
curriculum and assessment 418-21
failing 414-15
finance 410-11
grant-maintained 411
health and welfare 416
independent 416-17
information technology 421-2
inspection 422
LEA-maintained 410-11
management 411-13
nursery and primary 413
places 413
pupils 413-14
secondary 413-14
sixth form colleges 424
special educational needs 415-16
standards 422
see also Education and Teachers
Science and technology
government policy 309-11
international relations 323-4
research 307-24
technology transfer 317
Science and Technology, Office of 272
Science parks 320
Scientific museums 322-3
Scotland
administration 66
agriculture 276-7
appeals 93
Church of 435-6
civil courts 102
civil proceedings 103
criminal courts 89, 90
crofting 276-7
cultural and social affairs 21
custodial sentences 95
departments 513-14
description 17-21
economy 19—20
education 412, 422
electricity 257
enterprise 200
fishing 280-1
Gaelic television 467
government 18-20
history 18
industrial development 200
industry 19
law administration 104
legal aid 106
police service 87
press 477-8
schools 419
statistics, general 5
teacher training 418
trade unions 187-8
transport 20
urban regeneration 340 1
water supply 266-7
young offenders 101
Scottish Natural Heritage 348-9
Scottish Office, The 513
Sea see Marine; Shipping
Securities and Investments Board 212
Sentencing 92-3
Serbia 120, 137
Serious Fraud Office 89, 92, 510
Service industries 223-9
Shipbuilding 238
Shipping 223, 295-8
Shopping centres 225
Sick people, benefits 403-5
Sikh community 438
Single European market 64—5, 226-7,
373
Skiing 502
Small firms 198
Smallholdings 276-7
Smoking 385-6
Snooker 502—3
Social affairs, departments and
agencies 511-12
Social framework 26-39
Social Fund 407
Social security 398-408
Social Security, Department of 398,
512
Social services, personal 391-7
Social workers 397
Societies, literary and philological 458
Solar power 263
Solvent misuse 384
Southern Africa 122-3
Soviet Union (former) 120-2
Space science 319
Spectators, safety at sports grounds 494—5
Sponsorship
of arts 441-2
and broadcasting 434
and sport 491-3
Sport and recreation 438-57
and disabled 485-6
and drugs 494
in education 486
governing bodies 488
government policies 487
National Sports Centres 490-1
participation 484—6
popular 495-504
spectator safety 494—5
sponsorship 491-3
sports clubs 489
sports medicine 493
sports science 493
televised 486-7
and women 484—5
Sports Councils 487
Squash 503
Stamp duty 162
Stationery Office, HM 512
Statistics 5, 515-16
Steel products 231-2
Stock Exchange 220-1
Structural funds, EC 118-19
Students 427
overseas, in Britain 430-1
Sub-Saharan Africa 122-3
Suppliers, overseas, to UK, table 168
Supply-side policies 150-1
Swimming 503
T
Table tennis 503
Task forces, inner city 335-6
Taxes and duties 159-62, 408
Taxi services 291
Taxpayer’s Charter 162
Teachers 417-18
Technical and Vocational Education
Initiative (TVEI) 422
Technology see Science and technology
Telecommunications 301-5
Telecommunications, Office of
528
INDEX
(OFTEL) 302,509
Teletext 468
Television
BBC 461,463-5, 468, 469, 471-2
cable and satellite 468-9
independent 461-2, 465-7, 470
international services 471-3
technical developments 473-4
teletext 468
see also Broadcasting
Tenants’ rights 331
Tennis 503-4
Tenpin bowling 504
Terrorism 15, 82, 135
Textile industry 242-3
Theatre see Drama
Tidal power 263
Tin-mining 265
Tobacco industry 242
Tourism 227-8
Trade, overseas 148-9, 164-74
balance of payments 172^1;
table 173
commercial policy 168-70
commodity composition 164-6
controls on overseas trade 170 1
EC policy 118
Export Credits Guarantee
Department 172, 508
General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade 169, 275
geographical distribution 166-7
government services 171-2
invisible 167-8; table 169
visible 164—7; table 167
Trade and Industry, Department of
194, 212, 315-17, 508
Trade unions 186^8
Trades Union Congress 187
Training, education and enterprise
178-82, 194-5
Training and Enterprise Councils 178-9
Transplant surgery 379
Transport 238^40, 285-99
European Union 117-18
manufacturing industry 238^10
in UK 34-5
see also under types of transport
Transport, Department of 286, 508
Treasury, HM 211, 508
Tree preservation and planting 350
Trials 91-3
Tribunals 103-4
u
UK Atomic Energy Authority 260
Ulster see Northern Ireland
Underground railways 294—5
Unemployment 178
benefits 145-6
services 182-3
statistics 178
Unit trusts 219-20
United Nations
Conference on Environment and
Development 345
human rights 125-7
peacekeeping 119-20
register of arms transfers 125
United States 123
Universities 319-20, 427-9
libraries 459
Urban Development Corporations
336
Urban Regeneration 334-41
V
Value added tax 160-1
Vehicles see Motor vehicles
Venture capital 220
Veterinary services 279
Video 452-3
Visiting Arts Office 443
Visual arts 453-7
Vocational qualifications 181, 425
Volleyball 504
Voluntary organisations 374, 432
w
Wales
administration 66
agriculture 276
cultural and social affairs 25
description 22-5
economy 23 4
education 418
forestry 283-4
government 23
history 22-3
industrial development 200
language 22-3
mining 265
ministry for 514
press 477
urban programme 339
War pensions 407-8
Waste disposal, radioactive 365-6
Wastes, energy from 262
Water supply industry 265-7
and pollution 359-60
Water Services, Office of
(OFWAT) 509
Waterways 295, 489
Wave energy 263
Weapons see Arms control
Welsh Office 514
Western European Union 112
Westminster Foundation for
Democracy 127
Wholesaling 223^1;
table 223
Widows’ benefits 144
Wildlife protection 349
Wind power 262
Women 35-6
benefits for 402-3
in developing countries 129
and sport 484—5
Woodland see Forestry
Workforce see Employment
World Heritage Sites 354
Y
Yachting 504
Young offenders 99-101
Youth
music 449
service 431-2
theatre 446-7
training 181
voluntary service 432
workers 432
Yugoslavia (former) 120, 137
z
Zoological gardens 322
529
Acknowledgments for photographs
Cover: COI Pictures; Natural History (photographs in colour sections listed top to bottom
and left to right): COI Pictures; Multi-cultural Britain: COI Pictures; Scottish Dancing—PA
Photo Library; Industrial Heritage: COI Pictures, Wales Tourist Board; Environmental
Design: BBC Photo Library, COI Pictures; Rural Development: Department of Agriculture
for Northern Ireland; Rural Development Commission/Gary-John Norman; The Scottish
Highland Photo Library/Edward Garner; Development Board for Rural Wales/Steve Benbow;
Computer Technology: COI Pictures; Overseas Trade: COI Pictures; Channel Tunnel:
QA Photos, stamps—COI Pictures; World War II Remembered: COI Pictures, PA Photo
Library; Astronomy: Royal Greenwich Observatory; Archaeology: COI Pictures/Ann
Katrin-Purkis, COI Pictures; Housing: Countryside Properties pic; Soho Housing Association
Ltd; Education: COI Pictures, Department for Education (three pictures); Medicine: COI
Pictures; Religion: COI Pictures; Food and Drink: COI Pictures, Ty Nant Spring Water
Limited; Women in Sport: Kit Houghton, COI Pictures; Royal Heritage: Her Majesty
Queen Elizabeth II, Crown Copyright/P. Gates; Film and Animation: COI Pictures,
Aardman Animations; Visual Arts: COI Pictures.
«■'
i- : 1
-<
Printed in the United Kingdom for HMSO
Dd 0298450 C240 12/94
530
Main railway passenger routes
Inverm
Dundee
Stirling!
:dinburgh
Berwick'
iwcastle upon Tyne
indonderry
Larne
Carlisle
Darlington]
Harrogate
Bradfon
Prestoilf
Inchestej
Shrewsbun
Peterbi
:ester.
Hereford,
:ishguard
Gloucester
Swansea
largate
^^iTOury^
Southamptc
Taunton
lemgi
Newton Abbot
Electrified major lines
Other major lines
Other routes
Channel Tunnel ■■iimiiiH
Aberdeen
esbrough
• Scarborough
Blackpool
Live
Holyhead
bridge r
Colctw^fF* Harwich
Ashford^ Dover
*u»#
w Hastings
Eastbourne
Pen
0
20 40 60 miles
Motorways and major
trunk roads
Ullapool
Inverness
lyle of Lochalsh
:ort William
Perth
X)ban
lawick
ioleran
Dumfries'
fonderr^i
,A6 .
Ilymena'
Penrith SI
DarlingtoJ
itrim
Dangannan
Workington
Enniskil
"Armagh'
Burnle'
Sheffiel
Stoke
^\A50
Chestei
Shrewsl
Leicesl
lixstowe
.Colchestej
Oxford
• Swine
Taunton
lampton
Exeter
Penzai
Motorways:
completed
under construction
proposed *»*«*«*••»»
Other major trunk roads
Note: Many existing motorways have
widening schemes under construction
or in preparation
mu
Aberdeen
& wL^St. Andrews
ick-upon-Tweed
wcastle upon Tyne
'Sunderland
rborough
Barrow-in-Furn
Blackpool
Liverpo
Holyhead#rV<^
Aberystwyth
Fishgua
Harwich
Milford Have-
Pembroke
tv'yver
olkestone'^vSli>^
^ Channel*^
Hastings Tunnel
0
20 40 60 miles
19 9 5
BRITAIN
AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
From aerospace to zoological gardens, it’s all in Britain 1995: hard
facts and figures on the economy, background material on overseas
relations, information on Britain’s cultural and sporting pursuits, and
much else besides. This 46th edition contains even more colour
photographs, maps and diagrams than previously, and, to mark the
50th anniversary of the end of World War II, it also features a special
foreword by the distinguished BBC journalist John Humphrys.
HMSO publications are available from:
HMSO Publications Centre
(Mail, fax and telephone orders only)
PO Box 276, London SW8 5DT
Telephone orders 0171-873 9090
General enquiries 0171-873 0011
(queuing system in operation for both numbers)
Fax orders 0171-873 8200
HMSO Bookshops
49 High Holborn, London, WC1V 6HB
(counter service only)
0171-873 0011 Fax 0171-831 1326
68-69 Bull Street. Birmingham, B4 6AD
0121-236 9696 Fax 0121-236 9699
33 Wine Street, Bristol, BS1 2BQ
0117-926 4306 Fax 0117-929 4515
9-21 Princess Street, Manchester, M60 8AS
0161-834 7201 Fax 0161-833 0634
16 Arthur Street, Belfast, BT1 4GD
01232-238451 Fax 01232-235401
71 Lothian Road, Edinburgh EH3 9AZ
0131-228 4181 Fax 0131-229 2734
HMSO’s Accredited Agents
(see Yellow Pages)
And through good booksellers
ISBN 0-11-701859-7
78
11
8594
£25 net
9
Facsimile Cover Sheet
Xo: Britain Handbook readers
From: H.M. Government Departments
Date: 9 January 1995
Pages including this cover page: 1
Comments:
MESSAGE CONFIRMATION
TO RECEIVE: FOR THE LATEST GOVERNMENT PRESS RELEASES USE THE HANDSET ON YOUR FAX MACHINE:
{1) DIAL ONE OF THE FOLLOWING NUMBERS FOR A LISTING OF THAT DAY'S RELEASES,
(2) FROM THAT LISTING, YOU CAN SELECT THE RELEASES YOU NEED.
DATE: MON 0336 410 100, TUES 0336 410 200, WED 0336 410 300, THURS 0336 410 400, FRI 0336 410 500,
HELPLINE NUMBER 0374 507 407
THESE NUMBERS ARE UPDATED TWICE DAILY, AT 13.00 AND AT 16.30
CHARGES: CALLS COST 39P PER MIN CHEAP RATE, 49P PER MIN AT ALL OTHER TIMES.
PRICES CORRECT AS AT 1.11 94
SERVICE PROVIDER: COI, HERCULES ROAD, LONDON SEl 7DU, FAX: 0171 928 5696
SENDER: GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS COVERED INCLUDE: DTI, DSS, HM TREASURY, INLAND REVENUE,
EMPLOYMENT. ENVIRONMENT, TRANSPORT. . .
ADVANTAGES: RELIABLE, AUTHORITATIVE AND UNDILUTED INFORMATION ENABLES YOU TO MAKE BETTER
INFORMED DECISIONS.
Ordnance Survey
Total population
percentage change
1981 -1992
M: Greater than 10%
I 1 8% to 10%
I I 6% to 8%
□ 4% to 6%
| I 2% to 4%
n o% to 2%
□a -2% to o%
LZI Less than -2%
Ordnance Survey
A Statistical Atlas of the United Kingdom
Official statistics brought to life in full-colour maps
Subjects include wealth, education, crime and leisure ^
*
Nearly 100 pages of Ordnance Survey maps f
r'St
Accompanying graphics and commentary
Trends and changes at a glance
European Union comparisons
ISBN 0 11 701873 2 96 pages
fjapuructCK Jm* i ~t>
Available from:
• Ordnance Survey Stockists
• HMSO Bookshops and Bookshop Agents
(see Yellow Pages: Booksellers)
Credit card orders: © 0171 873 9090
Fax 0171 873 8200 (or see below)
Books
• Mail order
Please fill in this form and return to:
HMSO Publications Centre, PO Box 276, LONDON, United Kingdom , SW8 5DT.
• Please send me copy(ies) of STATLAS UK @ £14.99
ISBN 0 11 701873 2
• Debit my AccessA/isa/Amex/Connect A/c no 
Signature Expiry Date 
• I enclose a cheque for £ made payable to HMSO Books
• Please charge to my HMSO Account no 
Name 
Address 
 Postcode 
IPR 10615 1194
Facts at your fingertips
ASPECTS titles are grouped into
subject categories:
Government and Administration
Overseas Relations
Social and Cultural Affairs
Britain and its People
Industry
Environment
Available from HMSO Bookshops
and Bookshop Agents (see Yellow Pages)
and all good booksellers
HMSO
Books
ASPECTS
OF BRITAIN
A series of more than 50 handy
paperbacks exploring all aspects
of British life.
• Comprehensive
• Full of facts
• Clearly written
• Colour pictures
• Ideal for educational/
library use
• Suitable for overseas readers
• Only .£5.95 each
'Well presented, easy to read,
up-to-date and authoritativef
Trevor McDonald,
