m
Gti. (i.
BRITAIN
An Official Handbook
BRITAIN
An Official Handbook
PREPARED BY THE CENTRAL OFFICE OF INFORMATION
AND PUBLISHED BY
HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE LONDON
Crown Copyright Reserved
HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
Copies of this book may be had from H.M. Stationery
Office, York House, Kingsway, London, W.C.2; 423
Oxford St., London, W.i (orders by post to be sent to P.O.
Box 569, London, S.E.i); 13a Castle St., Edinburgh, 2;
39 King St., Manchester, 2; 2 Edmund St., Birmingham, 3;
1 St. Andrew’s Crescent, Cardiff; Tower Lane, Bristol, 1;
80 Chichester St., Belfast; or through any bookseller.
Obtainable in the United States of America from the
British Information Services, 30 Rockefeller Plaza,
New York 20, N.Y.
CONTENTS
Page
INTRODUCTORY NOTE vji
I. THE BRITISH ISLES
The Physical Background j
The Demographic Background ^
II. GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
The Monarchy ^
Parhament jp
The Privy Council 2(5
Her Majesty’s Government 28
Government Departments ^ 1
The Civil Service ^
Public Corporations and State-Sponsored Bodies 50
Local Government ^
Law and Order 62
III. DEFENCE
The Defence System
The Royal Navy gj
The Army g^
The Royal Air Force gg
Civil Defence gg
IV. THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
Background p0
The National Income 1948-52 p2
The Economy Today ^
V. FINANCE
Public Finance p7
Banking and Private Finance I0^
VI. TRADE
External Trade II0
Domestic Trade I2^
VII. INDUSTRY
Organization and Production I27
Agriculture I3g
Fisheries and Forestry j^2
Fuel, Power, and Water Supply
Some Manufacturing Industries X69
Page
VIII. TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
Inland Transport
Civil Aviation * 201
The Post Office 209
IX. LABOUR AND MANAGEMENT
Manpower 2I4
Government Employment and Training Services 2,16
Terms of Employment and Working Conditions 2I9
X. SOCIAL WELFARE
State and Voluntary Services 227
National Insurance and Assistance 229
Health 234
Education 241
Housing and Planning 249
XL RELIGION, SCIENCE, AND THE ARTS
Religion 23 ^
The Promotion of the Sciences 2(31
The Promotion of the Arts 2 74
XII. BROADCASTING AND THE PRESS
The British Broadcasting Corporation 281
The Press 2^3
APPENDIX : Legislative Changes Proposed for 1954 29I
BIBLIOGRAPHY 293
INDEX 313
List of Maps
PHYSICAL REGIONS 3
POPULATION 7
MAIN INDUSTRIAL AREAS i29
LAND USE AND AGRICULTURE 141
MAIN RAILWAYS i92
TRUNK ROADS 196
vi
Introductory Note
an official handbook on these lines appeared first in 1946 as £art of the British Informa¬
tion Services overseas. Experience had shown that there was in existence no one book
prepared primarily for the oversea reader and designed to answer the questions about
Britain which are most frequently asked in oversea countries by their writers and teachers,
their officials and administrators, and the leaders of their public life. In meeting this need,
the book, which has a free distribution overseas, has proved valuable; four revised or
rewritten editions have been issued; and in 1952, for the first time, it was placed on sale
in the United States and Canada. The book is now established as a main foundation of
the reference and library services provided by the official British Information Services in
oversea countries.
Though it is thus well known in the circles for which it was intended, the handbook
has not before been available in the United Kingdom, or on sale overseas except in North
America. Suggestions have from time to time been made that it should be placed on
general sale, and it was finally decided to do this after a recommendation by the Inter-
Departmental Committee on Social and Economic Research.
The handbook contains factual and statistical information, compiled from authoritative
and official sources, about the United Kingdom, its people and its institutions. It does not
claim to be comprehensive. Its principal purpose is to provide basic data on the main
aspects of national administration and national economy and to give an account of the
part played by the Government in the life of the community.
In considering its contents, readers in the United Kingdom are asked to remember the
original purpose of the book—its oversea distribution. Should any readers need additional
or more detailed information they are referred to the Annual Abstract of Statistics, the
Monthly Digest of Statistics issued by the Central Statistical Office, and the standard
works of reference and Government publications, some of which are listed in the biblio¬
graphy at the end of this handbook. They are asked to note that the Central Office of
Information reference papers included in the bibliography are available only at United
Kingdom Information Offices overseas and for visitors to Britain.
In general, the contents of the handbook refer to the United Kingdom as a whole, but
where separate facts or figures are available for England and Wales, Scotland, and
Northern Ireland, these have, in some cases, been given.
REFERENCE DIVISION,
CENTRAL OFFICE OF INFORMATION, LONDON.
October 1953
*
vu
*
I. THE BRITISH ISLES
THE PHYSICAL BACKGROUND
The British Isles form a group lying off the north-west coast of Europe, with a total
area of about 121,600 square miles (approximately 315,000 sq. km.). The two largest
islands are Great Britain proper (comprising the greater parts of England, Wales and
Scotland) and Ireland (comprising Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland). Off the
southern coast of England is the Isle of Wight and off the extreme south-west are the
Isles of Scilly; off north Wales is Anglesey. Western Scotland is fringed by numerous
islands and to the far north are the important groups of the Orkneys and Shetlands. All
these form administrative counties or parts of counties, but the Isle of Man in the heart of
the Irish Sea and the Channel Islands between Great Britain and France have a large
measure of administrative autonomy and are not part of England, Wales or Scotland.
England (including the county of Monmouth on the Welsh border), with a total area
including inland water of 32,558,774 acres (approximately 13,176,000 hectares), is
divided into 41 geographical or 50 ‘civil’ counties; Wales, with 4,780,533 acres (approxi¬
mately 1,935,000 hectares), into 12 counties. Scotland, including its 186 inhabited islands,
has a total area of 19,463,016 acres (approximately 7,876,000 hectares), and is divided into
33 counties.
Care must always be taken when studying British statistics to note whether they refer
to England as defined above, to England and Wales (considered together for many
administrative and other purposes), or to Great Britain which comprises England, Wales
and Scotland. The position is further complicated by the fact that the county of Monmouth
is sometimes included with Wales. The ‘United Kingdom’—formerly the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, now the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland—is Great Britain with the addition of the six counties of Northern
Ireland, 3,488,643 acres (approximately 1,412,000 hectares). Statistics and other data
sometimes include but sometimes exclude the Isle of Man, 141,263 acres (approximately
57,000 hectares), and the Channel Islands, off the coast of France, 48,083 acres (approxi¬
mately 19,000 hectares), which are strictly not part of the United Kingdom. Since southern
Ireland became a separate country and independent republic there are now no statistics
referring to the British Isles as a whole.
The latitude of 50° North just cuts across the southernmost part of the British mainland
(the Lizard Peninsula) and latitude 6o° North passes through the Shetland Islands. The
northernmost point of the Scottish mainland, Dunnet ITead, is in latitude 58° 40'. The
prime meridian of o° passes through the old Observatory of Greenwich (London), while
the easternmost point of England reaches nearly i° 45' East and the westernmost point of
Ireland is approximately io° 30' West. In general terms the British Isles lie mainly within
the rectangle 50-60 degrees North and 0-10 degrees West. It is thus rather under 600 miles
(966 km.) in a straight line from the south coast of Britain to the extreme north and rather
over 300 miles across in the widest part. Owing to the numerous bays and inlets no point
in the British Isles is as much as 75 miles from tidal water.
The seas surrounding the British Isles are everywhere shallow—usually less than
50 fathoms or 300 feet (91 metres)—because the islands lie on the continental shelf. To the
north-west along the edge of the shelf the sea floor plunges abruptly from 600 feet to
3,000. These shallow waters are important because they provide excellent fishing grounds
as well as breeding grounds for the fish. The Gulf Stream, the drift of warm water which
1
2 Britain: an official handbook
reaches the islands from across the Atlantic, spreads out over the shelf and its amehorating
effect on the air over it is magnified. The effect of tidal movement is also increased by the
shallowness of the water.
Despite their small area, the British Isles include rocks representing all the major
geological periods. It is largely because of their long and complicated geological history
that the British Isles have a range of scenery almost unrivalled in any area of comparable
size anywhere in the world.
In the main island of Great Britain the hilly and mountainous areas lie to the north
and west, so that it is possible to draw a broad distinction between Highland Britain and
Lowland Britain. An irregular line joining the mouth of the Tyne in the north-east with
the mouth of the Exe in the south-west marks the division between these two contrasted
parts of Britain.
Highland Britain thus includes the whole of Scotland; the broad upland running from
north to south through the north of England and known as the Pennines; the well-known
Lake District in the north-west of England; practically the whole of Wales; and the
south-western peninsula coinciding approximately with the counties of Devon and
Cornwall. Highland Britain is built up almost entirely of rocks older in age than the Coal
Measures and there are large tracts of the surface lying more than 1,000 feet above sea
level. Many parts of the surface have only thin, poor soils, with the result that large stretches
of moorland are found over the Highlands of Scotland, the Pennines, the Lake District
and the mountains of Wales as well as on the higher ground in the south-west. The
farmer has been able to use only the valley lands and the plains where soils are deeper
and richer, so that human settlements are sometimes widely scattered, and villages and
towns may be separated by considerable stretches with few if any habitations.
Lowland Britain, comprising south-east England and the Midlands, is built up almost
entirely of rocks younger than the Coal Measures, which are less resistant to weathering
and have broken down to form deep fertile soils. Scarcely any part of Lowland Britain
reaches i ,000 feet above sea level, so drat practically the whole, with the exception of a few
patches of poor soil or rocky land, has been cultivated, and farmland stretches over the
whole area except where interrupted by urban and industrial settlements. Elaborate land
drainage systems have been developed through the centuries to bring under cultivation
the fertile soil of the low-lying Fenland of Lincolnshire and other nearby areas in East
Anglia.
Towards the end of its long geological history, when the ancestors of present-day man
had already settled in Britain, came the great Ice Age, and at one period or another during
this time the whole of Britain north of a line joining the Thames and the Bristol Channel
was covered by ice caps and ice sheets. The ice naturally accumulated on the higher
ground and swept from the mountains of Scotland, northern England and Wales any
loose rock or soil which had previously been formed, so that when the ice eventually
disappeared the hills stood out as barren rocky areas, while a thick mantle of glacial debris
boulders, boulder-clay, sands and gravels lay distributed widely over the lower ground.
The ice had blocked up previous drainage channels and left large lakes, which have since
gradually dried up, leaving deposits of sand, silt and mud, often affording soils of great
fertility.
In Ireland, where the solid rocks are often covered deeply by the debris left by ice
sheets, the great central plain has large boggy areas, due to interruption of the previous
natural drainage. The mountains and hill masses of Ireland are irregularly disposed round
the fringes of the island, and in the higher parts the moorland cover resembles that of the
higher parts of Highland Britain.
Because of the complex geology and the varied relief which results, Britain enjoys
not only very attractive and contrasting scenery within short distances but a remarkable,
ever different, coastline. The ancient rocks of Highland Britain often reach the coast in
0'
PHYSICAL
REGIONS
ENGLAND-SCOTLAND &
NORTHERN IRELAND-REPUBLIC
OF IRELAND BORDERS
} THE DOTTED AREAS ARE
THE WORKED COALFIELDS
BOUNDARY BETWEEN HIGHLAND
AND LOWLAND BRITAIN
BOUNDARIES OF REGIONS
LINES OF HILLS (SCARPS)
—52V
LAND S END
SOLLY ISLES f2 LIZARD PT
This map is adapted from The Regions of Britain, a map appearing in The Face of Britain, by L. Dudley Stamp,
published for the British Council by Longmans, Green & Co.
3
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
4
towering cliffs; elsewhere the sea may penetrate in deep lochs, as along much of the west
coast of Scotland. Bold outstanding headlands are notable features in other parts of the
varied coastline: the granite cliffs of Land’s End; the limestone masses or forbidding
slates of the Pembrokeshire coast; the red sandstone of St. Bees Head; and the
vertically jointed lavas of Skye and the island of Staffa. Even around Lowland Britain
there are striking contrasts. In some parts the soft, white limestone the chalk gives
rise to die world-famous white cliffs of Dover or the Needles off the Isle of Wight. Near
at hand are accumulations of sand and shingle, and such tracts as Chesil Beach, Dungeness
and the sandspits of the Norfolk coast have their own peculiar beauty. The eastern coast
of England between the Humber and the Thames estuary is for the most part low-lying
and for hundreds of years some stretches of it have been protected against the sea by
embankments. These have occasionally been breached, as in the flood disaster of January
1953, which was caused by the abnormal concurrence of violent gales and exceptionally
high tides.
The marked tidal movement around the British Isles sweeps away much of the sand
and mud brought down by the rivers and makes the estuaries of the short British rivers
valuable as natural havens. In times past every little cove round the rocky coasts afforded
shelter to a fishing village from the waves of the North Sea or the giant rollers of the
Atlantic.
Situated for the most part on the border land between Highland and Lowland Britain
are the outcrops of the Coal Measures containing nearly all Britain’s coal. The older coal
workings and collieries are found where the coal seams are at or near the surface and
where the early miners followed them up the deep valleys into the highlands, as in
Yorkshire or South Wales. The modem deep collieries seek the coal where it lies beneath
a cover of younger rocks and amid the farming lands of Lowland Britain. This is well
seen in Yorkshire where the newer pits are ever moving farther and farther east into
farming country. Most of the coalfields of Britain, including those of the great Central
Lowland of Scotland, have given rise to industrial regions, so that the old rural pattern
of British settlement based essentially on the occurrence of good soils suitable for intensive
farming has been largely overlaid by the newer urban industrial pattern, which is still
growing and spreading:
Britain does not suffer from extremes of climate. It hes entirely in middle latitudes and
the dominant winds are south-westerly. The weather from day to day depends mainly on a
succession of depressions or lows, with intervening ridges of high pressure, which tend
to approach the British Isles from the Atlantic and to pass over in an easterly direction.
Long periods of settled weather associated with stable air masses are the exception rather
than the rule.
Throughout the British Isles winters can be described as mild. Apart from the exposed
uplands the average temperature for the coldest month is lowest along or near the east
coast (38° F. = 3-3° C.1 * *). The warmest parts of the British Isles, the extreme south-west and
the Scilly Isles, have an average January temperature of 440 F. Except on exposed moun¬
tains, temperatures as low as 150 F. or 20° F. are rare and until a recent exceptionally cold
winter it was doubtful whether o° F. had ever been recorded.
The summers are warm rather than hot. The average for August, usually the warmest
month, ranges from 63° F. in the south to about 550 F. in the extreme north. Temperatures
of 90° F. and above are rare, and ioo° F. has scarcely ever been recorded.
Because the dominant winds are from the south-west this is the rainy quarter and there
is a great contrast between the extremely heavy rainfall of the western mountains—in
132° F.= o° C. and the conversion factor from Fahrenheit to Centigrade is 5/9, thus 440 C.,
iD F.= —ii*7° C., 200 F.= -6-7° C., o° F.= -i7-80 C., 63° F.= i7-20 C., 55° F.= I2-80 C.,900 F.=
32-20 C., ioo° F.= 37,8° C.
THE BRITISH ISLES
5
some areas over 100 inches a year—and the relatively dry east coast tracts where the
average may be less than 20 inches a year. Although the English farmer may complain
of droughts, a period of as long as three weeks without rain is exceptional, and droughts
disastrous to agriculture, so well known in other lands, do not occur in Britain. Indeed
the drier years are usually marked by high crop yields.
Although Britain’s fogs, to a large extent accentuated by the smoky atmosphere of
London and other big cities, have attained world-wide notoriety, severe fogs are nowa¬
days rarer than formerly, and are seldom widespread, though occasionally, as in the winter
of 1952-53, fog persists for many consecutive days in certain areas. The hours of sunshine
throughout the year are relatively low owing to broken cloud cover; the average is be¬
tween 24 and 3 8 per cent of the possible total.
With its mild climate and varied soils, Britain has a complicated pattern of natural
vegetation cover. When the islands were first settled, oak woodland doubtless covered the
greater part of the lowland, giving place to thin forests of Scots fir on higher or sandy
ground, interrupted by extensive marshlands and perhaps some open moorland. In the
course of the centuries nearly all the forests have been cleared so that forest and woodland
now occupy only about 6 per cent of the surface of the country. Midland Britain seems
superficially to be well wooded because of the numerous hedgerows and isolated trees.
The hilly moorland with its famous heather (and cotton grass in the wetter parts),
with its numerous hill grasses and the bracken fern, is a semi-natural wild vegetation.
Most of Lowland Britain consists either of grass pastureland representing centuries of care¬
ful management, or ploughland. Because of the well-distributed rainfall coming in almost
equal amounts in each month of the year, streams rarely dry up and grass remains green
throughout the year.
THE DEMOGRAPHIC BACKGROUND
The people who now inhabit the British Isles are descended mainly from the people who
inhabited them nearly nine centuries ago. The last of a long succession of invaders and
colonizers from Scandinavia and the continent of Europe were the Normans, a branch of
the Norsemen or Scandinavian Vikings who, after settling in northern France, inter¬
marrying with the French, and assimilating the French language and customs, crossed to
England and conquered it in 1066.
It is neither possible nor suitable to attempt in this chapter to estimate the relative im¬
portance of various early peoples—pre-Celtic, Celtic, Roman, Anglo-Saxon and Norse—
in the ancestry of the present English, Scots, Welsh and Irish. It is significant, however,
that over most of England and the Lowlands of Scotland the language which soon came to
predominate was English, mainly a marriage of Anglo-Saxon and Norman-French, while
the use of Celtic languages persisted in Wales, Cornwall, the Isle of Man, the Highlands of
Scotland and Ireland.
The available records do not permit of any precise estimates of the size of population or
of the extent or direction of population movement until the beginning of the nineteenth
century. It is believed that at the end of the eleventh century the population of Great
Britain was of the order of two million, while at the end of the seventeenth a reasonable
contemporary estimate put the population of England and Wales at 5 J million and the
population of Scotland at about one million. Natural increase was the main factor in this
slow growth, though it was kept down in Britain, as in all countries before the develop¬
ment of medical science, by high death rates and particularly by very high infant and
maternal mortality. Immigration from the continent of Europe, e.g., of Flemish weavers,
played some part at certain times.
From the beginning of the nineteenth century, information about the British people,
their number, sex, age, geographical distribution, births, deaths, marriages, occupations,
language and family structure, is relatively plentiful and reliable. Most of it is derived from
<5 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
two main sources: the periodic census of population which gives a national snapshot at a
particular moment of time, and the regular flow of statistical information based on statu¬
tory registration of births, marriages and deaths.
The Census
Censuses of the people of Great Britain were taken regularly every ten years from 1801
to 1931. There was no census between 1931 and I95I> but a count of the population by age
and sex was a by-product of the national registration of September 1939, which was carried
out mainly for other purposes. . . . , ,
Censuses were taken on 8th April 1951 by the appropriate authorities in the United
Kingdom, the islands of the British Seas and the Republic of Ireland.1 This was the first
simultaneous population count covering all these areas since the censuses of 1911. The co¬
operation of the Republic of Ireland in arranging a simultaneous census was of particular
value, owing to the considerable sea and land traffic and temporary and permanent move¬
ment of population between that country and the United Kingdom.
Prehminary reports of the censuses of England and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ire¬
land were obtained, in advance of the main statistical operations, direct from summaries
supplied by the local census officers. They are, therefore, provisional, though no material
correction to their figures is expected to be necessary. They relate only to the numbers of
the population by sex for each country and for administrative areas within each country,
except that in the Scottish report there is a table indicating by counties the number and
percentage of the population returned as speaking Gaelic. To obtain advance information
on the many other matters covered by the Census, an analysis has been made of a repre-
sentative one per cent sample of the returns for Great Britain.
The short demographic account of the United Kingdom given in this chapter is based
mainly on census reports (including the 1951 Census One Per Cent Sample Tables) and
on the regular returns of births, marriages and deaths, though some use has been made
of other special investigations.
Total Population
The enumerated population of the United Kingdom at the census taken on 8th April
1951 was, to the nearest thousand, 50,210,000, excluding 158,000 persons in the Isle of
Man and the Channel Islands, which are not strictly parts of the United Kingdom. This
represented a population density of about 533 persons per square mile, which is one of the
highest in the world and is still rising.
The population has increased by about 2J million since mid-i939> by about 4 million
since 1931, by about 6 milhon since 1921 and by about 43 million or about sevenfold
since 1700. The main causes of this increase were a progressive reduction in death rates and
a continuance of high birth rates into the beginning of the twentieth century.
Birth and Death Rato.2 During the nineteenth century the annual birth rate was usually
around 3! per cent. The annual death rate was just over 2 per cent. Both birth and death
rates fell over the last 30 years of the century, but the natural increase of the population
changed but little. It rose from 1-2 per cent in 1851 to 1-4 per cent in 1881, and fell to i-i
per cent in 1901.
These fertile years, with their comparatively high death rates in all age groups, produced
1These authorities are: the General Register Office, Somerset House, London; the General Registry
Office, Edinburgh; the Ministry of Finance of the Government of Northern Ireland; the Govern¬
ments of the Isle of Man, of Jersey and of Guernsey and its dependencies; the Central Statistical Office
of the Republic of Ireland.
2Birth and death rates are the ratios of live-births and deaths to the population or population-group
concerned. Strictly speaking, the ratios of total live-births and total deaths to total population should
be referred to as crude birth and death rates (in contrast with age-specific or other specific rates.)
In common usage, however, the word ‘crude’ is often omitted, particularly in reference to birth rates,
7
8
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
a population of low average age and at each successive census the population of any age
group exceeded the corresponding figure at the preceding census. When, therefore, death
rates in all age groups fell by an average of about 33 per cent, as they did between 1880 and
1910, the result was first a very low crude death rate which helped to maintain the popula¬
tion increase in spite of a fall in the birth rate, and, secondly, a gradual increase in the
average age of the population.
After the first world war the birth rate fell to less than half the nineteenth-century rate.
Even so, the population continued to increase slowly, though its average age rose more
rapidly.
Owing to the changing age composition, crude death rates remained nearly stationary
at around 1-2 per cent though the death rates continued to fall heavily in all age groups,
particularly among pre-school children, school children, and adults in their thirties and
forties. From 1932 onwards the birth rate steadied itself and thereafter rose slowly up to
the outbreak of war, after which all orderly movement was interrupted by the disturbed
conditions of the war years. The 1947 birth rate (20-7 per thousand of the population) was
the highest since 1921, but the 1948, 1949, 1950, 1951 and 1952 birth rates were progres¬
sively lower, though higher than pre-war. The 1952 birth rate was 15-7 per thousand of
the population.
Mortality Causes. The causes of the decline in mortality include better nutrition, rising
standards of living, the advance of medical science, the growth of medical facilities, im¬
proved health measures, better working conditions, education in personal hygiene, public
and private schemes to make the health services generally available, and the smaller size of
the family, which has reduced the strain on mothers and enabled them to take greater care
of their children.
Mortality from acute infective diseases and infant and maternal mortality have declined
very sharply. Mortahty from the main acute infective diseases of childhood is less than
one-thirtieth, and mortality from tuberculosis is less than one-tenth of the rates prevailing
in the mid-nineteenth century. Infant mortality has fallen by about 80 per cent since 1900,
and between 1934 and 1942 maternal mortality was halved and has since continued to fall.
The reported mortality from many of the chronic diseases of middle and old age has
risen during the twentieth century, and this rise, though exaggerated by the improvement
in diagnosis, is at least partly real. Medicine has not yet discovered effective measures to
combat some of these diseases, and improvement in positive health does not always bring
increased immunity or resistance to them.
Fertility Trends. The fall in births during the twentieth century has taken place in spite of
an increase in the marriage rate and a drop in the usual age of marriage for women. It is
due mainly to a decline in the number of children born per married couple (the average
size of the family). Couples married in the mid-Victorian era produced on the average five
to six liveborn children. Among the couples married in the years 1925-29 the figure may
be estimated at 2-2.
At first the decline in family size was most marked among the professional and salaried
classes. Among couples married between 1900 and 1930 the famihes of manual workers
were about 40 per cent larger than those of non-manual workers, but this class difference
appears to have been diminishing. The decline in family size has been considerably slower
among Roman Catholics than in the rest of the population, and slower in Scotland and
Northern Ireland than in England and Wales.
Changing social habits and the disturbing effects of war preclude any reliable estimate of
long-term trends in family size since 1939.
Migration. During the inter-censal period 1931-51 the net balance of migration to and
from the United Kingdom was inward for the first time in the past century. The net gain
to the United Kingdom from civilian migration was about half a million, a net gain of
THE BRITISH ISLES
three-quarters of a million to England and Wales being offset by net losses from Scotland
and Northern Ireland. This net gain was the balance of a large outward movement mainly
of British subjects emigrating, mostly since 1945, to Canada, Austraha, New Zealand and
South Africa, and a larger inward movement mainly of aliens from Europe, many of
whom were refugees seeking sanctuary in Britain. Over the whole 150 years since the be¬
ginning of the nineteenth century, net migration has been markedly outward. About 25
million persons born in the British Isles are estimated to have gone overseas in this period
to settle in the United States and Commonwealth countries. On the other hand large
numbers of Europeans, mainly Russians, Poles and Germans, have entered the British
Isles during the last 80 years. The net loss by migration since 1871 from the present area
of the United Kingdom is about 3^ million,
Age Distribution. The continuous fall in death rates and the low inter-war birth rates are
beginning to increase the proportion of elderly people, and thus to reduce the proportion
of the working population to the total population. The small age groups born between
the wars have been and are still coming to maturity. The size of the age groups reaching
retirement age increases yearly, as these groups were born during a period of rapidly ex¬
panding population. The continuing fall of the death rate in all age groups has still further
increased the number of old persons. Moreover, the higher birth rates since 1942 have
arrested the compensating fall in the number of dependent children. In December 1952 the
age distribution of the United Kingdom was estimated as follows:
Under 15 .. .. 22-6 per cent
65 and over .. .. n-o per cent
15 to 64 .. .. 66-4 per cent
During the present decade the population of Britain will have abnormally large numbers
aged between 40 and 50. Assuming that mortality rates continue to fall, and disregarding
migration, it can therefore be shown that:
(1) over the next 15 years the population of working age will remain roughly constant;
(2) the number of old people (over 65) will increase over the next 30 years by about
three million.
These predictions are independent of the future course of births.
Sex Ratio. Total births of boys usually exceed those of girls by about 5 per cent, but
owing to the higher stillbirth rate and infant mortality among boys, and the higher male
death rates in all age groups, women have for the past 100 years outnumbered men from
adolescence onwards and in the total population. Their predominance increases with age
and is now nearly 50 per cent among persons over 70 years of age.
The fall in mortality has affected the sex ratio by increasing the proportion of old
persons in both sexes, which has made female predominance in those age groups a
weightier factor in the sex ratio of the population as a whole. At the same time there has
been a slight rise in the proportion of boys among children under 15 years of age.
The proportion of females to males in the total population has not varied greatly, how¬
ever, as these two effects have counterbalanced each other. At present there are six per
cent more females than males.
Population Policy
If the future brings a further reduction in family size, the decline of annual births will
become rapid, with serious effects on the trend of population. Fear of this eventuality was
an important factor in a growing concern with population problems, which led to the
appointment in March 1944 of a Royal Commission on Population to inquire into the
facts concerning British population trends, their causes and probable consequences; and to
‘consider what measures, if any, should be taken in the national interest to influence the
future trend of population’.
B
jo Britain: an official handbook
The Commission reported in March 1949- It found that the main cause, and very prob¬
ably the only cause, of the fall in family size was the spread of deliberate family limitation.
In the course of the nineteenth century powerful economic, social and cultural forces
combined to tell against the continued acceptance of an uncontrolled birth rate. Changes
in economic organization were reducing the importance of the family as a productive
unit, while the Factory and Education Acts were extending the period during which
children were an unrelieved expense to their parents, dhe result was that, in all classes of
society except the wealthiest, married couples with young children to support were at an
economic disadvantage compared with childless couples: and parents with a family of
several young children were at a disadvantage as compared with those with only one or
two. ... c
The Commission’s recommendations aimed at reducing the economic disadvantages ot
parenthood. It proposed increased family allowances; reform of income tax to reduce the
disadvantages of parenthood for the well-to-do; the building of more houses with more
than three bedrooms; the furdier development of family health and welfare services, and
research and education in population questions.
Regional Distribution and Trends
The populations of England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland1 and of each of the
principal regions of England were hi every case greater in 1951 than in 1931, whereas in
the period 1921-31 the populations of Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland had declined.
The greatest increases were in the eastern, southern, midland and south-western districts
of England, and in Northern Ireland. The smallest increase was in Wales.
The population of the United Kingdom taken as a whole is predominantly urban and
suburban. During the nineteenth century, when the labour demands of newly developing
industry drew great numbers from the countryside to the towns, the urban element con¬
tinuously and rapidly outgrew the rural element. At the end of the nineteenth century 75
per cent of the British population was living within the boundaries of urban adminis¬
trative areas and the large conurbation was already the dominant type of British com¬
munity. By 1911 the economic and social limits of these conurbations extended far beyond
the administrative boundaries of the cities which formed their core, owing to the building
of outer suburbs which linked up neighbouring towns. Since 1921 nearly 40 per cent of
the population has lived in the seven great conurbations whose centres are the cities of
London, Glasgow, Birmingham and Wolverhampton, Manchester, Liverpool, Leeds and
Bradford, and Newcastle upon Tyne.
During the twentieth century the general character of urbanization changed, the later
increases in urban areas being relatively much smaller and much more due to the natural
growth of the towns than to the withdrawal of rural population. Moreover, two new and
decided trends became apparent: first, the outer rings of conurbations and the suburbs of
large cities began to increase in population much more rapidly than the large cities them¬
selves; secondly, there was a considerable migration, particularly of young adults, to the
expanding new light industries and suburban residential areas springing up in and around
London and Birmingham. This movement was intensified by the heavy unemployment
of the inter-war years which affected with particular severity the textile and heavy engin¬
eering industries of Scotland, Northern England and South Wales.
The combined effect of these two trends was that the outer rings of the London and
Birmingham conurbations increased most in population while the remoter country areas
and some industrial towns of Scotland, Wales and Northern England declined. In urban
areas in England and Wales, the medium-sized towns of between 50,000 and 100,000 in¬
habitants increased most rapidly, while the populations of very large or very small towns
tended to decline.
1 For population figures see map on p. 7.
THE BRITISH ISLES
II
The second world war halted suburban building and for a time reduced the population
o conurbations and large cities, but by the end of the war many people had returned to
the neighbourhood of their pre-war homes. In 1951 many large cities and towns had larger
populations than in 1939, but the populations of others, notably London, were reduced.
The decrease in the County of London was about two-thirds of a million^ and in spite of
an increase in the population of the outer ring, the population of Greater London in 1951
(8,346,000 to the nearest thousand) was nearly 400,000 less than in 1939. The populations
of many urban and rural areas surrounding Greater London have continued to increase very
rapidly. 7
After 1939—and therefore probably at least in part as a result of the war—there was a
marked change in the relative rates of growth of rural and urban areas as a whole, and of
small, medium-sized and large towns. For the first time in 100 years the population of ad-
mmistrative rural areas grew faster than that of urban areas, while within urban areas the
greatest growth occurred in towns of 40,000 to 75,000 inhabitants, and smaller towns
appeared to be increasing almost as fast.
Language
In England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, English is the language predomin¬
antly spoken. In Wales, however, Welsh, a form of British Celtic, is the first language of
most of the population in some of the central and northern counties and was spoken by
about a quarter of the population at the time of the 1951 census. According to the 1951
census of Scotland nearly 100,000 persons, mainly in Ross and Cromarty, Inverness,
Avgy{1’ an<^ Lanark, speak the Scottish form of Gaelic, while a few scattered families in
Northern Ireland speak the Irish form of Gaelic.1
French is the official language of the Channel Islands and dialect French is still spoken
there by many people. The Manx and Cornish varieties of Celtic are no longer effectively
living languages. 7
Social Patterns
A general summary of trends in social organization, similar in scope to the foregoing
summary of population trends, is not practicable. Human relations and behaviour are too
complex and too little susceptible to precise statistical treatment, while sources of socio¬
logical information are incomplete and not always reliable. It may be useful, however, to
review some of the evidence relating to the structure of British households and the extent
and use of leisure in Britain in order to provide a background for the consideration of a
number of planning problems, particularly in the fields of town-planning, housing and
transport.
Number and Composition of Households
In Great Britain, as in other countries, most people live as members of private house¬
holds (usually famihes). Less than 5 per cent ot the population were enumerated by the
censuses of 1911, 1921, 1931 and 1951 in institutions (hotels, schools, hospitals, etc.).
In 1911 there were about nine million private households2 in Great Britain. By 1951,
according to the Census One Per Cent Sample Tables, there were about 14J million
households, an increase of about 60 per cent. This expansion seems out of proportion to
the 19 per cent increase in the total population for the same period. It was in fact com¬
parable widi the increase in the population of persons over 24 years old and the slightly
larger increase in the number of married persons. In other words, the increasing age of the
1Mo5t of the islands off the west coast of Scotland are included in the counties of Ross and Crom¬
arty, Inverness, and Argyll.
-Counting persons living alone as one-person households.
I2 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
population meant more but smaller families. The average size of household in Great
Britain fell from 4-5 persons in 1911 to 3-2 in I951- hi England and Wales the number
of persons living in households of one or two persons almost tripled between 1911 and
1951. At the end of this period such households constituted about 4c Per cent of private
households and comprised about 20 per cent of the population in private households.
About two-thirds of the persons living alone in 1951 were 60 years of age or over, while
in at least 43 per cent of families of two persons, at least one of the household was 60
or over.
It has been difficult to increase the number of separate dwelhng-places (houses or flats)
sufficiently rapidly to overtake the increasing number of private households, and this
difficulty was aggravated by the suspension of house-building and destruction of property
during the second world war. There were in 1951 only some 13-3 million structurally
separate dwelhng-places in Great Britain, so that over 2 million households had to share a
home (see page 250). It is unofficially estimated that about three-quarters of all dwellings
in Great Britain are terraced or semi-detached houses (usually of 4 to 6 dwelling-rooms
including bedrooms) while the remaining quarter consists of detached houses and flats in
approximately equal numbers. The proportion of flats is greatly above average in Scotland
(estimated at about 60 per cent) and considerably above average in London (estimated at
17 per cent).
Of the 14J million private households in Great Britain, 11-5 million were estimated in
the 1951 Census Sample to be of the simplest type, comprising married couples or
widowed persons with their children, if any, or persons living alone. More specifically,
they comprised 3 -2 million married couples with no children, 900,000 widowed persons
living alone, 6-9 million married couples or widowed persons with children of any age,
600,000 single persons living alone. Over a third of all married couples living alone were
60 years old or over; less than a quarter of the married couples under 40 years of age in
these simplest types of household had no children; and the majority of the single persons
living alone were over 40 years old.
Nearly another million households were of these simple types except for the inclusion of
parents or non-married brothers or sisters of the head of the household. Only 2 miflion
households contained persons less closely related to the head than parent or brother or
sister, or contained non-relatives. There were nearly a miflion families consisting of
married couples, or married or widowed persons with children, who were without their
own homes, and the majority of these were living in the homes of their parents. Apart
from these satellite family groups, 1,102,700 households contained an aggregate of
1,240,000 other persons unrelated or distantly related to the head of the household, tire
bulk of whom were presumably of the status of boarders. Of these more than half a million
constituted sole individual additions to the more normal types of families with married
heads. There were nearly 300,000 households consisting of two persons who were dis¬
tantly related or were unrelated to one another.
Over 8 million households (57 per cent of all households) were estimated in the 1951
Census Sample Tables to be without children under 16, while another 3-1 million con¬
tained only one child.
In Great Britain as a whole it was estimated that, in 1951,180,000 households contained
a total of 205,000 resident domestic servants. Of these, about half were in households of
one or two other persons, and over a quarter were in the households of single or widowed
or divorced persons, 40 years old or over, living alone except for a servant. A sample
analysis of 1931 census data covering only England and Wales showed 706,800 resident
domestic servants in private households, which compares with 178,000 in England and
Wales in 1951.
THE BRITISH ISLES
13
Work and Leisure
The great majority of British males over 15 years of age are in full-time gainful em¬
ployment, and the majority of females are either housewives or in full-time gainful
employment (see p. 214). In many cases housewives also undertake part-time or even
full-time employment.
Agreed hours of full-time work for the majority of occupations tend to be about 44
hours a week, with some variation on each side. Actual weekly hours worked by men
average a little longer owing to overtime working, and actual hours worked by women
and girls average a little less (see p. 225). To these hours must often be added the time
taken in travel to and from work. According to a sample survey made in August 1943,
over 75 per cent of wage earners in large towns spent half an hour a day travelling to and
from work, mainly by public transport, while over 30 per cent spent over an hour in such
daily travel. This survey was made in exceptional war-time conditions, and the average
time taken in travelling to work may have slightly decreased outside Greater London in
spite of the continuing movement of population away from the centre of large towns. In
Greater London, however, a sample survey made in 1949 showed that the average time
taken in travelling to and from work was 88 minutes a day.
In addition, there is often a long journey from home to the main shopping centre in
both urban and rural areas. According to a sample survey made in 1946 it averaged about
18 minutes each way, and in many rural areas took much longer. In most areas there are,
of course, one or two shops much closer at hand.
One consequence of the distance from home to work and to shops is the growth of the
habit of eating away from home. This habit has been encouraged by the rationing of cer¬
tain uncooked foods and by the establishment of factory and office canteens providing
cheap meals at places of work. The majority of all schoolchildren and probably about a
third of all adults, except housewives, take some meals regularly outside their homes.
According to a sample survey made in 1947, only 6 per cent of housewives employ
any paid help, and only 1 percent1 have a resident servant. Housewives appear, in general,
to have rather less leisure and considerably fewer periods of continuous leisure of over one
hour than other persons in Britain.
Most employees, in addition to i| or 2 days’ holiday each week and 6 statutory public
holidays a year, get at least one week’s continuous holiday in the year. In fact, about half
the population take at least a week’s holiday away from home every year, mostly in July
and August. Some two-thirds of these spend their holiday by the sea in Britain. About
4! per cent of hohdaymakers go abroad.
At least a quarter of the adult population is interested in playing or going to watch
outdoor sports; the most popular are Association football and cricket. In England alone
about 23,000 football clubs—mainly amateur clubs—are affiliated to the English Football
Association, excluding another 9,000 clubs in the armed forces, universities and schools.
Some 750,000 youths and men play in weekly football matches during the winter months;
spectators at professional football matches number about a million weekly. Cricket is
played by children, youths and men of every walk of life, especially in England. Atten¬
dance at first-class cricket matches is somewhat smaller than at professional football
matches, but the ‘Test’ matches between the cricket teams of Commonwealth countries
have become of nation-wide interest. Cricket is less popular in Scotland, where golf has
pride of place. Race meetings throughout the country draw large crowds, while many
other sporting events, for instance rugby football matches in the winter months and, in
the summer, tennis tournaments, especially the annual lawn tennis championships at
Wimbledon, have their smaller but devoted public. Every form of outdoor pursuit from
1This estimate has been shown to be approximately correct by the analysis of households employing
servants made in the 1951 Census Sample Tables (see p. 12).
14
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
swimming, hiking, cycling and motoring1 to hunting, shooting and fishing has an
enthusiastic following, though many sports, such as sailing and rock-climbing, can
be practised only by relatively few keen amateurs.
Although climatic and physical conditions in Britain afford few opportunities for ski¬
ing and mountaineering, numbers of people go abroad regularly for these pursuits, and the
whole nation was stirred by the news of the first ascent of Mount Everest on 29th May
1953 by members of the British Expedition.
The spread of television has added a vast new audience of indoor spectators to the
crowds who go to watch sports and other outdoor events. In June 1953 more than one
household in six had a television set; viewers are fairly evenly distributed among all
sections of the population, irrespective of income. The number of television licences is
increasing by 60,000 to 70,000 a month (see p. 282). Some districts, however, are still
outside the regular range of the transmitters.
Television is one of the factors that have caused a considerable fall in cinema attendances
since the end of the war, but it has not checked the growing popularity of plays, concerts,
the ballet and the opera. The cinema remains, however, the most popular form of indoor
entertainment outside the home; two out of five adults and one out of two schoolchildren
go to the cinema, on average, at least once a week.
Dancing, card games and other social gatherings—often organized by local social clubs
—are also popular; one traditional social rendezvous, the public house, has maintained and
even increased its popularity, although there has been a marked decrease in drunkenness
since the nineteenth century. The public house now attracts a very wide circle of casual
customers (both men and women) as well as many ‘regulars’, who meet for a drink and a
chat, and perhaps to play some traditional public-house game such as darts. On the other
hand many people, especially the married and the elderly, spend much of their leisure at
home—reading, listening to the radio, viewing television, or pursuing hobbies. Gardening
is perhaps the most widespread hobby, and the standard of rural and suburban gardens is
high.
A number of people, young and old, find their main free-time interest in some form of
group activity connected, for example, with the churches, trade unionism, politics, social
welfare and reform, or with cultural pursuits such as amateur dramatics or music. People
with these associational interests are, of course, in a minority, but they constitute an
important and characteristic feature of British life and, indeed, an essential ingredient in
the working of British democracy.
1Thcre are about 5 million motor vehicles licensed at the height of summer, of which some 2J
milhon are private cars and nearly a million are motor cycles. Most of the private cars, however, are
used partly, if not primarily, for business purposes.
II. GOVERNMENT AND
ADMINISTRATION
THE MONARCHY
The United Kingdom is a monarchical state, formed originally in the ninth century by
the unification of all England under a Saxon king, and later expanded by the conquest of
Wales and Ireland1 by kings of England and by the dynastic union of the English and
Scottish thrones in the person of James I of England and VI of Scotland. The United
Kingdom is also a member nation of the Commonwealth, of which the Queen is the head.
The form of the Royal title is varied for the member countries of the Commonwealth
to suit the particular circumstances of each. India, as a republic, owes no allegiance to the
Crown, but accepts the Queen as the symbol of the free association of the member
nations and, as such, as the head of the Commonwealth.
Agreement was reached at a meeting of Commonwealth representatives in December
1952 on the form of the Queen’s title in the various parts of the Commonwealth, and
legislation was passed by the Parliaments concerned to enable the necessary changes to be
made.2 The Royal Title in the United Kingdom is: ‘Elizabeth the Second, by the Grace
of God of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and of Her other
Realms and Territories Queen, Head of the Commonwealth, Defender of the Faith’.
The seat of the monarchy is in the United Kingdom. In the other member nations of
the Commonwealth which owe allegiance to the Crown, the Queen is represented by a
Governor-General appointed by the Crown on the advice of the ministers of the country
concerned. The sole function of the Governor-General is to act in relation to the adminis¬
tration of public affairs according to the constitutional practice obtaining in his country
in regard to the exercise of the powers of the Crown. As the Queen’s representative he has
no official dealings with the United Kingdom Government; nor has he any official
existence even in the country to which he is appointed, except in the absence of the Queen.
In the Dependencies—the Colonies, the Protectorates and the Trust Territories—the
Queen is represented by Governors, High Commissioners or Residents, who are appointed
by the Crown and perform the constitutional functions of the Crown, but who have in
addition varying executive and legislative powers, and are responsible to the United
Kingdom Government for the good government of the countries concerned.
Each of the member nations of the Commonwealth has its own separate constitution,
governed by different laws and customs, and subject to different powers of change. The
scope of this chapter will be confined to a description of one of those nations—namely
the United Kingdom—and the machinery and processes through which its constitution
works.
Succession
The monarchy is the most ancient secular institution in the United Kingdom. Its con¬
tinuity has been broken only once in over a thousand years; and in spite of interruptions in
the direct line of succession, the hereditary principle upon which it was founded has never
been abandoned. Queen Elizabeth II is a descendant of the Saxon king Egbert, who united
all England in 829.
1In 1920 the United Kingdom was diminished by the separation of the 26 counties of southern
Ireland.
2In the United Kingdom, the Royal Titles Act, 1953.
15
►-!
i-l
<1
o
w
H
i M
S'o
d ■
CsJ PC
tr v- _
O 3
M
z s
Wo
D t!
al
-•s.s -w.a
8-3
3Q
CO o
VO •-M
co rz
H.s
wS
s
B jj
-J3
%<
i=-l
i aw
;MJ
-3 e;
‘S.s
El
’3 <5 £ "0 nj
„ o
— O 03 ON,
£?§
g-o
o S”0
w | S' s'
3-z a S'o
"SS M-S
S"2Z g
Q « °
^•S<
tr1 o W
> «Q
—Q o Z -
§|S
w g
o°:§
2 Ew
SA ^
« q/
2>
I
>w
-WE9-
wg
m u
0£
U'z
sj1
_ ° M
£
M 'G O
3 I cl o
_Q g S 8 _
tfg'sO
ffww's
2 S ■ 0
02 6
l-^-o
Sw
-°J s|i-
riiir
J^O S'<Q
1^3-
oW-a
^eSk
- g . & 0—
w £■ a S'
’ O | ^
gang's
gEagwS
~w jr-sgS p-
O ON^O C N 3
O T S g,w O'
Z o!swW o
.3 .a ^ 3
^ cn^: -a g
—^"Sq-S s’ a.
^ »weS g
i g|r
-52
W-S
. Z^
JO [L] n
-Sw gW-r;
3 MO, W S
_Qls2S
.ag
1sE|n
^ v^. w .a ^
-3 o>
33
W o
ffl c u ja
•<) e-m £P
N 'o' ,5 3
W „ C
W ".S-^
z^3«
w ^
M
p
o
% <D p; X -
w o « ^ rr S J3 ^ ^ ° u
«UcS0(r^2..
a i*
•S a
5 a a g g5 §
jSSoSgogyaoo
3.3.3.S .3 3.3 .S .3 g
5£wQa3alQo3wwW>
■§15
^ ^ -S
•li
s S
■§ -a §
« v*
33
.. fc «<
U. .Jj
s
^ -a-s
o 1^,
-si §
2.3
_ SItj
^ M ^
tf)
Szq ft
K |!
13 a
a !?J
c3 cr^co
2 ^ c
-tM ^2 O .
.2-o'a
w ^ a
z
w
w
p
O'
o
H
O
z
H
<3
W
W
w
co
<3
Q
^ N S'-’
<3c ct! S-S
t> 2 a ”
z^Aw
&I’H
!| I?
^ <3 O G
ffi
o
x6
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION jy
The permanence of the monarchy has been ascribed to the fact that the constitution
oi the United Kingdom is governed by conventions rather than by formal law. Con¬
ventions are those parts of the rules and practices under which a system of government
works, which are not part of the law of the land in the sense that violation of them may
lead to proceedings in a court of law, but which are nevertheless indispensable to the
machmery of government. Since they are based upon usage, they are not absolutely
brncing, and they may therefore be adapted to changing conditions without serious
disturbance to existing organs and forms.
The title to the Crown derives from the Act of Settlement, 1701, which laid it down
that the Crown . . . shall remain and continue to the said most excellent Princess Sophia1
and the heirs of her body being Protestants’. Subsequent Succession to the Crown Acts
have confirmed this declaration; and although succession is not bound to continue in its
present line, it cannot now be altered except by common consent of the member nations
of the Commonwealth2 which owe allegiance to the Crown.
The inheritance of the Crown is governed by rules of descent, which provide that the
sons of the Sovereign are in Order of Succession to the Throne, or, if there are no sons,
the daughters in order of their own seniority. When a daughter succeeds, she becomes
Queen-Regnant, and powers of the Crown or Royal Prerogatives3 are vested in her as
fully and effectively as though she were a king. By convention, the consort of a king takes
the rank and style of her husband; but the converse does not apply, and the constitution
has never attached any special rank or privileges to the husband of the Queen-Regnant.
Accession
There is no interregnum between the death of one Sovereign and the accession of
another. Immediately on the death of his or her predecessor the new Sovereign is pro-
claimed at an Accession Council attended by the Privy Council; die Lords Spiritual and
1 emporal, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and citizens of the City of London, and the High
Commissioners in London of the member nations of the Commonwealth also have the
right to attend.
Coronation
The coronation of the Sovereign follows the accession after an interval which may last
for a year or more. The ceremony, which has frequently been modified in detail to bring
it into conformity with the occasion and the time, has remained much the same in sub¬
stance for nearly a thousand years. The service used at the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II
was derived from the service used at the coronation of King Edgar at Bath in the year 973.
1 he coronation service is held at Westminster Abbey in the presence of representatives
of the peers, the Commons and all the great public interests in the United Kingdom, of
the Prime Ministers and leading members of the other Commonwealth countries, and of
representatives of foreign States.
Acts of Government
The Queen is the personification of the State. In law, she is the supreme authority, an
integral part of the legislature, the head of the judiciary in England and Wales, Northern
Ireland, and Scotland, the head of the Navy, Army and Air Force of the United Kingdom,
the temporal head of the established Church of England, and the sole representative of the
nation in international affairs. In practice, as a result of a long evolutionary process, during
which many restrictions on the royal prerogative have been imposed, these powers have
1Thc Electress of Hanover, grand-daughter of Janies I.
2A provision of the Statute of Westminster, 1931.
3The residue of discretionary or arbitrary authority which at any time is legally left in the hands of
the Crown.’ Professor A. V. Dicey’s Law of the Constitution.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
changed from being the weapon of the monarchy to being the means of giving effect to
the public will. Today, the Queen acts only on the advice of her ministers which she can¬
not constitutionally ignore. She reigns, but she does not rule. The United Kingdom is
governed by Her Majesty’s Government in the name of the Queen.
Within this framework, and in spite of the fact that the trend of legislation during the
past hundred years has been to assign powers directly to ministers without any necessity for
royal intervention, there are still important acts of government which require the partici¬
pation of the Queen.1
The Queen summons, prorogues and dissolves Parliament; she opens the new session
with a speech from the throne, and must give Royal Assent before a Bill which has passed
all its stages in both Houses of Parliament becomes a legal enactment. The Queen is the
fountain of justice’, and in spite of the fact that the judiciary is now completely indepen¬
dent of the executive 'all jurisdictions of the courts are either indirectly or immediately
derived from the Crown’. As ‘the fountain of honour’, the Queen makes appointments to
peerages, knighthoods and other honours; to all important State offices,2 including judges,
officers in the armed forces, governors, diplomats and consuls; and to all leading positions
in the established Church of England. The Queen’s consent and approval are required
before a minister can take up office or a Cabinet be formed. In international affairs, it is the
Queen’s prerogative to conclude treaties, to cede or accept territory and to declare war or
to make peace.
That there is clear ministerial responsibility for all these acts of government is shown in
the three ways in which the royal will can be constitutionally expressed: by Order in
Council (see pp. 26-27) made ‘by and with the advice of the Privy Council’; by Order,
Commission or Warrant under the sign manual, which generally bears the signature of
one or more responsible ministers; or by Proclamation, Writs, Patents, Letters or other
documents under the Great Seal affixed by the Lord Chancellor in obedience to a Royal
Warrant countersigned by a minister.
Ministerial responsibility for the exercise of powers by the Crown does not detract
from the importance of the participation of the Sovereign in the smooth working of
government; for although the Queen has no personal authority and must show complete
impartiahty in every field, she must be informed and consulted on every aspect of the
national life to the widest possible extent. The Queen holds meetings of the Privy Council,
gives audiences to her ministers and other holders of office at home and overseas, receives
accounts of Cabinet decisions, reads dispatches and signs innumerable State papers.
Ceremonial
Ceremonial has always been associated with the kings and queens of the British Isles,
and in spite of the changes that have taken place with the altered outlook on life of both
the Sovereign and the people, certain customs and usages are the same today as they were
many centuries ago.
The Queen still holds Courts, at which the formal ceremony of presentation is retained.
Royal marriages, the birth of royal children and royal funerals are still marked by ancient
ceremonial, although to a lesser degree than in former days. The birthday of the Sovereign,
formerly the occasion of many royal and public functions, is today officially celebrated
early in June by Trooping the Colour on the Horse Guards Parade.
State banquets still take place when a foreign monarch or head of State pays a visit to
Provision is made by Act of Parliament for the appointment of a Regent in the event of the
Sovereign’s total incapacity. In the event of the Sovereign’s partial incapacity or absence abroad,
provision is made for the appointment of Counsellors of State to carry out such of the royal functions
as are delegated to them.
2In 1901 the Demise of the Crown Act provided that the holding of any such office should not be
affected by the demise of the Crown and that no fresh appointment should be necessary.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION 19
the United Kingdom; State investitures are still held at Buckingham Palace, although
today honours may be bestowed without the personal attendance of the recipient upon
the Sovereign. State processions are still an integral part of royal ceremonial; they grace
such social occasions as the Ascot Race Meeting, known as Royal Ascot, and add signi¬
ficance to the opening of Parliament, when the Queen drives from Buckingham PaTace
accompanied by other members of the Royal family, officers of State and members of the
Royal Household.
The Sovereign is the leader of society by order of general precedence dating from the
fourteenth century and sustained until the present day by royal ordinances, ancient usage,
established custom and the public will. The Queen’s presence at the inauguration of
scientific, artistic, industrial, and charitable works of national importance ensures nation¬
wide interest and support.
PARLIAMENT
The supreme legislative authority in the United Kingdom is the Queen in Parliament,
that is to say the Queen and the two Houses of Parliament—the House of Lords and the
House of Commons—which together represent all the elements in the nation.
The three sections of Parliament’ in this sense are outwardly separate; they do different
work in different places and meet only on occasions of great symbolic significance such
as the Coronation or the opening of Parhament by the Queen in person, when the Com¬
mons are summoned by the Queen to the House of Lords. As a law-making organ of
State, however, Parliament is a corporate body and cannot legislate without the con¬
currence of all its parts, except in the case of measures passed under the Parliament Act
1949-1
There are other Parliaments in parts of Britain besides the Parhament at Westminster.
There are, for instance, the ancient legislatures of the two Channel Island Bailiwicks and
of the Isle of Man, each of which legislates on domestic matters although the United
Kingdom Parliament retains the supreme authority.2 There is also the Northern Ireland
Parliament, created to perform specific functions by an Act of the United Kingdom
Parliament.3 The Northern Ireland Parliament consists of the Governor (as representative
of the Queen), a Senate and a House of Commons, and is federal in type, certain legislative
and fiscal powers being reserved to the Parliament of the United Kingdom. The Parha¬
ment at Westminster, however, has no rival authority, and within practical limits there
is nothing that it cannot legally do.
By the passing of the Parhament Act, 1911, the normal life of a Parhament was fixed at
five years (although it may be and often is dissolved in less than that time); and since one
Parliament cannot bind its successor (for otherwise the succeeding Parliament would not
be sovereign or supreme), each assembly has a period of time of up to five years during
which it may legislate exactly as it chooses. During its life, it can make or unmake any
law; it can destroy by statute the most firmly established convention of the constitution;
1See p. 25.
2The channel of communication between the United Kingdom Government and the local legis¬
latures is the Secretary of State for the Home Department, who advises the Crown on the exercise of
the royal prerogatives. The Queen is represented in each of the Channel Island Bailiwicks and in the
Isle of Man by a Lieutenant-Governor.
3Under the Government of Ireland Act, 1920, the Northern Ireland Parhament has power to make
laws for the peace, order and good government of Northern Ireland in relation to all domestic matters
except those reserved to the United Kingdom Parliament, provided that such laws do not conflict
with legislation passed by the United Kingdom Parhament and extending to Northern Ireland.
Matters reserved to the United Kingdom Parliament include the postal services, the judiciary, the
imposition of customs and excise duties and of income and profits taxes, and certain other services.
The Northern Ireland Parhament has no power to legislate concerning such matters as defence and
foreign relations.
20
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
it can legalize past illegalities and thus reverse the decisions of the courts; and it even has
power to prolong its own life by legislative means beyond the normal period of five
years without consulting the electorate.
In law, therefore, the supremacy of Parhament is absolute. In practice, Parliament does
not attempt to exert its supremacy in this way. In the first place, there is a large and in¬
creasing amount of delegation of powers to ministers, local authorities, public corpora¬
tions, etc., and although these powers could be withdrawn at any time by Parliament,
existing demands on parliamentary time make such a development extremely unlikely.
Secondly, the system of party government in the United Kingdom effectively discourages
Parliament from acting in too arbitrary a fashion; any Parliamentary majority which
abused its powers would almost certainly suffer severely at the hands of the electors.
The Meeting of Parliament
A ‘Parliament’ in the sense of a Parhamentary period begins and ends with a proclama¬
tion made by the Sovereign on the advice of the Privy Council. Such a proclamation on
the one hand dissolves an existing Parliament and on the other orders the issue of writs for
the election of a new one and appoints the day and place of its meeting.1
A session is the period of time between the meeting of a Parliament (whether after pro¬
rogation or dissolution) and its prorogation. Parliament is usually prorogued by a com¬
mission under the Great Seal, which appoints the day and place of its meeting in a new
session. The date so appointed may be brought forward or deferred by a subsequent pro¬
clamation. The effect of a prorogation is at once to terminate all business until Parliament
shall be summoned again.
During the session, either House may adjourn itself on its own motion to such date as it
pleases. An adjournment does not affect uncompleted business. A reassembly of the House
can be accelerated or delayed either by proclamation or by virtue of powers specially con¬
ferred by each House on its Speaker.
The average length of a session is 149 days divided by custom into the following periods:
one from Christmas to Easter lasting about 45 days; one from Easter to the summer
(August) lasting about 70 days; and one from October to Christmas lasting about 34 days.
The exact length of each period varies according to the amount of business to be done.
Structure of Parliament
The two Houses of Parliament are constituted on entirely different principles, as
follows:
The House of Lords
In November 1952 the House of Lords consisted of 775 temporal peers and 26 spiritual
peers, as follows: (1) princes of the royal blood (who by custom take no part in proceed-
ings), (2) all hereditary peers (other than minors and those who had not then applied for
a writ of summons) of England and the United Kingdom,2 (3) 16 hereditary peers of
Scotland elected from their own number for each Parliament in accordance with the pro¬
visions of the Act of Union, 1707, (4) five representative peers of Ireland elected for life,3
and (5) several Lords of Appeal in Ordinary appointed to perform the judicial duties of
formerly the death of a Sovereign involved the dissolution of Parhament, since Parhament meets
on the personal summons of the monarch. Since 1867, however, when the Representation of the
People Act of that year made the duration of Parhament independent of the demise of the Crown,
both Houses stand adjourned only until their members have taken the Oath of Allegiance to the new
Sovereign, which occurs immediately after the Accession Council has made the order for Proclamation.
2Peerages created since the Act for the Union of England and Scotland, 1707, are all peerages of the
United Kingdom.
3By the Act for the Union of Great Britain and Ireland, 1800, the Irish peers were entitled to elect
28 representatives, but since 1920 no new peers have been elected.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION 21
the House and holding their seats therein for life. The spiritual peers are the archbishops
and senior bishops of the Church of England.
Temporal peerages are conferred by the Sovereign on the advice of her ministers as a
mark of distinction. They are all, except the judicial peerages, hereditary and, with the
exception of the Scottish and Irish peerages, they carry with them, for men over 21 years
of age, a right to a seat in the House of Lords. A summons to Parliament cannot be with¬
held from a peer who is entitled to it, although most of the work of the House is done by
fewer than 85 of the 801 peers who receive the writ of summons. Party politics have little
effect upon the membership of the House, which remains relatively stable over a long
period of time.
The House of Lords is presided over by the Lord Chancellor, who is the Speaker of
the House. The permanent officers include the Clerk of the Parhaments, who is charged
with keeping the records of proceedings and judgments and who pronounces the words
of assents to Bills; the Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod, who enforces the orders of
the House; and the Serjeant-at-Arms, who attends the Lord Chancellor.
The House of Commons
The House of Commons is a popular assembly elected by an almost universal adult
suffrage and containing members from all sections of the community regardless of income
or occupation. There .are at present 625 members of the House of Commons, each repre¬
senting a single-member constituency.
^ Members of the House of Commons hold their seats during the life of a Parliament.
T. hey are elected either at a General Election which takes place after Parliament has been
dissolved and a new one summoned by the Sovereign, or at a by-election which is held
when a vacancy occurs in the House as a result of the death or resignation of a member
during the life of a Parliament. Election is decided by secret ballot in which all United
Kingdom citizens (except members of the House of Lords) and all citizens of the Com¬
monwealth and of the Republic of Ireland who are resident in the United Kingdom are
entitled to vote, provided that they are 21 years old or over, and unless they are serving
a prison sentence or have been certified as insane. All who are entitled to vote are entitled
to stand for election, except clergymen of the established Churches of England, Scotland
and Northern Ireland and of the Roman Cathohc Church; undischarged bankrupts; and
persons holding certain offices under the Crown.
The chief parhamentary officer of the House of Commons is the Speaker, who is
elected by the members as president of the House immediately after a new Parliament is
formed. Other parliamentary officers of the House are the Chairman of the Committee of
Ways and Means, and the Deputy-Chairman, who may act as Deputy-Speaker; both these
officers are elected by the House. In addition there are the party officials, i.e. the Govern¬
ment and Opposition Whips. Non-Parliamentary or permanent officers of the House, i.e.
those who are not members of Parhament, include the Clerk of the Commons, who is
appointed by letters patent and is charged with keeping the records, endorsing Bills,
signing Orders, etc.; the Serjeant-at-Arms, who is likewise appointed by letters patent and
attends the Speaker in the House; the Counsel to the Speaker; the Examiner of Petitions
for Private Bills and Taxing Officer; the Speaker’s Secretary; the Librarian; the Chaplain
to the Speaker; the Accountant; and the Editor of Official Reports of Debates—Hansard.
Parliamentary Privilege
Both Houses of Parhament enjoy certain privileges and immunities designed to protect
them from unnecessary obstruction in carrying out their duties. These privileges apply
collectively to the Houses and individually to each member.
In the House of Commons, the Speaker formally claims from the Crown for the
Commons their ancient and undoubted rights and privileges’ at the beginning of each
Parhament. These include freedom from arrest; freedom of speech; and the right of access
22
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
to the Crown, which is a collective privilege of the House and is exercised by the Speaker
on its behalf. Further privileges include the right (rarely exercised) to debate in secret; the
right to control internal proceedings; and the right to pronounce upon legal dis¬
qualifications for membership and to declare a seat vacant on such grounds.
The privileges of the House of Lords are (i) freedom from civil arrest for themselves
and their servants for a period of 40 days before and after a meeting of Parliament,
(2) freedom of speech, (3) freedom of access to the Sovereign for each peer individually,
(4) the right to commit for contempt, (5) the right to try and be tried by their fellow
peers for treason or felony, and (6) the right to exclude disqualified persons from taking
part in the proceedings of the House. These privileges are not formally claimed by the
Speaker as in the House of Commons; they exist independently without grant.
The Party System
The party system has existed in one form or another since the seventeenth century, and
has now become an essential element in the working of the constitution.
The present system is based upon the fact that there are three effective political parties
in the United Kingdom: Conservative, Labour and Liberal, each of which lays rival
policies before the electorate. Whenever there is a General Election, these parties (and
any minor parties that may be in existence at the time) may all put up candidates for
election in each of the constituencies into which the United Kingdom is divided for the
purpose. Independent candidates may also stand. As a rule, the electorate has a choice of
three candidates (Conservative, Labour and Liberal);1 and by its choice it indicates which
of the opposing policies it would like to see put into effect.
The party which wins the majority of seats (although not necessarily the majority of
votes) at a General Election forms the Government. By tradition, the leader of the majority
party is appointed as Prime Minister by the Sovereign, usually on the formal advice of the
retiring Prime Minister; and its most outstanding members in the House of Lords and the
House of Commons receive ministerial appointments on the advice of the Prime Minister.
The larger of the two minority parties becomes the official Opposition with its own leader
and its own council of discussion or unofficial Cabinet; while the members of any other
parties or any Independents who have been elected may support the Government or the
Opposition according to their party’s or their own view of the policy being debated
at any given time.
In the General Election which took place on the 25th October 1951, 82-6 per cent of
the electorate voted, compared with 70 per cent in 1945 and 84 per cent in 1950. The
number of votes cast for the principal parties is shown in Table 1.
TABLE 1*
Party
1945
1950
1951
Labour
Conservative and Supporters
Liberal
Communist
11,967,985
9,960,809
2,227,400
102,780
13,248,957
12,450,403
2,634,482
91,746
13,949,105
13,730,642
730,597
21,640
*These figures exclude those few constituencies for which candidates were returned unopposed.
1In the General Election of October 1951, the choice was between Labour and Conservative in
most constituencies. In a few constituencies, two of the parties agreed to support the same candidate.
Liberal candidates numbered 109, and the number of candidates representing other pohtical parties
was very small.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION 23
The distribution of seats in the House of Commons resulting from the General
Elections of 1950 and 1951 is shown in Table 2.
TABLE 2
(c) Two Irish Nationalists and one Irish Labour
Party.
(d) Returned as Conservative member for Ciren¬
cester and Tewkesbury, and elected Speaker
on 31st October.
The effectiveness of the party system rests to a considerable extent upon the fact that
Government and Opposition are carried on alike by agreement: that is to say, the minority
agrees that the majority must govern and, therefore, accepts its decisions; and die majority
agrees that the minority should criticize and, therefore, sets time aside for that criticism
to be heard. As far as is compatible with effective government, the Prime Minister meets
the convenience of the Leader of the Opposition and the Leader of the Opposition meets
the convenience of the Prime Minister. Through the respective Whips there is a measure
of agreement on the subjects to be debated and on the time to be allowed; sometimes
even on the information to be provided and the proposed line of attack. In this way,
Parhament has a chance of hearing a full discussion on policy from every point of view.
Outside Parhament, party control is exercised by the national and local organizations;
inside Parliament, it is exercised by the Whips, who in addition to their other functions
are expected to keep their forces effective by all means in their power. For the Govern¬
ment, this work is done by the Parliamentary Secretary to the Treasury, the junior lords
at the Treasury, and the political officers of the Household—the Treasurer, the Comptroller
and the Vice-Chamberlain. The Opposition Whips have no official position and are not
paid from public funds, but their parhamentary duties are the same.
Parliamentary Procedure
Parliamentary procedure is based on forms and rules, many of which date back to the
beginning of the sixteenth century and even earlier.
Each House has its own Standing Orders, but the system of debate is much the same in
the two Houses, except that in the House of Commons the Speaker has a much greater
measure of control. In the House of Lords, the office of Speaker could be held by a com¬
moner, since the Woolsack on which the Lord Chancellor sits as Speaker is technically
outside the precincts of the House. In fact, the office is always held by a peer, but it carries
with it only a limited authority to check or curtail debate. The Lords, unlike the Com¬
mons, claim the right to overrule their Speaker forthwidi on issues of procedure.
In die Commons, the Speaker has the prime duty of controlling debate. It is his
responsibility to see that parhamentary time is used to the best possible advantage and,
therefore, although he must carefully guard against abuse of procedure or any infringe-
1951
Conservative and Supporters.. 320
Labour .. .. .. .. 295
Liberal .. .. .. .. 6
Others (c) .. .. .. 3
The Speaker (d) .. .. 1
625
1950
Labour 315
Conservative and Supporters.. 297
Liberal .. .. .. .. 9
Others (a) .. .. .. 3
The Speaker (b) .. .. 1
625
(a) Two Irish Nationalists and one Independent
Liberal.
(b) Returned unopposed.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
24
ment of minority rights, he has power to limit unreasonable obstruction and his rulings
on points of order cannot be challenged at the time. The Speaker has the right to allow
or disallow a closure motion (i.e. a motion to curtail or end discussion so that the matter
may be put to the vote), to check irrelevance in debate, and to refuse to admit delaying
tactics. In cases of grave and continuous disorder, he may even adjourn the House or
suspend the sitting.
Voting in the House of Commons is carried out under the direction of the Speaker,
and it is his duty to pronounce the final result. If an equal number of votes is cast, the
Speaker must give the decisive vote; by regular practice he does this in such a way as to
avoid change and leave the question to be debated on another occasion.
In addition to his duties in debate, the Speaker has the responsibility of deciding what
is a Money Bill (a Bill dealing only with national taxation and finance, see p. 25); and
who, in case of doubt, is the Leader of the Opposition. He is also responsible for such
extraneous matters as the decision whether a prima facie case has been made against persons
accused of breach of privilege; the issue of warrants for elections to fill vacancies in the
House; and the appointment of the chairmen of the Standing Committees.
All proceedings of either House (with the exception of secret sessions) are public, and a
verbatim record is published daily in Hansard.
Parliamentary Functions
The main functions of Parliament today are (a) to make laws regulating the life of the
community, (b) to take formal action, cast in legislative form, to make available finance
for the needs of the community and to appropriate the funds necessary for the services
of the State, and (c) to criticize and control the Government (see pp. 25-26).
Although the making and ratification of international treaties and agreements is a
royal prerogative (see p. 17) exercised on the advice of the Government, which strictly
speaking is under no obligation to obtain Parhamentary approval, it is customary for
Parhament to be consulted before ratification of those agreements requiring it. These are,
in practice, of two types: treaties which could not be implemented without legislation,
which Parhament must be asked to pass before ratification can take place; and treaties of
such political importance that the Government feels obliged, as a political though not as a
legal necessity, to consult Parhament by arranging a debate on the matter before becoming
committed.
In the past, legislation was initiated from both sides of the House; but in present-day
practice almost all Bills are brought forward by die Government in power as a result
of policy decisions taken in the Cabinet at the instigation of those Government Depart¬
ments which will be responsible for their administration when the Bills become law. The
chief exceptions are Private Bills, which relate solely to some matter of individual,
corporate or local interest, and Private Members’ Bills, which are Public Bills introduced
by members on their own initiative on certain days set aside expressly for the purpose.
Bills may be introduced in either House, unless they deal with finance or representation,
when they are always introduced in the Commons. As a rule, however, no Bills likely to
raise much political controversy are introduced in the Lords, as the House of Commons
is considered a more suitable place of origin for measures of that kind.
The process of passing a Public Bill is the same in the House of Lords as in the House
of Commons: the Bill receives a formal First Reading on introduction; it is then printed;
and after a period of time (which varies between one and several weeks depending on the
type of Bill, subject matter, etc.) it may be given a Second Reading as the result of a
debate on its general merits or principles. It is then referred either to one of the Standing
Committees appointed for the purpose by the Committee of Selection,1 or, in the case of
XA body of 11 members nominated at the beginning of every session by the House in proportion
to party strength in the Commons.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
25
more important measures, to the whole House sitting in Committee, if the House so
decides on a motion. During the Committee stage, members may suggest appropriate
amendments, which will be incorporated into the Bill if the majority of the Committee
agree. When this stage is finished, the Bill is reported to the House, and a further debate
takes place during which additional amendments and alterations may be suggested and
incorporated and, if necessary, the Bill may be recommitted to Committee. Finally, it is
submitted for a Third Reading and, if passed, it is sent on from the Commons to the Lords
or from the Lords to the Commons (depending on its place of origin), where it enters on
the same course again.1
After a Bill has passed through its various parliamentary stages, it is sent to the
Sovereign for Royal Assent, which is automatically given either by the Sovereign in
person or (usually) by commission. The right of veto has not been exercised since the
early eighteenth century.
An exception to this procedure is made in the case of Money Bills, of which the two
most important are the Finance Bill, which authorizes annual taxation and amends
existing taxation, and the Appropriation Bill, which authorizes expenditure on the Supply
Services from the ConsoHdated Fund.2 As a general rule, these Bills must be introduced
in the House of Commons upon Resolutions in a Committee of the whole House and,
since their purpose is to raise money for the Crown as a means of providing for payment
of the various services performed by the Crown, they may be initiated only by a Minister
of the Crown.
The majority of Bills introduced in the House of Lords pass through the Commons
without difficulty because of their non-controversial nature; and they are then returned
to the Lords to be brought forward for Royal Assent. However, should any Lords Bill
be unacceptable to the Commons, it would never reach the Statute Book, for no debating
time would be allotted to it—at any rate until a new Government came into power,
when it might be revived. The Lords, on the other hand, are unlikely to be able to prevent
a Bill passed in the Commons from becoming law. In the normal course of events, they
either accept a Bill from the Commons and return it unchanged; or they amend it and
return it for the consideration of members of the other House, who frequently agree to
die amendments made. They cannot require the Commons to agree to amendments; nor
can they delay a Bill indefinitely. They have no powers in respect of Money Bills or Bills
dealing with the duration of Parhament; and since the passing of the Parliament Act, 1949,
any other Bill which has been passed by the House of Commons in two successive sessions
may be presented for Royal Assent without the consent of the Lords, provided that a year
has elapsed between the date of the Second Reading of the Bill in the Commons and the
date on which it is finally passed in that House. These limitations to the powers of the
Lords are based on the fundamental principle that the function of the Upper House, which
is a non-representative assembly, is not to thwart the will of the people, but to use the
combined experience and wisdom of its members to ensure that that will is precisely and
reasonably interpreted.
Parliamentary Control
Parhament’s function of controlling the Government in power is exercised in the final
analysis by the power of the House of Commons to pass a resolution of ‘no-confidence’
in the Government, or to reject a proposal which the Government considers so vital to
1Private Bill procedure is somewhat different. Such Bills begin with a petition, and promoters
must give notice of their intention to all persons and bodies whose interests may be affected by their
proposals. Committees are small, consisting of five members in the Lords and four members in the
Commons. The Committee stage is quasi-judicial, and provision is made for counsel to represent
supporters and opposers of the Bill.
2See also pp. 97-8.
C
26
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
its policy that it has made it a ‘matter of confidence’; and thus to force the Government
to resign.
The financial control necessary to ensure that money shall be spent only with the
authority of Parhament and for the purposes authorized by Parliament is exercised by the
whole House of Commons resolving itself on a specified number of days during each
session into a Committee of Supply to discuss public policy relevant to the Estimates of
Government Departments, which provide the programme for the year’s finance.1 If the
House approves the Estimates, the sums asked for are voted in the Appropriation Act of
the current year. Some Estimates are also examined by the Select Committee on Esti¬
mates which consists of 36 members of the House in proportion to party strength.
A further measure of control is exercised by the Select Committee on Public Accounts,
which considers whether full value has been obtained for the sums spent and examines
cases in which the administration appears to have been faulty or negligent. Its findings
are published in Reports which may be discussed in the House.
Methods of general control are provided by (1) the institution of Question Time,
which is a daily hour of parhamentary time during which members may question any
minister on matters for which he is responsible and thus focus the attention of the public
on the day-to-day processes of government; (2) the practice of bringing on a debate,
when the reply to a question is not satisfactory, by moving the adjournment of the
House;2 (3) the right of members to raise any matter on the motion for adjournment of
either House at the end of each day’s sitting; and (4) the power to confirm or annul the
Orders or Regulations made by ministers under the many Acts which delegate legislative
power to them. Furthermore, Government policy and action are fully discussed in the
important debates which take place during the proceedings at the opening of Parliament
and in the motion for the adjournment of the House before a recess.
THE PRIVY COUNCIL
Before the emergence of the system of Cabinet government in the eighteenth century,
the King in Council or the Privy Council was the chief source of executive power in the
State. As this system developed, however, the Privy Council declined in importance;
many of its powers were transferred to the Cabinet, and much of its work was handed
over to newly created Government Departments. The present-day Privy Council exists
mainly to give effect to policy decisions made elsewhere.
Apart from Cabinet Ministers, who must be Privy Counsellors and are sworn of the
Council on first assuming office, membership of the Privy Council is accorded by the
Sovereign on the recommendation of the Prime Minister as an honour to persons who
have reached eminence in some branch of public affairs, and is retained for life. There are
at present over 300 Privy Counsellors.
Procedure and Functions
The Privy Council is convened by the Clerk to the Council. At meetings where the
Sovereign is present, three Privy Counsellors form a quorum, but in practice never less
than four are summoned to attend. The whole Privy Council is called together only on
the death of the Sovereign or when the Sovereign announces his or her intention to marry.
The Privy Council is the instrument for the making of Orders in Council, which re¬
mains one of the chief methods of giving the force of law to executive acts. Such Orders
1See also p. 98.
2It is permitted to move the adjournment of the House before taking up the business of the day only
if the matter is deemed by the Speaker to be definite and urgent and if 40 members rise in their places
to support it, or ten members rise and the House grants leave on a division. The debate on such
occasions takes place later in the evening of the same day.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION 27
may be issued only when there is statutory or other authority for them, e.g., when an Act
of Parliament specifically leaves the making of rules and regulations to the Queen in
Council. When these rules and regulations are issued they must be published in The
London Gazette.1 Orders in Council are required when treaties are made, when particular
matters connected with Colonial Governments arise, and in the determination of appeals
^ the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council. Members attending a meeting at
which such an Order is made do not thereby become personally responsible for the policy
behind it, which rests with the minister in whose Department the draft Order was framed
whether he is present at the meeting or not. The Privy Council also advises the Crown on
the issue of Royal Proclamations—documents whose lawful use is restricted to prerogative
acts such as summoning, proroguing or dissolving Parliament, and which are of the same
validity as Acts of Parliament.
Committees of the Privy Council
Advisory functions still belong to the committees of the Council, whose meetings differ
from the meetings of the full Council in that the Sovereign cannot constitutionally be
present. These committees may be prerogative, such as the committee which deals with
matters relating to Jersey and Guernsey, and the committees for medical research,
scientific and industrial research, agricultural research and nature conservation; or they
may be provided for by statute as are those for the universities of Oxford and Cambridge
and for the Scottish universities, and that which deals with applications for the grant of
charters to municipal corporations.
The Privy Council Office
The administrative work of the Privy Council committees is carried out in the Privy
Council Office, which is an ancient prerogative Department under the control of the
Lord President of the Council. It is also carried out in the Office of the Lord President of
the Council.
Judicial Committee of the Privy Council
The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council is the final court of appeal on certain
legal issues arising in Australia, New Zealand, Ceylon, and in the United Kingdom depen¬
dent territories.2 Its appellate jurisdiction derives from the principle of English common
law which recognizes ‘the right of all the King’s subjects to appeal for redress to the King
in Council if they believe that the courts of law have failed to do them justice.
Appeals come to it either where a right of appeal in limited categories of cases has been
specially created, e.g., by Statute, Order in Council or Letters Patent, or by special leave
of the Queen in Council on the advice of the Judicial Committee. Appeals are heard by a
board of three or five drawn from the committee, depending on the significance of the
case, the quorum being three. Invitations to sit on the board are issued by the Lord Chan¬
cellor, who thus determines which members of the committee shall hear particular appeals.
In practice, boards are generally selected from the Law Lords of the United Kingdom—
the Lord Chancellor, ex-Lord Chancellors and Lords of Appeal in Ordinary—atthough
ex-judges of English and Scottish courts are asked to sit when business is heavy. Chief
Justices and certain judges from other Commonwealth countries have usually been sworn
of the Privy Council and may be invited to sit on the committee’s boards.
1An official periodical published by the authority of the Government.
-Until 1949, right of appeal to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council also existed in Canada,
India South Africa and Pakistan, but these countries have recently abolished the right. The Republic
01 Ireland abolished the right by the Constitution (Amendment No. 22) Act, 1933.
28
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
HER MAJESTY’S GOVERNMENT
Her Majesty’s Government is the body of ministers charged for the time being with
the administration of national affairs.1
Composition
The leading minister in the Government is the Prime Minister. The remaining ministers
include:
(1) ministers who are in charge of Departments, e.g., the Secretary of State for Foreign
Affairs, the Secretary of State for the Home Department and Minister for Welsh
Affairs, the Minister of Health, the Minister of Labour and National Service, etc.;
(2) ministers who hold traditional offices to which no specified departmental duties
are attached and who are therefore free to assist the Prime Minister by taking
responsibility for any special work that may require ministerial supervision at any
time;
(3) the Lord Chancellor, who is the principal adviser of the Government on matters
relating to the law and the constitution;
(4) the Law Officers of the Crown, i.e. the Attorney-General, the Solicitor-General,
the Lord Advocate for Scotland and the Solicitor-General for Scotland, who are
also legal advisers to the Government, and are charged with conducting certain
prosecutions of unusual importance, with filing criminal information and with
defending the rights of the Crown;
(5) Parliamentary Secretaries and Under-Secretaries, whose primary function is to
reheve their senior ministers of part of the burden of their Parliamentary duties, e.g.,
by taking part in debate and by answering Parhamentary Questions. With the
advice of the Departmental officials, they also assist their ministers in supervising
the administration of their Departments.
All ministers are appointed by the Crown on the recommendation of the Prime
Minister, who bases his choice on the fitness of the individual for the work involved.
The majority of ministers are members of the House of Commons, since the approval
of that House is necessary for the general policy (and frequently for the specific proposals)
of the Government. There must, however, always be a few ministers in the House of
Lords, in the first place because the Ministers of the Crown Act, 1937, limits the number of
ministers who may sit in the Commons while receiving salaries from the Crown, and
secondly because every Government must be assured of spokesmen of standing to ex¬
pound and justify its intentions and its actions to the Lords.
The Prime Minister
The office of Prime Minister as head of the Government has been in existence since
the middle of the eighteenth century. The office is a conventional one in that it is not
defined by statute or rule of common law, though in 1905 the Prime Minister was given
precedence as the fourth person in the realm after the Royal Family.2 The unique position
of authority enjoyed by the Prime Minister derives on the one hand from his status as
leader of the majority party in the Commons and on the other from his power to nominate
his own ministers and to dismiss them individually.
It is the duty of the Prime Minister to inform the Crown of the general business of
the Government; to control the Cabinet over which he presides; to exercise a general
1See pp. 22-23, The Party System.
2Above him in order of precedence are: the Archbishops of Canterbury and York and the Lord
Chancellor.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION 29
supervision over Departments, settling Departmental differences where possible and
approviiig nnportant Departmental decisions where Cabinet reference is not required;
to take the final decision in all matters of high policy affecting the welfare of the nation,
particularly as regards foreign affairs and defence; to be prepared to speak in the House of
Commons both on general subjects and on all the most important Government Bills; and
to keep a careful watch on the progress of all Government measures to see that there is no
deviation from policy laid down and no avoidable delay. His responsibilities include
recommending the appointment of Church of England archbishops, bishops, some senior
dignitaries, and incumbents of Crown livings, as well as that of the Lord Chief Justice and
of the holders of other high judicial offices, Lords Lieutenant of Counties,1 Trustees of
National Museums and Regius Professors in certain universities. He also makes recom-
mendations for the awards of most civil honours and distinctions.
The Cabinet
1 he Cabinet is a conventional organ of government composed of a number of ministers
selected by the Prime Minister. Membership is not fixed by statute, although certain
ministers are always appointed; the number of members varies nowadays between 15 and
25. In fixing the size of his Cabinet, the Prime Minister is primarily motivated by his
desire to have around him a committee capable of the efficient conduct of the highest
affairs of State.
The system of Cabinet government came into being as one of the results of the passing
of the Bill of Rights in 1689. In origin it was an informal gathering of those Privy
Counsellors who were also ministers, meeting at first with, and later without, the
Sovereign. The Cabinet assumed its present shape when the accession of the Hanoverian
kmgs with their limited knowledge of the English language, the British constitution and
the British way of life had severely curtailed the personal participation of the Sovereign in
executive government and made it essential that a substitute should be found.
d he Cabinet is not in itself an executant, in that it has no legal authority, its decisions
being vahd by convention and not by law. It is designed to formulate general policy, to
bring about co-operation between the different forces of the State without interfering
with their legal independence, and to exercise general control. Its functions have been
defined2 as:
(1) the final determination of the pohcy to be submitted to Parliament,
(2) the supreme control of the national executive in accordance with the policy agreed
by Parhament,
(3) the continuous co-ordination and delimitation of the authority of the several
Departments of State.
In the performance of its functions, the Cabinet makes considerable use of the com¬
mittee system, which was introduced in the nineteenth century and has been developed
to keep pace with government business during the past fifty years. The system involves
the reference of any issue either to one of the standing Cabinet committees or to an ad hoc
committee composed of the ministers primarily concerned, which considers the matter
in detail and either disposes of it or reports upon it to the full Cabinet with recommenda¬
tions for action.
The Cabinet Office
Records of the discussions of the committees and of the full Cabinet are kept by the
Secretariat of the Cabinet, or Cabinet Office, which was introduced as an emergency
institution during the first world war and has grown into an organ of great importance in
1See footnote p. 65.
-In the Report of the Machinery of Government Committee (Haldane Committee). Cd. 9230.1918.
30
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the co-ordination of policy at the highest level. The Secretariat is responsible for the keep¬
ing of records, for providing information and advice to ministers, and for issuing directives
or promulgating decisions of the Cabinet or the Prime Minister to the Departments
concerned. It has a military side and a civil side. There is also a Central Statistical Office
which is charged with the collection, analysis and presentation of statistics relating to the
national economy.
In normal times, the Cabinet meets for about two hours once or twice a week during
parliamentary sittings, and rather less frequently when Parliament is not sitting. Additional
meetings may be called by the Prime Minister at any time, if a matter urgently requiring
discussion should arise. During Cabinet meetings, decisions are reached on the important
political and social questions of the hour, and the Cabinet settles any matters which cannot
be disposed of at lower levels.
Cabinet Meetings
The Cabinet meets in private and its proceedings are strictly confidential. Its members
are bound by their oath as Privy Counsellors not to disclose any information. The Official
Secrets Acts forbid the publication of Cabinet as well as of other State papers, and a
resigning minister desiring to make a statement involving disclosure of Cabinet discussions
must first obtain the permission of the Sovereign through the Prime Minister. The
theoretical reason for this secrecy is that a Cabinet decision is advice to the Sovereign,
whose consent is necessary before it is made pubhc. From a practical point of view, secrecy
is essential in the interests of unprejudiced debate, which can take place only if there is no
risk of pubheity for every statement made and every point conceded.
Detailed accounts of Cabinet meetings are not prepared; only the substance of docu¬
ments submitted, together with a summary of the arguments and the conclusions, are
recorded; and even these records have a strictly limited circulation.
Ministerial Responsibility
Ministerial responsibility means both the collective responsibility which ministers share
for the policy and actions of the Government and the individual responsibility of ministers
to Parliament for the work of their Departments.
The doctrine of collective responsibility, which was fully accepted by the middle of
die nineteenth century, imposes upon Cabinet ministers the obligation to act not as
individuals but (in the interests of stability of government) as a united group. It does not
require every minister to be present at every Cabinet meeting; and the obligations of
individual ministers may be passive rather than active when the decision to be taken does
not relate to their spheres of administrative responsibility. At the same time, every minister
should be fully informed of the subject of discussion beforehand, so that if he has any
objections he may voice them at the meeting. He may not repudiate, either in Parliament
or in his constituency, poheies which have received Cabinet approval, nor may he
announce policies which have not been so approved. He must be prepared to vote with
the Government on all issues, and where necessary to speak in support or defence of its
policy. Any minister who feels himself unable to agree or to compromise with die view
of the majority of his colleagues in Parliament or elsewhere must resign. If he does not
resign, he is held to be responsible, and cannot afterwards reject criticism on the ground
that he did not personally agree with the policy adopted.
The doctrine of collective responsibility also means that the Cabinet is bound to offer
unanimous advice to the Sovereign, even when its members do not hold identical views
on a given subject.
The individual responsibility of a minister for the work of his Department means that, as
political head of that Department, he is answerable for all its acts and omissions and must
bear the consequences of any defect of administration, any injustice to an individual or any
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION 3X
aspect of policy which may be criticized in Parhament, whether he is personally respon¬
sible or not. r
Since the majority of ministers are members of the House of Commons, they are
available to answer questions and to defend themselves against criticism in person.
Ministers who are in the House of Lords must be represented in the Commons by political
subordinates qualified to speak on their behalf, i.e. by their Parliamentary Secretaries and
Under-Secretaries. Responsibility, however, cannot be delegated and remains with the
senior minister concerned.
Ministers are expected to take all decisions relating to their spheres of administration,
unless these are of such political importance that in their opinion Cabinet sanction is
required.
If any departmental decision brings a minister under fire of criticism in Parhament he
may be upheld by the Cabinet, which will then treat the matter as one of confidence in
itself; or he may be disowned, when he alone will be liable to lose office.
Ministerial responsibility is an effective way of bringing government under public
control. It is also a check upon incompetence, for the knowledge that any departmental
action may be reported to and examined in Parhament discourages ministers from
making arbitrary and ill-considered decisions.
GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS
Government Departments exist to serve ministers, to provide information and advice
as a basis for the formation of policy, and to put that policy into effect when the necessary
legislation has been passed.
A change of Government does not generally affect the number or functions of Govern¬
ment Departments, although a radical change in policy may be accompanied by a cor¬
responding change in the Departments concerned. The widening scope of Government
activity has, however, led to the formation of a substantial number of new Departments
in the past half-century. A few have existed for over 200 years.
Most Government Departments have a minister in control. Some minister, who may
have other duties, is answerable in Parliament for the general policy and financial estimates
of the few which do not have a minister of their own.
This section outlines briefly the principal functions of the main Government Depart¬
ments. Since much of their work is interconnected, they are not grouped according to the
subjects with which they deal, but are arranged in alphabetical order, except for the
Treasury which, in view of its unique central position, is placed first, and the Scottish and
Northern Ireland Departments which are grouped at the end of the section.
The Treasury
Nominally the heads of the Treasury are the Lords Commissioners: the First Lord of the
Treasury (who is now invariably the Prime Minister), the Chancellor of the Exchequer
and fivejunior Lords. In practice the Lords Commissioners never meet as a Board and their
responsibilities are carried by the Chancellor of the Exchequer assisted by his two Parlia¬
mentary Under-Secretaries, the Financial Secretary and the Economic Secretary. There is
also a Parliamentary Secretary to the Treasury who is the chief Government Whip in the
House of Commons (see p. 23).
The traditional functions of the Treasury are the management of the financial resources
of the United Kingdom Government,1 the control of all public expenditure, and the con¬
trol, management and organization of the Civil Service (see pp. 46-50). In other words, it
is the Department responsible for ensuring that no more money is asked for by the
1The jurisdiction of the Treasury extends to Scotland. Northern Ireland has its own Ministry of
Finance (see p. 45) which works closely with the Treasury.
32
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
spending Departments than is required for their annual needs, and for making sure that
no more money is spent than is authorized by Parhament.
In addition, the Treasury has since 1947 been responsible for economic planning and for
co-ordinating the activities of all the Departments concerned with economic matters, and
has had special staffs for undertaking this work. The major group is known as the Central
Economic Planning Staff. This group is charged with die task of achieving a comprehen¬
sive economic policy for the nation, and of co-ordinating departmental policies. A separate
group co-ordinates the policies of Departments in matters connected widi oversea trade
and the balance of payments.
For further information on the Treasury see pp. 98-99.
The Admiralty
The Board of Admiralty has been in existence since 1708. It is served by the Admiralty
Divisions of the Naval Staff and the Admiralty Departments. The Divisions of the Naval
Staff deal with operational and technical policy. The Departments deal with the manning
of the ships and establishments; the provision of warships and other vessels, aircraft,
weapons and munitions, stores, fuel and other goods, equipment and reserve forces; the
general organization and administration of the Fleets and establishments; and the account¬
ing and administration of the moneys voted by Parhament for these purposes.
The Admiralty is also responsible for the Government’s economic policy in the ship¬
building and ship repair industries and certain minor allied industries.
For further information on the Admiralty see pp. 81 and 269-70.
The Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries
The Board of Agriculture and Fisheries was established in 1899, and was converted into
the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries by statute in 1919. Its main functions are to secure
the best possible output of food and to improve the general efficiency of the agricultural,
horticultural and fishing industries of England and Wales;1 and it is responsible, in associa¬
tion with the Department of Agriculture for Scotland and the Northern Ireland Ministry
of Agriculture, for the settling of general agricultural production programmes and prices
of the main farm products.
The Ministry is also concerned with the encouragement, and if necessary the enforce¬
ment, of proper standards of husbandry and estate management; with the supply and in
some cases the distribution of farmers’ requisites such as feedingstuffs, machinery, fertilizers
and seeds; with all forms of land drainage; with the improvement of rural services such as
farm buildings, water supphes and electricity; with the supply of agricultural labour and
the enforcement of agricultural wages awards; with the provision of technical advice on
all aspects of food production; with agricultural education and agricultural and fisheries
research; with marketing schemes; with the effect of international trade negotiations on
the agricultural industries of the United Kingdom; and with the international aspects of
sea fishing, the regulation of whaling, the regulation of freshwater fishing and inshore
fisheries.
Other measures for which the Ministry is responsible are designed to improve the
quality of livestock, and to control and eradicate animal and plant diseases and pests. The
Ministry is also responsible for the Ordnance Survey and for Kew Gardens.
For further information on the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries see pp. 138-152.
The Air Ministry
The Air Council was established in 1918 under the presidency of the Secretary of State
1The Ministry is responsible for agriculture and fisheries in England and Wales; but for the control
and eradication of animal and plant diseases and pests it is the responsible Department in England.
Wales and Scotland.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
33
for Air to provide for the growing importance of aircraft in warfare by taking over re¬
sponsibility for the administrative control of the Royal Air Force. The functions of the Air
Ministry include strategic planning; the organization of general and technical training;
the organization and control of aeronautical inspection and of the provision, maintenance
and repair of equipment; the supervision of the finance and contracts of the Air Force;
the acquisition of lands required for air force purposes; and the appointment, promotion,
posting and payment of all members of the Royal Air Force.
The Air Ministry is also the Department responsible for the Meteorological Office.
For further information on the Air Ministry see p. 86.
The Colonial Office
The Colonial Office is the Department of the United Kingdom Government which
deals with the affairs of the great majority of the non-selfgoveming countries of the
Commonwealth. At the head of the Colonial Office is the Secretary of State for the
Colonies, who is the Minister responsible to Parhament for the general administration of
those territories. The functions of the Colonial Office are to convey to Colonial Govern¬
ments the views and wishes of Her Majesty’s Government on broad matters of policy; to
see that the interests of Colonial Governments and peoples are safeguarded and promoted;
and to provide expert services and advice of many kinds, including the allocation of
moneys for development purposes under the Colonial Development and Welfare Acts and
the provision of administrative and professional staff for the Colonial Service.1 Through
its staff of professional advisers, and with the help of Advisory Committees composed of
men and women eminent in various fields, the Colonial Office provides guidance to
Colonial Governments on a wide range of matters. Particular functions of the Colonial
Office also include the care of Colonial students in the United Kingdom and the provision
of information services on Colonial affairs for the United Kingdom, other Common¬
wealth and foreign territories and the territories themselves.
The Colonial Office does not directly administer the non-selfgoveming territories with
which it deals. Each of these has its own administration and an increasing measure of
autonomy.
The Crown Agents for the Colonies are appointed by the Secretary of State to act as com¬
mercial and financial agents in the United Kingdom for the Governments of the territories
for which he is responsible. They also act by special arrangement for other Governments
and bodies.
The Commonwealth Relations Office
The Commonwealth Relations Office was established in 1947, replacing the Do¬
minions Office (set up in 1925). In the same year the conduct of relations with India and
Pakistan was transferred to the Commonwealth Relations Office from the India Office,
which was abohshed, and in 1948 the Office assumed similar responsibility in respect of
Ceylon, which in that year became an equal member of the Commonwealth. The Office
is also responsible for the conduct of relations with the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasa-
land, the self-governing colony of Southern Rhodesia, and the High Commission Terri¬
tories—Basutoland, the Bechuanaland Protectorate and Swaziland.
The Commonwealth Relations Office is the main channel of communication between
the United Kingdom Government and the Governments of the other Members of the
Commonwealth. Through it, consultation and exchange of information takes place with
1The Colonial Service comprises all the public services of all the territories for which the Secretary
of State for the Colonies is responsible. Each Colonial Government is a separate administrative entity,
and members of the Colonial Service are the servants of the territory in which they serve and their
salaries are paid from local revenue. Recruitment is undertaken in the United Kingdom and other
Commonwealth countries only when suitably qualified local candidates are not available.
34
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the External Affairs Departments of those Commonwealth countries, either directly or
through United Kingdom High Commissioners, on all subjects of mutual interest—
foreign affairs, defence co-operation, economic and other matters. Where foreign policy
is concerned, the Office works in close association with the Foreign Office.
The Commonwealth Relations Office remains the Department responsible for the con¬
duct of relations between the United Kingdom Government and the Government of the
Irish Republic, which left the Commonwealth in 1949.
The Customs and Excise Department
The primary work of the Customs and Excise Department is to collect and deal with
the duties of Customs and Excise imposed from time to time in the annual Finance Acts
or by other specific legislation, and to advise the Chancellor of the Exchequer on any
matters connected with them. The work of the Department also comprises the prevention
and detection of evasions of the Revenue laws, including smuggling and illicit distillation.
In addition to its revenue work the Department undertakes a wide range of non-revenue
agency work for other Departments, e.g., the enforcement of prohibitions and restrictions
on the importation and exportation of certain classes of goods, exchange currency control,
and the compilation of United Kingdom oversea trade statistics from Customs import
and export documents.
For further information on the work of the Customs and Excise Department see
pp. 100 and 102.
The Ministry of Defence
The Ministry of Defence was formally constituted injanuary 1947 following the passing
of the Ministry of Defence Act, 1946. The Act charges the Minister with responsibility for
‘the formulation and general application of a unified policy relating to the armed forces of
the Crown as a whole and their requirements’. He carries out this responsibility in accord¬
ance with general defence policy laid down by the Cabinet.
In addition to its main function of co-ordinating the policies and requirements of the
three armed services, the Ministry is responsible for the administration of certain inter¬
service organizations, such as Amphibious Warfare Headquarters, the Joint Intelligence
Bureau and the Imperial Defence College.
For further information on the Ministry of Defence see pp. 78-79.
The Ministry of Education
The Ministry of Education was established in 1944 to take over the powers and duties
previously exercised by the Board of Education (1899-1944) in regard to the promotion
of the education of the people of England and W ales and of the progressive development of
institutions devoted to that purpose. The Ministry exercises this function in co-operation
with the local education authorities—the councils of the counties and of the county
boroughs—whose duty it is to secure the provision in their areas of adequate facilities for
all forms of education. On professional matters, contact with the local education authori¬
ties is maintained through Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Schools, which is organized in
regional divisions throughout England and Wales for its work of inspection, liaison and
advice. A separate Welsh Department of the Ministry deals with education in Wales.
The Ministry is concerned with the development of primary, secondary and further
education, including vocational education and education for leisure and the social and
physical training of young people. It deals with the supply, training and superannuation of
teachers; the building of new schools and other institutions; the school health service; the
special educational treatment of handicapped children; and the provision of school meals
and milk. It is responsible for the award of State scholarships and other awards for univer¬
sity students; for the administration of certain museums; and for the maintenance of educa-
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
35
tional relations with the countries of the Commonwealth, with foreign countries, and
with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
For further information on the Ministry of Education see p. 242.
The Ministry of Food
The Ministry of Food developed out of the Food (Defence Plans) Department of the
Board of Trade and was established as a separate Ministry in 1939. Its primary responsi-
bility is to ensure the equitable distribution of suppHes of essential or scarce foodstuffs at
reasonable prices. For this purpose, the Ministry, where necessary, purchases supplies of
food at home and overseas and exercises control over the processing, manufacture, distri¬
bution and prices of foods. It is responsible for the administration of the food subsidies
and for the supply of welfare foods to children and expectant and nursing mothers. It is
also concerned with the maintenance and improvement of food hygiene and food stan¬
dards and carries on research work into methods of preparing, marketing and preserving
food. The Ministry is responsible for the representation of the United Kingdom on various
international bodies concerned with food.
For further information on food rationing see p. 126, and on welfare foods see pp. 240
and 244.
The Foreign Office
The Foreign Office, which is the headquarters of Her Majesty’s Foreign Service, fust
became a separate Department of State in 1782. The Minister in charge of the Foreign
Office, and responsible to Parliament for the conduct of foreign affairs and for the direc¬
tion and operation of the Foreign Service, is styled Her Majesty’s Principal Secretary of
State for Foreign Affairs.
The Foreign Office acts as a channel of communication between the Government of
the United Kingdom and the Governments of foreign States, either through the repre¬
sentatives of foreign States in the United Kingdom or through Her Majesty’s representa¬
tives abroad, for the discussion and negotiation of all matters falling within the field of
international relations, including the drawing up of international treaties and agreements.
It also provides the means by which the United Kingdom Government is represented in
the United Nations and on other international bodies and is kept informed of develop¬
ments in foreign countries; by which British subjects and interests abroad are protected
and trade promoted; and by which British policy is explained to the Governments and
peoples of foreign countries. The questions dealt with by the Foreign Office are primarily
of a political nature, but they also include many other matters such as questions of
nationality, the issue and renewal of passports, and the immunities and privileges of
foreign diplomatic representatives.
The Foreign Office is staffed by members of the Foreign Service which, as a separate
and self-contained Service of the Crown formed in 1943 as a result of the amalgamation
of the Foreign Office and the Diplomatic Service with the Consular and Commercial-
Diplomatic Services, provides an interchangeable staff for service both at home and at
United Kingdom diplomatic missions and consular posts abroad.
The Forestry Commission
The Forestry Commission was established under the Forestry Acts, 1919-51, to pro¬
mote the interests of forestry, the development of afforestation, and the production and
supply of timber in Great Britain. The Forestry Act, 1951, places responsibility on the
Forestry Commissioners for the maintenance of reserves of growing trees, through a
system of licensing of felling.
The Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries and the Secretary of State for Scotland are
responsible for forest policy in Great Britain.
For further information on the Forestry Commission see pp. 154, 156 and 271.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
36
The Ministry of Fuel and Power
The Ministry of Fuel and Power was established in 1942, when it absorbed the former
Mines and Petroleum Departments of the Board of Trade and the Board’s functions in
relation to gas and electricity. It was made permanent by the Ministry of Fuel and Power
Act, 1945.
The Ministry has the general duty of ensuring the effective and co-ordinated develop¬
ment of fuel and power supplies in Great Britain, and of promoting economy and
efficiency in their distribution and consumption. The business of producing and distri¬
buting gas and electricity and of producing coal is operated by the boards of the three
nationalized industries, whose members are responsible to the Minister on policy issues.
The distribution of coal and coke is carried out, under Ministry control, largely by private
concerns. The Ministry is also responsible for Government relations with the petroleum
industry.
The Acts and Regulations governing the safety and health of workers in and about
coal mines, metalliferous mines and quarries are administered by the Safety and Health
Division of the Ministry, which includes the Inspectorate of Mines. The Ministry is
responsible for the general co-ordination of fuel research, and the Chief Scientist’s Divi¬
sion itself conducts or arranges for scientific research on specific projects and on matters
affecting safety and health in mines and quarries.
The General Register Office
The General Register Office, which is under the Minister of Health for purposes of par¬
liamentary control, is responsible under the Registrar General for the administration of
the system of civil registration in England and Wales, for the preparation of statistics
and reports relating to population, fertility, births, marriages, diseases and deaths, and for
making arrangements for the periodic census of the population.
The Ministry of Health
The Ministry of Health, created in 1919 to take over the powers and duties previously
attaching to the Local Government Board (established in 1871) and the National Health
Insurance Commission (formed in 1912), assumed, in 1920, the responsibilities in connec¬
tion with mental illness formerly attached to the Home Office.
Twice since 1944 there has been a transfer of some of its main responsibilities to newly
created Departments—in 1945 those in respect of national health insurance and contri¬
butory pensions to the Ministry of National Insurance (now the Ministry of Pensions and
National Insurance), and, in 1951, those in respect of housing, water and sewerage ser¬
vices, and the supervision of local government to the Ministry of Local Government and
Planning (now the Ministry of Housing and Local Government).
The main function of the Ministry of Health is now the administration of the National
Health Service in England and Wales under the National Health Service Acts. The
Minister is also responsible in England and Wales for supervising the work of local
authorities under certain sections of the Public Health Acts and in providing for the care
of the aged, infirm, blind, deaf and dumb and other handicapped persons under the
National Assistance Act, 1946.
On the amalgamation of the Ministry of Pensions with the Ministry of National In¬
surance on 31st August 1953, the medical and surgical treatment of war pensioners—^in¬
cluding the management of hospitals and the supply of artificial limbs, surgical appHances
and invalid vehicles—hitherto the responsibility of the Ministry of Pensions, was trans¬
ferred in England and Wales to the Ministry of Health (and in Scotland to the Department
of Health for Scotland). The responsibility of the Ministry of Pensions for the medical
treatment of war pensioners in the Channel Isles and the Isle of Man and of those residing
in the Irish Republic was also transferred to the Ministry of Health on that date.
For further information on the Ministry of Health see pp. 235 and 272.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
37
The Home Office
The Home Office was created in 1782. Its head is the Secretary of State for the Home
Department (the Home Secretary), who is the principal Secretary of State and is entrusted
with all the responsibilities of national administration which have not been especially as¬
signed by law or convention to the remaining Secretaries of State or Ministers. The Home
Secretary is also the channel of communication between the Sovereign and her subjects,
and between the United Kingdom Government and the Governments of Northern Ire¬
land, the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man. In the Government formed in October 1951
the Home Secretary was appointed Minister in charge of Welsh affairs.
The chief matters with which the Home Office deals are: the maintenance of law and
order; the efficiency of the police service; the treatment of offenders, including juvenile
offenders, the efficacy of the probation service; the organization of magistrates* courts;
legislation on criminal justice; the efficiency of the fire service; the care of children by
local authorities and voluntary organizations; the regulation of the employment of
children and young persons; the control and naturalization of aliens; the law relating to
parliamentary and local government elections; public safety and public well-being; and
preparations for civil defence.
In carrying out its functions the Home Office is responsible, inter alia, for receiving and
submitting Addresses and Petitions to the Sovereign and for preparing Presentations to
Parliament; for preparing patents of nobility for peers and formal proceedings for the be¬
stowal of honours; for advising the Crown on the exercise of the Prerogative of Mercy;
for the sanctioning of byelaws by local authorities in so far as they relate to ‘law and order’
and ‘good governance’; for granting licences to experiment with animals; for ordering the
exhumation and removal of bodies; for the control of explosives, firearms and dangerous
drugs; and for the admimstration of the State Management Scheme for controlling the
liquor trade in the Carlisle district.
The Ministry of Housing and Local Government
The Ministry of Housing and Local Government was constituted in 1951, under the
title of Ministry of Local Government and Planning, to take over the housing and local
government functions of the Ministry of Health and the planning functions of the Minis¬
try of Town and Country Planning (1943-1951).
The Ministry is responsible for the administration of Government housing policy,
housing standards, and the general supervision of the housing programmes carried out by
local authorities.
The town and country planning work of the Ministry includes the framing of general
policy concerning the use and development of land throughout England and Wales, and
the guidance of local planning authorities, New Towns Development Corporations, and
the National Parks Commission in the carrying out of the planning functions allotted to
them. The Ministry also co-ordinates the interests of Government Departments in the
development of land.
In local government, the Ministry is the main link between local authorities and the
central government.
For further information on the Ministry of Housing and Local Government see p. 250.
The Central Office of Information
The Central Office of Information was established in 1946 as the successor to the war¬
time Ministry of Information. It is a common service agency for the production of infor¬
mation and publicity material and the supply of general publicity services required by
Government Departments. Both for the home and oversea ministerial Departments it
produces and distributes books, pamphlets, magazines, films, exhibitions, photographs
and other visual material. It conducts all official press and poster advertising except that
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
38
of the National Savings Committee, carries out social surveys, and distributes Depart¬
mental news to the Press and the BBC. For the oversea Departments, it supplies British
information posts with a daily service of news-background and comment and with a com¬
prehensive reference service. Administratively, the Central Office is responsible to
Treasury Ministers, while the Ministers whose Departments it serves are responsible for
the policy expressed in its work.
The Inland Revenue Department
The Inland Revenue Department administers the laws relating to income tax and sur¬
tax, profits tax, stamp duty, death duties, and certain other direct taxes of lesser import¬
ance; and advises the Chancellor of the Exchequer on any matters connected with them.
The Department is also responsible for the valuation of real property for various purposes
such as compensation for compulsory purchase, local authority rates, death duties, etc.
The Ministry of Labour and National Service
The office of the Minister of Labour was created by the New Ministries and Secretaries
Act, 1916, under which certain duties of the Board of Trade were transferred to the
Ministry of Labour. On the outbreak of war in 1939 the Ministry also became responsible
for mobilizing and allocating manpower for the armed forces and essential industries and
services, and its title was changed to the Ministry of Labour and National Service. Its main
functions in relation to Employment Services and Training derive from the Employment
and Training Act, 1948.
The Ministry is responsible for: (1) the provision of a free Employment Service,
through Employment Exchanges, Appointments Offices, the Technical and Scientific
Register, and Nursing Appointments Offices, with the object of helping people to obtain
suitable employment and helping employers to obtain suitable employees; (2) the pro¬
vision and development of a comprehensive Youth Employment Service; (3) general
employment policy and advice in consultation with other Government Departments on
employment aspects of economic policy and the distribution of industry; (4) the pro¬
vision of training in appropriate cases in Government Training Centres and assistance in
the training of supervisors through the system known as TWI (Training Within Indus-
try); (5) the supply of labour to industry, including recruitment and placing of foreign
workers; (6) the administration of the Disabled Persons (Employment) Act, 1944, includ¬
ing provision of industrial rehabilitation and vocational training for disabled persons;
(7) assistance in the prevention and settlement of industrial disputes, including the en¬
couragement of the means for voluntary negotiation and the provision of concihation and
arbitration services; (8) the registration, medical examination, call-up and reinstatement
in civil employment of persons affected by the National Service Acts; (9) the collection
and publication of labour statistics; (10) the administration of the Factories Acts and
miscellaneous work relating to the safety, health and welfare of workers; (11) United
Kingdom Government policy in connection with the International Labour Organization
and on economic and social questions arising in other international organizations; (12)
agency work for other Government Departments, such as payment of unemployment
benefit for the Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance, and payment of grants for
the National Assistance Board.
For further information on the Ministry of Labour and National Service see pp. 216-19.
The Central Land Board
The Central Land Board was set up by the Minister of Town and Country Planning
(now the Minister of Housing and Local Government) and the Secretary of State for Scot¬
land under the provisions of the Town and Country Planning Act, 1947, and the corre¬
sponding Scottish Act.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION 39
By a Government decision the members of the War Damage Commission, which was
instituted in 1941 to operate the scheme of payment for damage by enemy action to land
and buildings in the United Kingdom, were appointed to the Board. Thus, the same offi¬
cials have two distinct and separate functions.
The financial provisions of the 1947 Acts with which the Board is concerned have re¬
cently been under review by the Government. A White Paper (Cmd. 8699) containing
proposals1 for amending legislation was published in November 1952, since when the main
functions of the Board have been to continue to assess and collect outstanding development
charges (see footnote p. 254), and to complete the determination, assessment and payment
of claims for compensation in respect of depreciation of land values brought about by the
provisions of the 1947 Acts. " 7
The Law Officers’ Department
The Law Officers of the Crown for England and Wales2 are the Attorney-General and
the Solicitor-General, who represent the Crown in courts of justice, act as legal advisers
to Government Departments on important matters, and represent them in court. They
are assisted by Junior Counsel to the Treasury. The appointments are political, and the
Attorney-General may be in the Cabinet. The Attorney-General also has certain ad¬
ministrative functions, of which the most important is the supervision of the Department
of the Director of Public Prosecutions.
The Lord Chancellor’s Office
The Chancellorship is a legislative, judicial and executive office always carrying Cabinet
rjmk. The office is political in that it is held by an eminent ex-member of the Bench or
of the Bar adhering to the political party in power.
In addition to his functions as Speaker of the House of Lords and Custodian of the
Great Seal, the Lord Chancellor is in charge of more than 20 different offices and branches
which are mainly concerned with legal practice and procedure. He controls the machinery
of the courts of law both through his patronage and through administrative powers con¬
ferred by the Judicature Act, 1925, and other Acts; he appoints and removes Justices of
the Peace, and he is the Minister responsible for the Judge Advocate General’s Depart¬
ment. This department advises the War Office and the Air Ministry on ah legal matters
arising out of the administration of military law, and, where necessary, reviews the pro¬
ceedings of army and air force courts martial.3 The Lord Chancellor is also a member of
the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, exercises ecclesiastical patronage and is
connected with a number of administrative tribunals, including the Pensions Appeal
Tribunals, and the Lands Tribunal, which determines questions relating to compensation
for the compulsory acquisition of land, and hears rating appeals from local valuation
courts. The Land Registry, which is responsible for maintaining a State register of title
to land,4 and the Public Trustee Office, which may act as the executor or administrator
of the estate of a deceased person or as a trustee under a will or settlement, are both
administered under the Lord Chancellor.
The Ministry of Materials
The Ministry of Materials was established in 1951 to take over the responsibilities of
the Ministry of Supply and the Board of Trade in connection with the supply of certain
These proposals have been implemented in part by the Town and Country Planning Act, 1953.
2For details of the Law Officers for Scotland see p. 45.
3The Judge Advocate of the Fleet is responsible for these matters in the Royal Navy.
4Title must be so registered and guaranteed by the State in certain compulsory areas, but elsewhere
registration is voluntary.
40
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
raw materials, including non-ferrous and light metals in unwrought form, the basic raw
materials of the chemical industry, hides, skins, leather and tanning materials, natural and
synthetic rubber, raw cotton, raw wool and other animal fibres, raw jute, raw silk and
timber.
The Ministry is charged with the duty of securing adequate supplies of these and any
other materials for which it is responsible; where these materials are dealt with on public
account the Ministry is responsible for their purchase and sale. Its functions also include
negotiating on behalf of the United Kingdom in international conferences discussing
material shortages; promoting increased production of scarce materials, their economical
use, salvage and recovery; and developing the production and use of substitutes.
The National Assistance Board
The National Assistance Board is responsible for administering the State service of
financial assistance to persons in need and unable to maintain themselves, and the non¬
contributory pension scheme under the Old Age Pensions Act, 1936. It has also responsi-
bihties for assessing the needs of applicants for free legal aid (see p. 69).
The National Assistance Board is responsible to Parhament through the Minister of
Pensions and National Insurance.
For further information on the National Assistance Board see p. 234.
The Paymaster-General’s Department
The Paymaster-General’s Department acts as chief paying agent for Government
Departments other than the Revenue Departments. The majority of payments are
made through banks (to whose accounts the necessary transfers are made at the Bank of
England), but cash payments can be made and the payment of pensions is an impor¬
tant feature of the work of the Department.
In the Government formed in 1951, the Paymaster-General was specially charged with
the supervision of atomic energy research and production and with the direction of the
Prime Minister’s Statistical Branch.
The Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance
On 31st August 1953 the Ministry of Pensions (estabhshed in 1916) and the Ministry of
National Insurance (estabhshed in 1944) were amalgamated.
The Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance is responsible (a) for the social
security services estabhshed by the Family Allowances Act, 1945, the National Insurance
Act, 1946, and the National Insurance (Industrial Injuries) Act, 1946, and for reciprocal
national insurance arrangements with other countries, and (b) for the award and payment
of war pensions and allowances1 for disablement and death due to service in the armed
forces of the Crown, or due to war injuries sustained by merchant seamen, civil defence
personnel and civihans in the second world war, and for the welfare of pensioners and
their dependants and war orphans.1
The Ministry has two Parhamentary Secretaries, one to deal with war pensions and
one with National Insurance matters.
For further information on the Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance see
p. 229.
1In addition to these responsibilities for war pensioners in the United Kingdom, the Ministry is also
responsible for the administration of United Kingdom war pensions for pensioners resident in the
Irish Republic, and for the administration of United Kingdom war pensions and the medical treat¬
ment for war disablement operating through the Pensions Office at Ottawa and for the various
agency arrangements operating in different parts of the world. The Ministry is also financially
responsible for contractual arrangements with the two Ulster Volunteer Force Hospitals for the
treatment and rehabilitation of war pensioners in Northern Ireland,
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
41
The Post Office
The Post Office was set up in the seventeenth century to take over the responsibility for
carrymg letters, which was previously attached to the Crown. The Minister at its head is
the Postmaster-General Its work is mainly concerned with the operation of the inland
postal telegraph and telephone services and, in co-operation with other countries and
interests, of the oversea postal and telecommunications services. It also undertakes certain
banking functions, including the operation of the Post Office Savings Bank and the issue
of money orders, and it acts as an agent for many other Government Departments in the
collection of revenue and the payments of grants and allowances, such as National Insur-
ance payments, old age and certam other pensions and family allowances
In addition, the Engineering Department of the Post Office carries out a considerable
volume or scientific research and technical development.
For further information on the Post Office see pp. 209—213 and 272.
The Department of Scientific and Industrial Research
T he Department of Scientific and Industrial Research was set up as a Department of the
rivy Council m 1916. It accounts for its own Vote in the Estimates and if responsible to
Parliament through the Lord President of the Council.
The work of the Department covers research (except defence research) in all branches
of natural science except medicine and in all industries except agriculture, fishery and
forestry. Its primary functions are to undertake research in the national interest for the
benefit of the community and to meet the requirements of other Departments; to en¬
courage research and the application of scientific knowledge in industry; and to encourage
undamental research at universities and elsewhere, and the maintenance of an adequate
supply of tramed research workers for laboratories of all kinds.
For further information on the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research see
p. 267.
The Stationery Office
Her Majesty s Stationery Office was established in 1786. It is the Government’s central
organization for the supply of office equipment, office machinery, and published books
and periodicals for the public service both in the United Kingdom and overseas. It also
undertakes duplicating and distributing services for other Departments. In addition, the
Stationery Office is the publisher for the Government and has offices for the sale of
Government publications of all kinds. Any questions pertaining to the Stationery Office
asked m the House of Commons are answered by the Financial Secretary to the Treasury.
The Ministry of Supply
The Ministry of Supply was formed in 1946 by the amalgamation of the wartime
Ministries of Supply and Aircraft Production.
The primary function of the Ministry is to furnish supphes to the armed forces and to
undertake research on, and the design and development of, equipment for these forces,
principally for the Army and Royal Air Force, but including aircraft, vehicles, some guns
and ammunition and other equipment for the Royal Navy. Other functions are to sponsor
the production of certain goods which are of economic importance at the present time and
to carry the primary Government responsibility in the field of engineering, including the
associated task of administering any controls of iron and steel and of certain non-ferrous
and light metals; to develop new types of civil aircraft, including those required by the
national airlines, and to undertake research on and the production of atomic-energy.1
Bn April 1953 the Prime Minister announced that a committee had been appointed to devise a plan
tor transferring responsibility for atomic energy projects from the Ministry of Supply to a non-
departmental organization. 1
D
42
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Ministry also controls the Royal Ordnance factories and those experimental, storage
and other establishments which are owned by the Department; it is responsible for the ad¬
ministration of such matters as labour supply, labour management, welfare, housing and
transport in connection with these organizations.
The Board of Trade
The Board of Trade, which is headed by a President, assisted by a Minister of State
who is specially concerned with oversea trade, and by a Parhamentary Secretary, was
formally constituted by an Order in Council of 1786. It has a general responsibility in
relation to the United Kingdom’s commerce, industry and oversea trade, and carries
the central responsibility among Government Departments for the formulation of policy
in certain economic fields.
The most important of the latter are: commercial relations and negotiations with other
countries, including international commodity policy and the commercial aspect of rela¬
tions with international bodies; general import and export policy; policy on the United
Kingdom protective tariffs; consumer protection, including, for example, policy on price
control, resale price maintenance, monopohes and restrictive practices and merchandise
marks; matters affecting industrial productivity, and publicity for methods of increasing
it; and distribution of industry, including implementation of the Distribution of Industry
Acts (see pp. 130 and 255).
The Board is also responsible for the following matters: (1) statistics of trade and in¬
dustry, including the Censuses of Production and Distribution; (2) the administration of
certain regulative legislation, mainly in relation to patents, registered designs, copyright
and trade marks, companies and bankruptcy, insurance, weights and measures, and enemy
property; and (3) policy towards and relations with certain non-Govemment organiza¬
tions concerned with trade and industry, such as the British Standards Institution, the
British Institute of Management, the British Travel and Holidays Association, the Council
of Industrial Design and the National Research Development Corporation.
In addition, the Board is the ‘production department’ (see p. 134) for all industries
which are not the concern of other Departments, chief among which are the textile in¬
dustries and a large part of the chemical industry.
For further information on the Board of Trade see pp. 120, 122-3 •
The Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation
On 1st October 1953 the Ministry of Transport and the Ministry of Civil Aviation were
amalgamated. This amalgamation was foreshadowed in November 1951, from which time
the two offices of Minister of Transport and Minister of Civil Aviation were held by the
same Minister.
The Ministry of Transport, established in 1919 ‘for the purpose of improving the means
of, and the facilities for, locomotion and transport’, assumed also, in 1939, the responsi-
bility for merchant shipping formerly exercised by the Mercantile Marine Department of
the Board of Trade.
The Ministry of Civil Aviation was established in 1945 to organize, carry out and en¬
courage measures for the development of civil aviation, for the promotion of air safety
and efficiency, and for research on air navigation.
The powers and duties of the Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation relate to the
following branches of inland transport and merchant shipping: railways; inland water¬
ways; roads, bridges and ferries, and the vehicles they carry; harbours, docks, piers,
and river conservancy; national and international shipping policy; ships, their masters,
officers and men; safety of hfe at sea; navigation (including some aspects of pilotage and
the administration of the Lighthouse Fund); wreck and salvage; and the Coastguard
Service. The Ministry is also the highway authority for trunk roads, of which there are
over 8,000 miles (12,875 km.), and is responsible for providing and operating troopships.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION 43
In civil aviation matters, the Minister of Transport and Civil Aviation may give general
directions to the publicly-owned airline corporations on matters affecting the national
interest. He also approves associate arrangements between airline corporations and
independent air transport companies for the operation of scheduled services.
Additional civil aviation responsibilities include: the provision, administration and
equipment of State-controlled aerodromes and other ground services in the United Kina-
dom;the_ regulation of civil flying; air safety and the investigation of accidents; the
adoption m the Umted Kingdom of the standards and practices recommended by the
iternational Civil Aviation Organization; the negotiation of international air transport
agreements; the registration of aircraft; and the examination and licensing of aircrew
The Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation has two Parliamentary Secretaries one
to deal with transport matters and one with civil aviation.
For further information on the Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation see pp. 185
188-9,194, 201, 207 and 271. ^ ^
The War Office
Ihe office of Secretary of State for War was established in 1854 as a preliminary to
abohshmg the office of Secretary of State at War, which had been in existence since the
beginning of the century In 1904 the Army Council was constituted on the model of the
Board of Admiralty, with the Secretary of State as president and a mixed membership of
military and civil personnel. r
The War Office is responsible for the administrative control of the Army, including
appointments, promotion, postings and payment, and its functions include the planning
of operations and training ; the collection and sifting of military information; the framing
of policy on the composition, weapons and equipment of the Army; the determination of
financial and labour policy connected with the Army; and the supervision of War Office
civilian staffs both at home and abroad.
For further information on the War Office see p. 84.
The Ministry of Works
The Ministry of Works, previously known as His Majesty’s Office of Works was
estabhshed under its present title in 1943. Its main functions are: the provision of accom¬
modation for Government Departments (including public buildings overseas), either by
the design and erection of new buildings or the leasing, requisition and adaptation of
existing buildings; the design, purchase, supply and maintenance of furniture and equip-
mcnt for Government Departments and certain other bodies, and the supply of fuel
household articles and stores; the maintenance of, and advisory services in connection
with, ancient monuments and historic buildings; the maintenance of certain Royal
Palaces; and the management and maintenance of the Royal Parks and Pleasure Gardens.
The Ministry is also responsible for the control of building licensing, certain building
materials and fitments and the registration of building and civil engineering undertakings-
for the oversight of the national building programme and the allocation of certain con¬
trolled materials among various users; and for the review of research and development
work in connection with building requirements and the communication of the results to
industry.
SCOTLAND
The first Secretary for Scotland was appointed in 1885 in recognition of the fact that
Scotland required a separate system of administration from that of England and Wales
In 1926, all the powers and duties attached to the office were transferred by the Secretaries
of State Act to a principal Secretary of State.
44
BRITAIN: AN OTFICIAL HANDBOOK
The functions of the Secretary of State, who is assisted at ministerial level by a Minister
of State, three Parhamentary Under-Secretaries and the Scottish law officers, are discharged
by four main administrative Departments of equal status, each under a Secretary responsible
to the Secretary of State for the discharge of the duties of the Department. The day-to-day
administration of the Departments is conducted in Edinburgh, but each Department has
representatives in London for liaison and Parhamentary duties. This London office is
generally known as the Scottish Office, a term also used to describe the whole system of
Scottish administration.
The four main Scottish Departments are the Scottish Home Department, the Depart¬
ment of Health for Scotland, the Scottish Education Department and the Department of
Agriculture for Scotland.
The Scottish Home Department
The Scottish Home Department was set up in 1939 to take over the work that had been
undertaken previously by the Secretary of State’s Office, and by the Fishery Board for
Scotland and the Prisons Department for Scotland.
In the field of law and order, the Department is concerned with the police, probation
and remand home services, criminal justice, legal aid and the services needed by the
courts; it is directly responsible for the administration of prisons and Borstal institutions.
The Department is the central Department in Scotland for the fire service and civil
defence; for the children’s service; and for legislation concerning shops, theatres, cinemas
and licensed premises. Licensed premises in the State Management Districts1 are directly
maintained by the Department.
Other functions of the Department are: general duties in connection with the structure
and finance of local authorities, including valuation and rating and the administration of
the Exchequer equalization grants; and the oversight and protection of the Scottish inshore,
deep-sea and freshwater fisheries. The Department is also closely concerned, in co¬
operation with the Board of Trade and other United Kingdom Departments, with
Scottish economic development, including the work of the North of Scotland Hydro-
Electric Board and the rehabilitation of the Highlands generally.
The Department of Health for Scotland
The Department of Health for Scotland is responsible for the general supervision of the
National Health Service in Scotland; for the central administration of the Housing
(Scotland) Acts and for the supervision of the house-building programme and the distri¬
bution of grants to local authorities for housing purposes; and for the control, under the
Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Acts, of the use of land and the estabhshment of
new towns under the New Towns Act.
The Department is also responsible for the administration of various environmenta
and welfare services, e.g., water supphes, sewerage, and the care of the aged; and for the
medical and surgical treatment of war pensioners in Scotland (including hospital services
and the supply and repair of artificial hmbs, surgical appliances and invalid chairs).
The Scottish Education Department
The Scottish Education Department was reconstituted in 1939. Its present functions
include: supervising the administration of the Education (Scotland) Acts; guiding the
development of public education in Scotland in all its forms; supervising the training of
teachers, issuing teachers’ certificates and administering the Teachers’ Superannuation
Scheme; controlling the distribution of Exchequer grants-in-aid of educational expendi¬
ture; conducting the annual examination for the Scottish Leaving Certificate; exercising
1Districts in which State management of the liquor trade is in operation.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
45
general supervision over Approved Schools, and over the administration of the Royal
Scottish Museum.
The Department of Agriculture for Scotland
The Department of Agriculture for Scotland is the successor of the Board of Agri¬
culture which was established in 1912. The Department is responsible in Scotland for
the management of agricultural property owned by the Secretary of State; for the admini¬
stration and finance of various instructional, advisory and research services provided by
agricultural colleges and research institutes; for the administration of subsidies and other
services in connection with food production, the use of land and the economics of the
agricultural industry; for the administration of agricultural improvement schemes and of
labour, machinery and supply services; and for the protection of agricultural interests
generally.
Minor Departments
In addition to the main Departments, there are a number of minor Scottish Depart¬
ments, including the Department of the Registrar General for Scotland,1 all of which
work in varying degrees under the direction of the Secretary of State. There are also the
Scottish branches of the United Kingdom Departments under the direction of Controllers,
who are responsible for ensuring that the execution in Scotland of the policy and pro¬
cedure of their Departments is in accordance with Scottish conditions and needs.
Legal Departments
The Law Officers for Scotland are the Lord Advocate and the Solicitor-General. The
Lord Advocate is in administrative control of two Departments: The Lord Advocate's
Department, which is responsible for drafting Scottish legislation, providing legal advice
on Scottish questions for other Departments, and assisting the Scottish law officers in
certain of their legal duties; and The Crown Office, which exercises the powers of the Lord
Advocate in relation to criminal proceedings.
NORTHERN IRELAND
There are a number of separate Departments for Northern Ireland, which are con¬
trolled by the Northern Ireland Parliament. Most of these have functions in Northern
Ireland analogous to those performed for England and Wales by the United Kingdom
Departments of the same name—the Northern Ireland Ministries of Home Affairs,
Education and Agriculture; the Northern Ireland Assistance Board; and the Exchequer and
Audit Department for Northern Ireland. Other Northern Ireland Departments cover
activities which in Great Britain are divided between several Departments. These
Northern Ireland Departments include the Ministries of Finance, Commerce, Health and
Local Government, and Labour and National Insurance.
The Ministry of Finance
In addition to acting as Treasury to the Government of Northern Ireland, the Ministry
of Finance is responsible for administrative work in connection with the erection and
maintenance of public works and buildings; for Government valuation and survey; for
land registry, the registry of deeds, and certain duties in connection with land purchases;
for the reception and preservation of pubhc records; for the work of the Registrar-
General; for the control of Government publications; for the control and administration
of charitable donations and bequests; and for the control of borrowings.
Attached to the Department is the office of Parliamentary Counsel, in which Govern¬
ment Bills are prepared for introduction into Parliament.
1The General Registry Office (see footnote p. 6).
46 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Ministry of Commerce
In addition to its commercial intelligence work, and its work in connection with in¬
dustrial production and the development of new, and the expansion of existing, industries,
the Department is responsible for the business of the Government in relation to electricity
and gas undertakings; roads and bridges and inland public transport; motor vehicles and
road traffic; railways; harbours and inland waterways; fisheries; the development of the
tourist traffic; the regulation and inspection of mines and quarries; mineral development;
scientific development; the registration of companies and trade unions; the administration
of the Assurance Companies Acts and the Industrial Assurance (Northern Ireland) Act,
1924. The Ministry also performs functions delegated by the Ministry of Fuel and Power
(Whitehall) relating to the distribution of coal and other solid fuels.
The Ministry of Health and Local Government
In addition to its work in connection with the National Health Service, the Department
is responsible for the central administration of local government services.
The Ministry of Labour and National Insurance
The Ministry is responsible for the administration of the Factories Acts and other
legislation connected with industrial health and welfare; for the promotion of joint
organizations for the settlement of industrial questions and of machinery of conciliation
in industrial disputes; for the administration of local employment offices and the machinery
for dealing with employment questions of all kinds; for the administration of the National
Insurance and the National Insurance (Industrial Injuries) Act, and of the Family Allow¬
ances Act; and for carrying out certain statutory functions in connection with the National
Assistance Scheme in conjunction with the National Assistance Board for Northern
Ireland.
THE CIVIL SERVICE
A civil servant in Britain is a servant of the Crown (not being the holder of a pohtical
or judicial office), who is employed in a civil capacity and whose remuneration is found
wholly or directly out of moneys voted by Parliament. The number of civil servants
under this definition amounts to more than a million; for it includes some 400,000
Government industrial employees in such establishments as Royal Ordnance factories
and Admiralty dockyards. The term ‘Civil Service’ is, however, generally used only to
cover ‘non-industrial’ members of the staffs of the various Government Departments.
Legally, therefore, the civil servant is a servant of the Crown. In practice, he serves
the Minister in charge of his Department, or, in the case of a few Departments, the Board
or Commission responsible to Parliament, by advising in the formulation of policy and
by carrying out policy decisions once they have been taken.
Development of the Modern Civil Service
The Civil Service in its present form is a product of the past one hundred years. Before
then, Departments were wholly free to choose their own staffs, qualifying standards were
unknown, there was no central supervision, and pohtical jobbery was rife. Measures of
reform instigated during the nineteenth century included the substitution of open com¬
petition tor the practice of obtaining Civil Service appointments by favour or purchase,
and the establishment of an independent body, known as the Civil Service Commission,
to organize recruitment to the service. The great expansion in State planning which has
taken place during the last fifty years, and the consequent expansion in the numbers of
civil servants and the scope of their duties, have led to further reorganization. During
the last few decades, recruitment competitions have been adapted to a developing educa¬
tional system; co-ordination between the various Departments has been improved; and
government AND ADMINISTRATION 47
the search for increased efficiency in the conduct of public business has been the task of
many Government-appointed commissions and committees of inquiry. As a result, civil
servants are today members of an integrated service with common conditions of employ¬
ment and common traditions and standards of conduct which belong not to individual
Departments but to the Civil Service as a whole.
Control of the Service
The general control of the Service is in the hands of the Treasury, as the Department
responsible for ensuring that the amount of money voted by Parhament for the activities
of the Civil Service is not exceeded and that the money itself is spent in the best and most
economical way. The Treasury therefore examines and approves (or disapproves) all new
proposals for spending public money; sanctions (or vetoes) increases of staff; regulates the
salaries and conditions of employment of civil servants; supervises training for the Civil
Service, and continually keeps under review the machinery of government.
The responsibility for the policy and activities of each Department lies with the appro¬
priate Minister, who is answerable to Parliament for what the civil servants in that
Department may do or say.
Structure of the Service
At the head of each important Government Department is the Minister (sometimes
known as the Secretary of State), who is assisted by one or more junior Ministers. Directly
responsible to the Minister is the permanent Head of the Department—the Permanent
Secretary (sometimes known as the Permanent Under-Secretary of State)—who is
supported in the higher direction of the work by a Deputy Secretary and a varying num¬
ber of Under-Secretaries and Assistant Secretaries.
Departmental Organization
The internal organization of Departments varies according to the work allotted to
them by the Government of the day. Most Departments are, however, divided into
branches, divisions and sections, each responsible for some portion of the Department’s
activities in decreasing order of size and scope. Two branches are common to all Depart¬
ments: a Finance Branch, which is responsible for financial matters and accounting,
and an Estabhshments Branch, which is responsible for staff matters. In the larger
Departments, the Estabhshments Branch usually contains what is called an ‘Organization
and Methods’ division, the members of which act in an advisory capacity as ‘efficiency
experts for improving the way in which the Department arranges its work and elimin¬
ating all that is not strictly essential to the tasks in hand. Smaller Departments are advised
by the ‘Organization and Methods’ division of the Treasury.
Classes and Grades
The majority of civil servants working in the United Kingdom1 are divided into four
main classes, each class containing a series of grades. The classes are:
i. The Administrative Class, which is responsible for advising Ministers on policy,
for dealing with any difficulties which may arise in carrying out existing policy,
and for forecasting the probable effects of new measures and regulations. This
relatively small class, which at present numbers about 3,000, is recruited largely
from university graduates.
1A number of civil servants work overseas in the Foreign Service (see p. 35) and the Colonial
Service (see footnote p. 33) and for other Government Departments such as the Commonwealth
Relations Office (see p. 33).
48
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
2. The Executive Class (numbering 70,000 in April 1953), which is responsible for
the day-to-day conduct of Government business, including the higher work of
supply and accounts, within the framework of established policy. Members of
this class must have reached a recognized educational standard; after entry they
may train for specialist work such as that of an auditor, actuary or statistician.
3. The Clerical Class (the largest of the main classes, comprising about 200,000
officers), which undertakes all the usual clerical work involved in running depart¬
mental business, e.g., the preparation of accounts and the keeping of records, the
handling of particular claims in accordance with known rules, and the summarizing
and annotation of documents for the assistance of senior officers.
4. The Typing Class (about 30,000 members), which consists of shorthand typists,
copy typists and learner typists.
Other classes are: the Professional, Scientific and Technical Classes, which consist of
74,000 civil servants with the necessary qualifications (e.g., doctors, lawyers, engineers,
information officers and research workers) for carrying out the wide range of specialized
duties which are now discharged by the Government; the Departmental Classes, which are
not found throughout the Service generally but are normally confined to one or two
Departments, e.g., the Tax Inspectorate of the Inland Revenue Department, the Factory
Inspectorate of the Ministry of Labour and National Service, and the Waterguard of the
Customs and Excise Department; and the Manipulative Classes, which include large
numbers (over 240,000 in 1953) of postal and telegraph officers, postmen, telephonists,
messengers, paper keepers, office cleaners and similar workers in Government Depart¬
ments and their immediate supervisors.
In July 1953 the total number of non-industrial civil servants in all these classes at
home and overseas (including the Post Office staff) was 662,975; approximately one-third
of this total were women.
Organization of the Staff
The engagement and position of all civil servants is covered by regulation, agreement
and traditional practice. Every civil servant thus has a definite status, depending upon the
post which he fills.
Recruitment
The recruitment of all permanent civil servants1 is in the hands of the Civil Service
Commission, whose members are appointed by the Crown on the advice of the Govern¬
ment. The normal method of entry is by open competition, conducted in accordance
with regulations approved by the Treasury, consisting of written examinations or inter¬
views, or both. The points of entry into the four main classes of the Civil Service are
planned to correspond to definite levels in the British educational system, and it is the
Commission s duty to study the requirements of the Civil Service in the light of the
education provided by the schools and universities.
In addition to holding examinations and conducting interviews, the Commission is
responsible for issuing a Certificate of Qualification in respect of each successful candidate,
for placing new entrants in Departments for which their qualifications are appropriate,
and for watching the careers of those it has selected in order to ensure that current methods
of recruitment are successful and up to date.
Training
Each of the larger Government Departments has a Training Officer and a number of
instructors, who organize both general and technical courses where necessary. Methods
1There are a number of ‘temporary’ civil servants, who are not entitled to pensions.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION 49
vary from Department to Department, but nearly all have systematic instruction of
recruits in all classes. Refresher’ courses for the established staff are often held, in which
emphasis is placed on helping the civil servant to appreciate fully how his work relates to
the general work of his Department, and how the work of his Department affects the
commumty as a whole.
Methods of training include the use of films and instructional books; discussion groups;
and educational visits, which enable civil servants to study the workings of outside bodies,’
where these touch their own duties. In addition, officers in the early years of their service
are transferred from branch to branch and sometimes from Department to Department,
in order that they may gain as wide an experience as possible of civil service activities.
.e functions of Training Officers are co-ordinated by the Training and Education
Division of the Treasury, which also undertakes the task of training the departmental
mstructors themselves, and provides central courses, on entry, for members of the Ad¬
ministrative Class.
Promotion
A period of probation, lasting from one to two years according to grade with exten¬
sions in certain instances, is the rule for all new entrants to the permanent Civil Service.
Promotions from grade to grade are made by the Departments; those from class to class
partly through centrally conducted limited competitions1 and partly by Departments
themselves. All promotions to the Administrative Class from other classes require
Treasury approval. Promotions to the highest positions in the Civil Service, e.g., Per¬
manent Secretaries, Principal Establishments Officers and Principal Finance Officers,
must be approved by the Prime Minister, who is advised in these matters by the Permanent
Secretary to the Treasury.
Conditions of Service2
Machinery for negotiation on conditions of service affecting the Civil Service as a
whole is provided by a system of Whitley Councils, comprising a National Council and
about 80 departmental councils, each composed jointly of official and staff representatives.
Negotiating machinery for separate sections of the Service is provided by the various
staff associations, which civil servants are encouraged to join, e.g., the Civil Service
Clerical Association, the Union of Post Office Workers, the Society of Civil Servants,
die Institution of Professional Civil Servants, and the Association of First Division Civil
Servants.
In general, the civil servant receives a salary which, except hi the highest posts, com¬
pares reasonably with that paid for similar work outside the Service, with regular annual
increments up to the maximum of the scale of the grade to which he belongs. In addition,
although he holds office at the pleasure of the Crown and may therefore be dismissed
at any time, he enjoys, in practice, a considerable measure of security of tenure. Thus
every permanent civil servant may reasonably expect a full career in the public service,
and a pension on retirement—though this, again, is not a legal right.
Civil servants are generally ‘conditioned’ to a given number of hours of attendance a
week. Overtime is paid to members of most of the lower salary groups if they work
longer than their ‘conditioned’ hours. The standard working week in the Service is, at
present, 45 J hours. The highest administrative officials, who work the longest hours,
receive no extra remuneration for extra work performed. Annual leave varies according
to the grade up to a maximum, at present, of 36 days a year. Sick leave on full pay may
1 Competitions open only to serving members of specified civil service classes.
2A review of the pay of the Civil Service, including the principles which should govern it, and
of other conditions of service such as hours of work and annual leave, is being undertaken by a Royal
Commission set up in July 1953.
50
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
be granted to established, i.e. permanent, civil servants for up to six months in any twelve
months, and on reduced pay up to a maximum of one year’s paid sick leave in any four
years.
Political and Private Activities
The position and functions of a civil servant remain the same whichever pohtical party
is in power; and it is his duty to serve the Government of the day irrespective of his own
pohtical opinion. Save, however, for the fact that all civil servants are debarred by statute
from being Members of Parhament, restrictions on pohtical activities are imposed only to
the extent that they are necessary in order to preserve the confidence of the pubhc in the
pohtical impartiality of the Civil Service. Civil servants in most of the minor grades are
allowed complete pohtical freedom; and those in the higher classes whose pohtical activi¬
ties are restricted are given as much freedom as possible to play their part in those spheres
of pubhc hfe which are not matters of party controversy. Civil servants may, of course,
exercise the right of all citizens to register their private pohtical opinions on appropriate
occasions, e.g., at a General Election.
Every civil servant may engage in such private activities as he wishes, provided that
such activities do not in any way conflict with his official duties, nor with the provisions
of the Official Secrets Acts of 1911 and 1920 and the Prevention of Corruption Act of
1906. A civil servant, however, must not use his official position to further his private
interests, and he is therefore subject to restrictions in matters of commerce and business
from which the ordinary citizen is free, e.g., he may not hold private interests in pubhc
contracts, and he may not use official information or experience in writing, broadcasting
or lecturing without the express approval of his Department. Above all, a civil servant is
expected to conform to the high standards of integrity which characterize the Service to
which he belongs.
PUBLIC CORPORATIONS AND STATE-SPONSORED BODIES
Public Corporations
Since the beginning of the present century, the pubhc corporation has been favoured
as an instrument for the regulation of industrial and semi-industrial undertakings in the
pubhc interest. As a device of administration, however, it is very much older; its history
in the United Kingdom can be traced back to the corporate bodies of the Middle Ages
and its influence can be discerned in nearly all institutions of pubhc control (except
Government Departments) established during the past four centuries.
The pubhc corporation in its twentieth-century form is, generally speaking, a pubhc
body having a clearly defined and specific task. Its board of directors and its staff" are
chosen for their experience and competence hi a particular field; they are not civil
servants, and although they are accountable to Parhament for their actions in a variety
of ways, they are free from full and continuous ministerial control.
Financially, certain of the corporations are self-supporting; that is to say, their revenue
from operations over a period of years is expected to cover running costs and the interest
charges on the loans they have received. Others receive Exchequer grants to help them in
carrying out the duties with which they have been charged. In general the self-supporting
corporations enjoy a greater measure of independence in their work.
Internal Organization
From the point of view of internal organization and scope, there are almost as many
kinds of corporation as there are industries and services administered in this way. The
comparatively small pre-war corporations, e.g., the London Passenger Transport Board,1
Superseded in 1947 by the London Transport Executive under the provisions of the Transport Act,
1947.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
51
the Central Electricity Board,1 and the British Broadcasting Corporation,* had no
standard pattern of any kind. They were designed as conveniently as possible to reorganize
and to operate for the public benefit some service that required co-ordination, or that
was developing so rapidly that, in the public interest, some form of public assistance and
control was needed; and even their governing bodies varied in method of appointment
and in composition. The governors of the British Broadcasting Corporation, for example,
are appointed by the Crown; the London Passenger Transport Board was an expert
functional board appointed by an independent body of Appointing Trustees; while of
the members of the Central Electricity Board, who were appointed by the responsible
minister (before the second world war the Minister of Transport), only the chairman had
any executive functions.
The post-war corporations resemble the pre-war corporations in the diversity of their
general structure, organization and methods, having been similarly designed to suit the
particular needs of the various industries under public control. They are, however, less
varied in the composition of their governing boards, all of which (except that of the Bank
of England, whose court of directors is appointed by the Crown) are directly appointed
by the responsible minister, who also has full powers of dismissal.
Public Control
The powers and duties of the boards of the nationalized industries are broadly defined
in the Acts under which they have been set up. Their autonomy is limited by the fact that
they are appointed by a minister who has reserve powers to issue directions to them on
major matters of policy affecting the public interest. Other measures of control are pro¬
vided: in the first place by the Parliamentary debates winch take place on the activities of
the corporations when their annual Reports and Accounts are presented to the House of
Commons, and, at intervals, in the course of usual procedure on Estimates; and, secondly,
by the existence of Consumer Councils which represent the interests of the general public.
In their Report published in July 1953, the Select Committee on Nationalized Industries
recommended as a further measure the appointment of a Committee of the House of Com¬
mons by Standing Order, to examine the nationalized industries with a view to obtaining
further information as to their general policy and practice. It would be the duty of the
Committee to inform Parliament about the aims, activities and problems of the Corpora¬
tions, but not to control their work. In matters of day-to-day administration and manage¬
ment, however, the boards would remain perfectly free.
Operation of Major Industries and Services
Two of the post-war corporations were established merely to take over and administer
an existing institution already functioning as a unit: the Bank of England (see p. 104),
which under the Bank of England Act, 1946, enjoys freedom of action subject only to
such instructions as the Treasury may from time to time issue in the public interest after
consultation with the court of directors; and Cable and Wireless Limited (see p. 212),
which under the Cable and Wireless Act, 1946, is a publicly owned company controlled
by a board of directors appointed by the Postmaster-General, working in close connection
with the Post Office in the operation of oversea telecommunication services. The other
corporations established since 1945 to operate major industries and services are new
orgamzations for which new admimstrative machinery has been set up. These include:
The National Coal Board (see pp. 158-60). The Board consists of a chairman, two deputy
chairmen, four full-time and five part-time members. It is a non-functional board
responsible for its own regional organization. It has split up its undertaking into nine
Tts functions were transferred to the British Electricity Authority by the Electricity Act, 1947, and
it was dissolved in 1948.
Tor further information on the British Broadcasting Corporation see p. 281.
52
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
divisions (each controlled by a separate board) covering the main coalfields of the United
Kingdom. Colheries in the divisions are grouped into 50 area organizations which work
in conjunction with the managers of individual colheries.
The British Transport Commission (see p. 189). As established by the Transport Act, 1947,
the British Transport Commission was a small controlling and policy-making body
(normally composed of a chairman, a deputy chairman, three full-time and three part-
time members), in which was vested the responsibility for the various nationalized under¬
takings of the transport industry in Great Britain.
Under the Transport Act, 1953, substantial alterations were made in the composition
and duties of the Commission, which may now have up to fourteen members besides the
chairman, all of whom may be part-time members.
Formerly the Commission delegated management functions to six Executives, five of
which have now been abohshed. The remaining Executive, the London Transport
Executive, has its own independent subordinate structure, but is finally responsible to
the Commission.
The British Electricity Authority and fourteen Area Electricity Boards (see p. 161). The
central authority is a partly functional board consisting of a chairman, two deputy chair¬
men, one full-time and eight part-time members. It controls the general policy of the
whole industry throughout Great Britain except for Northern Scotland (for which there
is a separate authority, the North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board), and it is responsible
for the generation and bulk supply of electricity to the statutory Area Boards. It has sub¬
divided the generating side of the industry into 14 divisions, corresponding geographically
with the Area Boards.
The Area Boards are responsible for the distribution of electricity. Each consists of a
full-time chairman and deputy chairman and five or six part-time members. The chair¬
man of the Area Consultative Council1 is an ex-officio member. Four of the chairmen
of the Area Boards serve in rotation as members of the Authority, and the chairman of
the North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board is an ex-officio member.
The Area Boards are mainly autonomous, although the central authority has certain
powers of supervision. Their areas are divided into between four and nine sub-areas and
the sub-areas are divided into a number of districts.
The Gas Council and the Area Gas Boards (see p. 164). Each of the 12 Area Boards,
which are responsible both for the manufacture of gas and for distribution to consumers,
consists of a full-time chairman and deputy chairman, in some cases one full-time member,
and always five or six part-time members including the chairman of the Area Consultative
Council. There is no common pattern of organization; each board is fully independent and
has devised its own subordinate structure.
The Gas Council is the national body and consists of a full-time chairman and deputy
chairman and the 12 chairmen of the Area Boards. It is an advisory and co-ordinating
council, and it has extensive powers over the Area Boards in the matter of finance.
The British Overseas Airways Corporation (see pp. 201-4). The Corporation is con¬
trolled by a board consisting of a chairman, a deputy chairman and eight members. It
operates a world-wide network of long-distance air services radiating from the United
Kingdom.
The British European Airways Corporation (see pp. 201-3 and 204-5). The board consists
of a chairman, deputy chairman, chief executive and four members, who include repre¬
sentatives of regional interests in the United Kingdom. The Corporation provide
scheduled air services within the United Kingdom and Europe.
XA statutory council representing consumer interests. Councils and committees of this kind are
common to most of the post-war corporations.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
53
The Colonial Development Corporation. The board consists of a chairman, deputy chair¬
man and seven part-time members. Its duty is to investigate, formulate and carry out
commercial projects for developing Colonial resources. It may assume direct responsi¬
bility for the initiation and management of any project, or it may participate in a project
with other bodies, both public and private. There is consultation with Colonial Govern¬
ments before projects are launched.
State-sponsored Bodies
In addition to the public corporations there are a number of other permanent and
temporary organizations which arc under some degree of public control or receive some
degree of public support. These range from bodies which are virtually extensions of Gov¬
ernment Departments to those which are completely independent voluntary associations,
but yet receive a special degree of official recognition. The definition and classification of
State-sponsored bodies must therefore be to some extent arbitrary, while even within a
narrow definition it is impossible for reasons of space to describe them all in this section. The
following examples are intended to be no more than a representative sample of those
permanent organizations which have been set up by Statute or are financed wholly or
partly out of public funds but yet have certain powers of independent administrative or
executive action. Purely advisory organizations and those with judicial or quasi-judicial
functions (e.g., tribunals for arbitrating in industrial disputes), educational institutions and
research associations are omitted.
Provision of Nation-wide Services
The following bodies, which are not public corporations, provide services on a nation¬
wide scale.
The National Dock Labour Board administers the scheme for giving permanent employ¬
ment to dock workers under the Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, 1947.
It consists of a chairman, vice-chairman and eight members appointed by the Minister of
Labour and National Service on the nomination of the National Joint Council for the
Port Transport Industry, four to represent dock employers and four to represent dock
workers.
The Corporation of Trinity House is administered by a Board of ten Elder Brethren elected
from the Royal Navy and the Merchant Service. The Corporation, which received its first
Royal Charter in the sixteenth century, is the general lighthouse authority for Eng¬
land and Wales, the Channel Islands and Gibraltar. It is also the chief pilotage authority in
the United Kingdom, having the management of all matters relating to pilots and pilotage
in the London area, the English Channel and certain other coastal districts of the United
Kingdom.
The Imperial War Graves Commission was founded in 1917 to commemorate the war
dead of the Commonwealth by keeping the memorials, graves and gardens of British war
cemeteries in permanent good order. The Commission consists of 19 members represen¬
ting the United Kingdom and the Commonwealth Governments. The cost of its opera¬
tions is borne by each member of the Commonwealth in proportion to the number of
graves of its dead.
Remploy Ltd. (see p. 219) is a non-profit-making public company, with no share capital,
established in accordance with the provisions of the Disabled Persons (Employment) Act,
1944. Its objects are to provide training and employment facilities to registered disabled
persons who are unhkely to obtain work except under special conditions. Its powers are
wide enough to cover the provision of special factories and workshops, hostel accom¬
modation and facilities for home workers. The directors are appointed by the Minister of
Labour and National Service; funds for capital development and to meet operational costs
are provided by loans and grants under the Ministry of Labour Vote.
54
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Provision of Local Services
The majority of local services are provided by local authorities. Other bodies concerned
include various types of dock and harbour authorities, water boards and river conservancy
boards. The following examples illustrate their general nature and functions.
The Metropolitan Water Board (see p. 167) consists of 66 voluntary part-time members,
who are the elected representatives of the various local authorities within the Board’s area
of operations, and a salaried chairman and vice-chairman, chosen by members of the Board
for their experience in water undertakings. The Metropolitan Water Board is responsible
for providing an adequate supply of pure water in the London area.
The Port of London Authority consists of 28 members representing all the port interests,
and a chairman and vice-chairman. The chairman and vice-chairman are elected by the
members, but not necessarily from within their own ranks. The Authority controls a
statutory undertaking independent of the Government and the local authorities, and is
responsible for 69 miles (m km.) of one of the busiest waterways in the world and for
the maintenance and operation of a dock estate with an aggregate area of over 4,000 acres
(1,620 ha.). Conservancy duties of the Authority, under the Harbour Master, include
the maintenance of adequate river channels, the regulation of traffic, the provision and up¬
keep of moorings, and the licensing of wharves and structures in the area under its control.
The Thames Conservancy Board (see pp. 168-9) consists of 34 conservators, each appointed
by an interested local authority or other interested bodies as prescribed by the Thames
Conservancy Act, 1932. The conservators are the navigation authority for 136 miles (219
km.) of the river Thames; they are responsible for the prevention of pollution in a catch¬
ment area of 3,812 square miles (9,873 sq. km.) and for all land drainage work in connec¬
tion with the river.
The New Towns Development Corporations (see p. 255—6) consist of some eight members
including a chairman and a deputy chairman. They are responsible for the development
of the New Towns in the United Kingdom.
Trading Agencies
Trading in the United Kingdom is carried on for the most part by private trading
compames. In the case of certain foodstuffs and raw materials, however, the Government
either itself engages in buying and distributing or promotes the setting up of various types
of statutory body as purchasing and marketing agents, as in the following examples.
The Raw Cotton Commission consists of a chairman, one or two full-time members and
ten part-time members appointed by the Board of Trade. Established under the Cotton
(Centralized Buying) Act, 1947, it was made responsible for ‘buying, importing into the
United Kingdom and holding and distributing therein all raw cotton required for the
purposes of the cotton industry’.
Since 1952, however, spinners and other users of raw cotton have been free to buy their
cotton either on their own account or from the Commission. It is expected that about 56
per cent of the raw cotton to be imported in the year ending 31st August 1954 will be on
private account.
Agricultural Marketing Boards (see p. 143) are producers’ organizations established as
part of the scheme brought into force under the provisions of the Agricultural Marketing
Acts, 1931, 1933 and 1949, to regulate the marketing of certain agricultural produce.
Under the terms of the 1949 Act, the Boards may consist of between 8 and 24 members
(unless for any reason the Minister of Agriculture wishes to increase the number), of
whom up to one-fifth may be persons appointed by the Minister. The Boards are partly
financed from public funds.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
55
Provision of Finance
The distinction between State-sponsored and independent bodies is particularly difficult
to draw in the case of central financial institutions. In general these institutions, though
subject to some guidance by the Treasury and the Bank of England, are neither statutory
nor financially dependent on grants from the Exchequer. The following organizations
are, however, exceptions to this rule.
The Public Works Loan Board was originally constituted under the Public Works Loans
Act, 1875, to make certain local loans out of moneys provided by the Exchequer. The
scope of its operations has been extended by subsequent Acts, and, from 1945 to 1952, it
was the only source from which local authorities could normally borrow.1
The 12 commissioners who constitute the Board are appointed by Royal Warrant.
The National Film Finance Corporation (see p. 276) is a statutory corporation established
under the Cinematograph Films Production (Special Loan) Act, 1949. Its function is to
make loans to film distributors in order to help to finance the production of films. Its
members—a chairman, a managing director, and three to five others—are appointed by the
Board of Trade and its funds are provided by advances from the Board of Trade.
Scottish Agricultural Securities Corporation Ltd. is a limited company whose shares are
held by Scottish banks. It was set up in accordance with the provisions of the Agricultural
Credits (Scotland) Act, I929> to grant loans on favourable terms for agricultural purposes
on the security of agricultural land in Scotland. It receives a grant from the Treasury to
cover losses resulting from its reduction of interest rates.
Industrial Production and Development
Organizations set up by the Government with the object of assisting industry in par¬
ticular ways include the following bodies.
Development Councils may be set up under the provisions of the Industrial Organization
and Development Act, 1947, by Departments responsible for the industry concerned. The
purpose of the Councils is to provide firms in an industry with those services (research,
design, statistics, personnel training, etc.) which individual firms cannot afford out of their
resources. There are at present development councils for the cotton industry (the Cotton
Board), and for the furniture industry. A development council for jewellery and silver¬
ware, which had been set up, was dissolved on 18th February 1953, while ajoint Clothing
Council, a voluntary body representative of both sides of the clothing industry, was in¬
corporated on 31st January 1953 as a company limited by guarantee, to take the place of
the Clothing Development Council, which had been dissolved on 1st December 1952.
Industrial Estate Companies are registered non-profit-making companies which build,
manage and maintain factories and industrial estates in the Development Areas (see p.
130). Their directors are unpaid and are appointed by the Board of Trade to act as its
agents, and their capital is provided from Government sources. The companies include
North Western Industrial Estates Ltd., North-East Trading Estates Ltd., Scottish Indus¬
trial Estates Ltd., Wales and Monmouthshire Trading Estates Ltd., and West Cumberland
Industrial Development Company Ltd. Besides estates controlled and financed in this way
there are other industrial estates operated by private firms or local authorities.
The Herring Industry Board (see p. 154) is responsible for reorganizing, developing and
regulating the herring industry. It consists of a chairman and two other members, all part-
time and independent of the industry, who are appointed jointly by the Secretary of State
for Scotland, the Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries and the Secretary of State for the
Home Department. The Board is financed in part by Government grants.
1 Since January 1953, local authorities have been free to borrow on the open market if they wish.
56
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The White Fish Authority (see p. 154) is responsible for developing and regulating the
white fish industry in Great Britain. It consists of five members appointed jointly by the
Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries, the Secretary of State for Scotland and the Minister
of Food.
Maintenance and Improvement of Standards of Skill and Quality
Organizations set up or supported by the Government to encourage the maintenance
and improvement of skill and quality in industry and of professional standards include
the following bodies.
The Council of Industrial Design consists of 22 members, including a chairman appointed
by the President of the Board of Trade. The purpose of the Council is to promote by all
practicable means the improvement of design in the products of British industry.
The Air Registration Board, set up in February 1937 under the Air Navigation Act,
1936, consists of about 18 members, of whom some are appointed by the Minister of
Transport and Civil Aviation and others represent the interests concerned with civil avia¬
tion (operators, constructors and insurers). The Board is responsible for certain functions
in connection with the design, construction and maintenance of civil aircraft and for
advising the Minister on these matters.
The British Standards Institution, a voluntary non-profit-making body constituted in
1901 and incorporated by Royal Charter, is the national organization for the promulga¬
tion of standard methods of testing, codes of practice, terms, definitions, symbols and
specifications, mainly in the engineering field but also increasingly for consumer goods.
It is governed by a General Council consisting of representatives of the main organizations
of employers and workpeople, the professional institutions and the larger Government
Departments, and it receives a Government grant.
Encouragement of the Arts
Government interest in the arts in the United Kingdom is expressed mainly through
the provision of grants to such bodies as the Arts Council.
The Arts Council of Great Britain (see pp. 277-9) was established under a Royal Charter
in 1946. It consists of not more than 16 honorary members appointed by the Chancellor
of the Exchequer in consultation with the Minister of Education and the Secretary of
State for Scotland. Its main duties are to increase the accessibility of the fine arts to the
public, to improve the standard of execution of the fine arts, and to advise and co-operate
with Government Departments, local authorities and other bodies on any matter con¬
nected directly or indirectly with these objects.
Oversea Cultural Relations
The British Council (see pp. 273-4, 277 and 280) exists to promote overseas a wider
knowledge of the United Kingdom and the Enghsh language and to develop closer
cultural relations with other countries. It was founded in 1934 and was granted a Royal
Charter in 1940. Nine of the 30 members of its Executive Committee are nominated by
Government Departments; it is financed almost entirely from public funds, mainly
through the Foreign Office. In the Commonwealth, it acts directly as the agent of the
Commonwealth Relations Office and the Colonial Office. It is usually designated as the
Government’s principal instrument for the implementation of cultural conventions to
which the United Kingdom is a party.
In about 60 oversea countries, the Council maintains centres which foster Enghsh
studies and provide regular information on British life and thought. Through libraries
and exhibitions of books, by means of documentary films, and by lectures given by the
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION ^7
local staffs or by distinguished experts sent abroad on short tours, and in a variety of other
In the United Kingdom itself, the Council arranges study programmes for scholars and
teachers from overseas, and other professional visitors, /also provides a wide range
of services for students from overseas, particularly those from the Colonies, who are study¬
ing in United Kmgdom universities and other educational institutions. 7
LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Local government has been defined as government by elected local bodies charged
with administrative and executive duties in matters concerning the inhabitants of a
particular district or place and vested with powers to make byelaws for their guidance.
overnment on a local basis has been part of the administrative system of the United
Kingdom for many centuries. It has existed in England continuously since Saxon times
In its present shape, however, it dates back only to the later nineteenth century when the
recognition g^rnment by popularly elected councils received statuto^
The first 40 years of the present century witnessed a sharp increase in, and expansion of
environmental and social services, and a corresponding increase in the responsibilities of
de™1v2hT 1 ?°n WhJm t lC greater Patt °f the managcment of these services
devolved. Legislation passed m the post-war period has made some further changes- on
the one hand the powers of local authorities relating to the provision of hospitals eas
and e ectncity supplies, and (in England and Wales) valuation for rating purposes have
been transferred to national boards or to Government Departments, while on the other
loca! authorities (mainly the councils of counties and county boroughs in England and
Wales and of counties and large burghs in Scotland) have been charged with certain addi¬
tional or new responsibilities m connection with the health services, care of children, town
and country plannmg, care of the aged and a number of other welfare services.
Recent changes have not affected the structure of local government, nor its importance
as part of the administrative system as a whole. In the United Kingdom, it remains as an
essential Imk between the individual and the central Departments of State.
Relations between Central and Local Government
As the supreme authority in the United Kingdom, Parliament controls local authorities
by prescribing and defimng policies which elected local councils are required to implement
by specific Acts. The scope of local government is limited by the same means; no council
may go beyond the boundary fixed for its activities by an Act of Parliament.
Legislation is supported by Departmental supervision; Parliament makes certain
ministers responsible for securmg the efficient functioning of local government services.
epartmental supervision is exercised by means of inspections, inquiries, examinations of
statistics, authorization of loiins, the issue of advisory circulars and statutory Rules and
Orders, the approval of byelaws, and the administration of Government grants.
Principal Types of Local Authority
For purposes of local government, England and Wales and Northern Ireland are divided
into county boroughs and administrative counties. Administrative counties are further
divided into three types of county district: municipal or non-county boroughs; urban
districts; and rural districts, which are themselves subdivided into parishes (except in
Northern Ireland). Each of these divisions is administered by a different kind of local
council, as follows: ■
58
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
England and Wales Northern Ireland
county councils (61) county councils (6)
county borough councils (83) county borough councils (2)
non-county borough councils (309) non-county borough councils and
urban district councils (571) municipal town councils (9)
rural district councils (475) urban district councils (24)
parish councils (about 7,300) or town commissioners (3)
parish meetings (about 3,800) rural district councils (32)
There are, in addition, the local authorities for London, which are unlike those in the
rest of the United Kingdom. They are:
the London County Council
the Corporation of the City of London
the Metropolitan Borough Councils (28)
Scotland
The local authorities in Scotland are:
county councils (33, of which two pairs are combined for certain purposes)
town councils (197, which are the authorities for counties of cities (4), other large
burghs (20), and small burghs (173))
district councils (199, two counties are not divided into districts).
Functions and Services
It is the primary duty of every local authority to provide and administer such environ¬
mental and social services as it may be required to provide and administer by an Act of
Parliament. It may provide additional services under the permissive powers of a general
Act or under powers granted to it by Private Bill legislation.
The responsibilities of local authorities depend upon the type of council. For example,
county borough councils are all-purpose authorities, while the county councils and county
district councils, i.e. the non-county boroughs and the urban and rural districts in England
and Wales and Northern Ireland, each have particular functions allotted to them, which
they exercise independently to a considerable extent, although there is a certain degree of
delegation from county councils to county district councils especially in the fields of
education and planning. In Scotland, the town councils of the counties of cities are all¬
purpose authorities. The town councils of large burghs are responsible for all services,
except education and in a few cases police, which are administered by the county council,
which also provides important services in the small burghs. The town councils of small
burghs are responsible for housing and certain other functions. Outside the burghs the
county council exercises most of the local government functions; a few of these functions
are vested in district councils.
The services provided by the councils may be considered under three heads:
1. Environmental Services, which are services designed to secure and improve the citi¬
zens’ surroundings. The majority are public health and sanitary services administered by
the county district or parish councils (in London by the metropolitan borough councils
and in Scotland by the county and town councils). There are also the services for street
lighting, pubhc safety on the highways, the provision of amenities such as parks and
recreation grounds, which are generally administered by the same authorities. The impor¬
tant work of town and country planning is done in England and Wales by the county and
county borough councils, except where it is delegated to county district councils, and in
Scotland by county councils and the town councils of large burghs. County borough
councils, as all-purpose authorities, provide and administer their own environmental
services.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
59
2. Protective Services, which include the fire service, the police service and the civil
defence service. Except in London, these services are administered by the county councils
and the county borough councils in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, or by joint
boards of these authorities if neighbouring councils amalgamate; and in Scotland by the
county councils and the town councils of large burghs or by joint boards. In London, the
City Corporation has jurisdiction over the police force within its area, while the Com¬
missioners of Pohce, responsible directly to the Home Secretary and appointed by him,
control the Metropolitan Police Force (see p. 70). The fire service in London is adminis¬
tered by the London County Council, and civil defence partly by the county council and
partly by the metropolitan boroughs and by the City Corporation.
3. Personal Services, which are services designed to ‘cultivate the best physical, mental,
and moral potentialities of each individual’. The type of authority concerned depends on
the nature of the services, which range from maternity and child welfare, education, care
of children and housing to the provision of entertainments. Services under this heading
also include certain other health services, services for the aged and infirm, and the pro¬
vision and upkeep of libraries, museums and art galleries.
There are also some trading services, e.g., civic restaurants, but these are now less wide¬
spread than during the war, as some of them, e.g., electricity and gas, have been handed
over to national boards (see p. 52).
Local Authority Elections
Local government elections are held at statutory intervals according to local election
rules.1
Any person is entitled to vote at a local government election, provided that he or she
is a British subject of 21 years or over or a citizen of the Irish Republic, is not serving
a prison sentence, is not certified insane, is resident in the area for which the election is
being held or has a non-resident qualification therein.2 A register containing the names
of all electors is prepared and published yearly by registration officers, who, in England
and Wales, are usually the clerks of the council, and in Scotland are the local lands valua¬
tion assessors.
Voting takes place at polling stations arranged by the council concerned, under the
supervision of a returning officer specially appointed for the purpose. Every elector is
expected to cast his vote in person, although members of the armed forces may vote by
proxy and (except in rural district or parish council elections) voting by post, or in certain
cases by proxy, may be allowed if it is impossible for the voter to attend. No elector may
give more than one vote for one candidate, nor may he give more votes in all than the
total number of councillors to be elected.
Candidates for election stand either as Independents or as representatives of one of the
national or local political parties. Each candidate must be nominated by two electors, as
proposer and seconder; and in England and Wales, except in the case of an election for
metropolitan boroughs, eight other electors for the area must assent to the nomination;
in Scotland, county and district council candidates require no assenters, town council
candidates only five. Eligibility for nomination as a candidate depends in the first place
upon registration as a local government elector for the area, and thereafter upon a number
of statutory qualifications and disqualifications designed to secure that the candidate is a
suitable person for the office.
In parliamentary elections, the contest is between several candidates for one seat, hi
1MainIy concerned with the machinery for elections, e.g., equipment of polling booths, sealing of
ballot boxes, and keeping order at voting centres.
2A person is deemed to have a non-resident qualification in an electoral area in England and Wales
if he is occupying as owner or tenant (in Scotland if he owns or occupies as tenant) any rateable land
or premises therein of the yearly value of not less than ten pounds,
6o
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
local government elections there are usually a good many seats to be filled, and nearly all
county and non-county boroughs and metropoh'tan boroughs in England and Wales and
many burghs in Scotland are divided into wards, the number of councillors elected for
each ward varying between three and nine. The areas of all the other authorities, except
county councils, may be so divided or they may be left as single units depending on their
size. County elections are based on single-member constituencies formed by groups of
parishes or by divisions regulated by the Home Secretary and the Secretary of State for
Scotland in their respective countries. The London County Council is organized in two-
member constituencies, which are the same as the parliamentary constituencies in its area.
Internal Organization of Local Authorities
Local authorities are free to a very considerable extent to make their own internal
arrangements and to choose the means and methods by which they will discharge their
responsibilities. The arrangements made by most councils are briefly as follows: questions
of policy and principle are decided by the whole council, which appoints committees to
carry out the detailed administration of its various services. The more important of the
committees of the larger authorities divide their work among sub-committees, which
stand to the parent committee in more or less the same relation as do the main committees
to the whole council. The execution of the policy decided upon by the council and the
committees rests with salaried officers and employees, whose number may vary between
about half a dozen in the case of a small rural district to several thousand in the large
counties and in the larger county boroughs.
Apart from one or two minor provisions regarding the representation of specialists on
committees and the length of time certain members may hold office, committees of
councils are remarkably free from legal restrictions; even those known as ‘statutory’
committees are constituted according to individual requirements and not according to
any set pattern laid down. For purposes of classification, however, they may be divided
into two kinds: ordinary committees and joint committees. Ordinary committees may
be further divided into statutory committees, the appointment of which is compulsory
under an Act of Parhament; standing committees, which are appointed in accordance
with the Standing Orders of the council on a permanent basis according to the extent of
the council’s business; and special committees, which a council may set up for a limited
period to deal with a particular problem that once solved is unlikely to recur.
Joint Committees or Joint Boards consist of representatives of more than one authority.
They are usually established when local authorities co-operate for services which cannot
be dealt with on purely local lines, e.g., water supply, or sewerage.
Committees of a local authority may be advisory or executive; their powers and duties
are usually laid down in the appointing council’s Standing Orders or, in the case of a
county or large burgh in Scotland, in the council’s administrative scheme. A council is
free to delegate all its powers to committees except its powers in connection with raising
loans, levying rates or issuing precepts, which are legally reserved to the council as a whole.
Every council is empowered to appoint such staff as it deems necessary to carry out
its work. Certain appointments are compulsory, e.g., the Clerk, the Treasurer and the
Medical Officer of Health, the Surveyor and the Sanitary Inspector. Even the smallest
parish council usually employs a clerk. Choice of personnel is left to the individual council.
Officers are normally of three kinds: heads of departments, whose duties are mainly of
an administrative and managerial kind; subordinate officers employed in a professional,
clerical or technical capacity; and manual workers who are employed to do the actual
physical work for which the council is responsible. As a rule, senior staff appointments
are made at the instance of the committee or committees particularly concerned; while
most junior appointments are made by heads of departments, who are also responsible
for engaging the manual labour required. Appointments and engagements are always
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION <5x
made in conformity with a set establishment, and committees are informed of any appoint¬
ments which they have not made themselves.
Rates of pay and conditions of service for local authority staff are within the jurisdiction
of the employing council (except where the proposed salary of an officer requires the
approval of a Government Department, as in the case of the clerk of the county council in
England and Wales). They are based on recommendations made by the Whitley Councils
(see foomote 2,p. 221), of which there are several, including the National Joint Council for
Local Authorities Administrative, Professional, Technical and Clerical Services the
National Joint Industrial Council for Local Authorities’ Non-Trading Services (Manual
or ers), the National Joint Council for County Council Roadmen, and, in Scotland
the Jomt Industrial Councils for Local Authority Services. In England and Wales there
are also two special joint committees, which have made recommendations with regard
to the salaries and conditions of service of town clerks, county district council clerks and
other local authority chief officers.
All local government officers are expected to maintain a high standard of conduct; as
public servants they ‘must not only be honest in fact, but must be beyond the reach of the
suspicion of dishonesty’.
Local Government Finance
Local authorities derive their incomes from Government grants,1 from local rates, from
loans, from trading receipts, rents, fees and other miscellaneous sources.
Government grants are of four main types: percentage grants, which are agreed pro¬
portions of local government expenditure upon certain services approved by Government
Departments, e.g., education, health, fire, police and children’s services; unit grants, which
depend exactly on the service provided; equalization grants, which are contributions to
^ ^ general revenues of the poorer local authorities; and special grants, which are grants
paid from time to time for some particular purpose.
Rates are a form of local taxation paid by the occupiers (and sometimes in Scotland also
by the owners) of land and buildings in a local authority area as contributions to the cost of
local services. They are levied by a poundage on the rateable value of property which, in
an<^ an<^ W;des’ is equivalent (subject to certain deductions) to the yearly rent that a
willing tenant would pay and a willing landlord accept if the tenant paid rates and taxes
and the landlord the cost of insurance and repairs. Valuation is undertaken by the Valua¬
tion Officers of the Inland Revenue; appeals may be made to independent Valuation
Panels. In Scotland the primary basis of valuation is the annual rent payable. Valuation is
carried out by assessors appointed by county councils and the town councils of large
burghs, and appeals lie to a county or burgh Valuation Committee and thereafter to the
Lands Valuation Appeal Court of the Court of Session.
The responsibility for levying and collecting the rates in England and Wales lies with
the councils of county boroughs and county districts; in London, with the City Corpora-
tion and the metropolitan borough councils. County councils finance themselves by
issuing a precept on the county districts (in London the metropolitan borough councils
and the City Corporation) for the sums of money required; while parishes are financed
by 3 special rate for the parish levied by the appropriate rural district councils. Rates in
Scotland are levied by the town councils in burghs and by county councils elsewhere; to
cover their expenditure, district councils issue a requisition each year to the county council;
a town council has to meet an annual requisition from the county council in respect of the
burgh s share of the expenditure on functions administered by the county council through¬
out the county, including the burgh. In Northern Ireland, county councils are responsible
‘Paid in Northern Ireland by the Government of Northern Ireland.
62
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
for making, levying and collecting the rates, except in such parts of the county as fall
within the jurisdiction of the county borough or urban district councils.
Loans may be raised by all types of local authority for items of capital expenditure
which could not well be met out of current revenue. These loans are subject to the appro¬
val of the Government Department responsible for the service for which the capital is
required.1
Internal control of finance is exercised on behalf of the council concerned by a Finance
Committee, whose function is to keep the financial policy of the council under constant
review. External control is carried out by means of an annual audit, which in the case of
all councils in England, Wales and Northern Ireland (except in the case of certain general
accounts in about two-thirds of the borough councils) is operated by district auditors
appointed by the Ministry of Housing and Local Government. Borough councils must
use the services of the district auditor for accounts which relate to education, national
assistance, children, local health services, coast protection, motor tax, rate collection,
police, fire, civil defence and town and country planning, but they may and sometimes
do employ a professional firm of auditors to do other work. In Scotland, all accounts are
audited by a professional auditor appointed by the Secretary of State for Scotland, and
paid by the council.
LAW AND ORDER
The maintenance of public order in the United Kingdom is effected, generally speaking,
by two agencies—the judiciary and the police. Both are concerned in different ways with
the obedience of the citizen to the law.
Law is said to be based on the concepts of order and compulsion. In the legal sense, it
has been defined as any rule which will be enforced by the courts; as it applies to a
country, it is usually understood as the set of rules by which the citizens of that country
will expect to regulate their conduct in relation to their fellow citizens and to the State.
There is no written code of law in the United Kingdom. The question whether a par¬
ticular rule is recognized as part of law is determined by consideration of the authorities,
which may be statutes, statements made by legal writers, or reports of decided cases. If
none of these exist, the judge uses a process of analogy, that is to say, he bases his decision
in a case on its similarity to a previous case in which judgment has already been given.
The sources of law in the United Kingdom are statute law, case law, and common law,
which is law recognized by the courts as binding on some other grounds than express enact¬
ment. Statute law may include a Royal Proclamation, an Act of Parliament, and delegated
or subordinate legislation, such as Statutory Instruments made by Ministers of the Crown
and byelaws made by local authorities. The origins of common law are to be found in
the customs of the realm.
The greater part of statute law applies uniformly in all four countries of the United
Kingdom, although in many fields of legislation there are statutes applying to Scotland
only. The Scottish common law2 also is different from that prevailing in England and
Wales and (as a rule) in Northern Ireland.
The two main branches of the law in the United Kingdom, as in most other countries,
are civil law and criminal law. Civil law has been defined as ‘relating to the maintenance
of private claims and the redress of private wrongs, which may not involve moral guilt’.3
Criminal law deals with offences against the State and their punishment on behalf of the
community.
Tor further information on local government loans see p. 55.
2Ancient differences were perpetuated by the Act for the Union of England and Scotland, 1707,
under which Scotland retained her own system of laws.
^Outlines of Central Government, J. J. Clarke.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
63
The Courts
The courts that apply the law in the United Kingdom are broadly speaking divided
into civil and criminal courts, although, since the distinction is a comparatively modern
one, no hard and fast line can be drawn. Quite a number of civil cases are, in fact, heard
in criminal courts; while occasionally a criminal case may be heard in what is primarily
a civil court.
Civil Courts in England and Wales
The following are among the more important of the civil courts in England and Wales:
The County Courts, which are so arranged that there is no part of the country more
than a reasonable distance from one of them. This kind of court may be regarded as a
‘popular tribunal’; something over a million cases are entered in it every year, although
comparatively few ever reach the stage of trial. County Courts are presided over by a
paid judge, sitting alone.
The general jurisdiction of the County Court covers all common law actions, except
cases (such as hbel) where the personal reputation of the defendant is involved, provided
that the amount claimed does not exceed £200. If the claim is for more than ^jioo, the
defendant may object and apply to have the case referred to the High Court. Cases which
fall under the specific jurisdiction of the County Courts, that is to say cases especially
assigned to this kind of court by statute,1 are tried irrespective of the amount involved.
In addition to the ordinary County Courts, there are still a few local courts, with some¬
what similar jurisdiction. Most of these are survivals from the medieval borough courts,
and many of them have little or no work to do at the present time. Two or three, such as
the Liverpool Court of Passage, the Salford Hundred Court and the Bristol Tolzey Court,
are still comparatively well used.
The Mayor's and City of London Court, which is the County Court for the City of
London, is the amalgamation of two courts, the Mayor’s Court, with a jurisdiction un¬
limited as to amount, and the City of London Court, a court for small cases. It is usually
presided over by a judge appointed by the City of London.
The High Court ofJustice, which forms part of the Supreme Court of Judicature. The
Supreme Court of Judicature largely took its present form in 1873. It is composed of the
High Court and the Court of Appeal.
The High Court sits in three divisions: the Queen’s Bench Division, the Chancery
Division, and the Probate, Divorce and Admiralty Division. These divisions derive from
the old courts of the same names which existed before 1873, and cases are distributed
between them as tradition and convenience dictate.
The Queen’s Bench Division is staffed by the Lord Chief Justice and 22 puisne judges,
i.e. judges without special office of their own.2 These judges are mainly concerned with
ordinary civil actions—debt cases, actions for damages, revenue cases, insurance cases,
commercial cases, etc.; but they also hear criminal cases at Assizes (see p. 65).
The Chancery Division is officially headed by the Lord Chancellor; but most of the
work is done by seven puisne judges who remain in London all the time. The jurisdiction
of the Chancery Division derives from the ancient ‘equity’ system,3 which was fused with
1Such cases may be connected with agricultural holdings, rent restrictions, hire purchase agreements
and other matters governed by statute or ministerial order.
2The Lord Chief Justice, the Lord Chancellor and other superior judges are, for example, not puisne
judges.
3 Equity was introduced into the English legal system to modify the older common law system
during the Middle Ages. Its purpose was to temper justice with mercy, when conscience was opposed
to the rigours of the law. It was used primarily to enforce cases of transactions which give a moral
right, but a right then unknown to common law; and to provide more effectual remedies for existing
law. It was an addendum to the common law, with which it has now been merged.
64
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
ic cominmi law in 1873. The work of the division covers actions for the administration
ot the estates of deceased persons; partnership actions; actions connected with trusts and
matters865' ^ ^ ^ ^ °f infantS’ eStatCS; and comPanY and bankruptcy
The Probate, Divorce and Admiralty Division deals, as its name implies, with juris¬
diction over wills, with Admiralty and shipping cases, and with divorce cases.1
Tlw Courts of Appeal. There are two Courts of Appeal in civil law actions-the Court
Lords^ ’ W11C11S Part 0ft lC SuPreme Court ofJudicature (see p. 63), and the House of
There are several ex-officio members of the Court of Appeal, but its effective head is a
judge called the Master of the Ro Is, who is assisted by eight Lord Justices of Appeal.
Appeals he to the Court of Appeal from the County Courts, the Mayor’s and City of
London Court and the civil side of the High Court. The Court of Appeal generahy sits
in three or four divisions, with three judges to a division.
From the Court of Appeal, a further appeal is possible to the House of Lords, with the
leave of the House of Lords or of the Court of Appeal. Such appeals are usually heard by
°fA?pCj 1,n1°rdl!!ary’ WJ1° are Paid professional judges with peerages for life.
^add^0n’ thf,L<^d Chancellor and any peers who have held ‘high judicial office’ are
entitled to sit The House of Lords is the supreme court of appeal in civil cases in the whole
or the United Kingdom.
Civil Courts in Scotland
The Sheriff Court in its civil capacity corresponds roughly to the County Court in
England and Wales, but it has a wider jurisdiction unlimited by the value of the case
It also has power to try (summarily or by indictment2) all but the most serious crimes and
ottences. The initial work of the court is normally done by a Sheriff-Substitute, against
whose judgment an appeal may be made to the Sheriff2 or directly to the Court of Session.
Peace101 ^ matterS (actlons not exceeding £$ in value) may be tried by Justices of the
The Court of Session is the supreme civil court in Scotland. It was established in is 32 and
consists at present of 14 judges. The Court is divided into two parts—the Inner House
which is mainly an appeal court, and the Outer House, a court of first instance, where’
mter aha all actions for divorce are taken. The Inner House is divided into two Division
of equal status, each consisting of four judges; the First Division being presided over bv
the Lord President, and the Second Division by the Lord Justice Clerk. From the Inner
House, an appeal lies to the House of Lords.
The Scottish Land Court is a special court in Scotland for dealing with certain agricultural
matters. The Court is presided over by a legal chairman, who has the rank and dignity
ot a Judge of the Court of Session. & ^
Criminal Courts in England and Wales
Criminal courts in England and Wales include:
Petty Sessional or Magistrates Courts. Magistrates’ courts are courts of summary juris¬
diction, i.e. courts where accused persons may be tried without a jury. All kinds of minor
offences are tried in this way, although if any offence coming into a magistrates’ court is
' At present, many divorce cases are heard before the Queen’s Bench, and County Court judges as
well as before judges of the Probate, Divorce and Admiralty Division. J S
2An indictment is a formal written accusation. An indictable offence is an offence which requires
such an accusation for its prosecution. “
Sheriffs-Substitute1^01 ^ 12 Sheriffd°ms’ each Provided with a Sheriff and a varying number of
government and administration
65
m “ courTwii!1 a7u*r“ m0ndlS’ ^ ™Y *« to be tried
The less serious indictable offences may also be tried summarily in a magistrates’ court
thodd the accused desire it and in fact a large number of such caL are trfed to L way!
magteatts-coum" ““ ““ ” England and WaleS Were disPosed of ^
The majority of these courts are presided over by two or more unpaid ‘lay’ magistrates
or justices of the peace, who are appointed in each county, and for each borough which
has its own commission of the peace, by the Crown on the recommendation of8,he Srd
Chancellor, who is advised as to counties by the Lord Lieutenant* with the assistance of
c advisory committee, and as to boroughs by separate advisory committees. There are
also a few persons who are authorized by statute to act as justices, by virtue of holding
county co'u’nct e'tc ' e'S" mayOK ^ and b°™Shs’ <>!
In the metropolitan police district of London, the courts are presided over by paid
me ropohtan magistrates, and many of the larger towns also have stipendiary magistrates.
vTl C Tr1? f°r the trialof young offenders are constituted from special panels of
suitably qualified justices appointed by the justices of each county or borough out of their
own number. A juvenile court consists of not more than three justices drawn from the
panel, and must hold its sitting at a different time from those of the ordinary summary
court or preferably in a different room. 7 7
Domestic proceedings are also tried by not more than three justices, of whom one
s ould be a man and one a woman. The hearing of domestic proceedings is separated from
other business and, as in juvenile courts, the public is excluded.
In addition to acting as judges, magistrates are required to conduct prehminary in-
committed foftrial5 C °ffenCeS t0 determine whether or not an accused person should be
Courts of Quarter Session. There are two different kinds of Quarter Session—county
sessions and borough sessions; both are normally held four times a year.
County Quarter Sessions consist of the magistrates of the county assembled together-
generally the chairman of the sessions is a retired judge or has some other legal qualifica¬
tion. In the boroughs which have the right to hold separate Quarter Sessions,2 the courts
are presided over by a Recorder, who is a salaried barrister, as sole judge. Trial by iurv
applies at both borough and county sessions. 7 J 7
The jurisdiction of Quarter Sessions covers the less serious indictable offences- the
courts are debarred from trying any crime that carries the death sentence or detention for
. Afsizes-1 ,ie Courts of Assize are branches of the High Court of Justice. They are held
m the county towns and in certain big cities three times a year, a Queen’s Bench judge or
j Commissioner of Assize, who may be a barrister commissioned to act as a judge, presi-
ding. The Assize judges work on circuits covering England and Wales, and travel from
one county town to another in the course of their duties. They can try any indictable
offence committed m the county.
At the winter and summer Assizes, civil business as well as criminal may be taken, but
except in a few large towns the autumn Assize is confined to criminal cases.
The Central Criminal Court. The Central Criminal Court at the Old Bailey acts as the
Court of Assize for the criminal business of London, Middlesex and parts of the Home
Counties. Thejudges are judges of the Queen’s Bench Division, one of whom (in rotation)
1The office of Lord Lieutenant in the county was first created in the sixteenth
among the county justices and commander of the county militia
2 Traditionally, those boroughs which have their own commission of the peace.
century as chief
66
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
attends each of the monthly sessions of the Court; the Recorder of London; the Common
Serjeant; and a judge of the City of London Court.
Criminal Appeals
Appeals may be made direct from the magistrates’ court to the High Court on a point
of law; but the more usual kind of appeal is the appeal of a convicted person against his
conviction or his sentence. Appeals of this kind from a magistrates’ court are heard in the
counties by the Appeals Committee of Quarter Sessions, consisting of between three and
twelve magistrates, and in the boroughs by the Recorder; in neither case is a jury required.
Appeals in indictable charges first heard at Quarter Sessions or at Assizes go to the
Court of Criminal Appeal, which exists to ensure that no innocent person shall be con¬
victed and to revise unsuitable sentences. Appeals may be made on any point of law, and
also, by leave, on point of fact.
The Court of Criminal Appeal consists of the Lord Chief Justice and any Queen’s
Bench judges; three in session is the usual number.
A further appeal from the Court of Criminal Appeal to the House of Lords on a point
of fact is only possible if such an appeal is in the public interest; an appeal on a point of
law can be made if the Attorney-General grants a certificate affirming that the appeal is
of‘exceptional public importance’. Appeals of this kind are very rare.
Criminal Courts in Scotland
The bulk of the criminal actions in Scotland are heard in the Sheriff Court (see p. 64).
In cases of breach of the peace and other petty offences the justices injustice of the Peace
Courts in the counties and the magistrates in magistrates’ courts in burghs have powers of
jurisdiction. Cases involving serious crime are taken in the High Court ofjusticiary, which
is the supreme criminal court of first instance. It also functions as an appeal court from in¬
ferior criminal courts. It consists of the Lord Justice General (who is also the Lord President
of the Court of Session), the Lord Justice Clerk and twelve Lords Commissioners of
Justiciary who are also judges of the Court of Session. The seat ofthe court is in Edinburgh,
but the judges go on circuit to preside at trials in other towns. Appeals to the High
Court are heard by three or more judges; there is no further appeal to the Houseof Lords.
Courts in Northern Ireland
Both civil and criminal courts in Northern Ireland are similar to those in England and
Wales with some minor modifications to suit a smaller community. The main difference is
that there is no lay magistracy in the country, all petty sessional cases being dealt with by
resident magistrates who correspond to the metropolitan or stipendiary magistrates of
England and Wales. The inferior courts, that is to say the courts where the less serious cases
are tried, are administered by the Parliament of Northern Ireland; the administration of
the superior courts has been reserved to the Parliament of the United Kingdom.
The Coroner s Court
The Coroner’s Court, strictly speaking, is neither a civil nor a criminal court, although
it has some connection with criminal proceedings. The primary function of the coroner is
to hold an inquest whenever a death occurs in his district and the doctor refuses to certify
that the death was from natural causes; various Acts of Parhament lay down the cases in
which a coroner must be informed and in which a jury must be summoned. If the jury at a
coroner’s court returns a verdict of murder or manslaughter against some particular per¬
son, then that person must be committed for trial at Assizes or the Central Criminal
Court. In Scotland, the office of Coroner does not exist. The Procurator Fiscal inquires
privately into all sudden and suspicious deaths in his district and may report the results of
his inquiries to the Crown Agent who considers, with the Crown Counsel, what proceed¬
ings, if any, are required.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
6?
Ecclesiastical Courts
The established Church of England1 has its own ecclesiastical courts, which constitute a
graduated hierarchy. They consist of the Court of the Archdeacon, the Consistory Court
of the Bishop of each diocese and the Provincial Courts of the Archbishops of Canterbury
and of York.
The ecclesiastical courts, which are still courts in the full sense of the word, have juris¬
diction only in matters of purely ecclesiastical concern, such as questions of doctrine and
ritual, ordination, consecration, and the celebration of divine service.
Special Tribunals
A number of special tribunals exist in the United Kingdom for the exercise of what is
known as administrative justice, that is to say for the settlement of disputes or the deter¬
mination of rights in cases where the public interest is the central issue.
Such tribunals are too various to permit of any formal classification, but they include
professional tribunals such as the General Medical Council, the General Council of the
Bar, and the Disciplinary Committee of the Law Society (Solicitors)2; ministerial tri¬
bunals, such as the War Pensions Tribunals, the Lands Tribunals, the Rent Tribunals, and
the Local Appeal Tribunals for Insurance Benefits; and the disciplinary committees of
marketing boards.
Appeals on a point of law in most cases lie from such tribunals either to a single judge of
the High Court or to permanent Commissioners appointed under an Act of Parliament or
to the appropriate minister.
Military Courts
The jurisdiction of military courts or courts-martial is exclusively over persons subject
to military law. The powers of the courts are limited to those conferred on them by statute,
and if these powers are exceeded, the person injured has his remedy in the High Court.
The Judiciary
The judiciary of the United Kingdom is independent. That is to say, it is free to ad¬
minister the law under the protection of the law without fear or favour. All judges, from
those of the House of Lords and the Supreme Courts to the ‘lay’ magistrates or justices of
the peace, must not only be, but must appear to be, completely impartial, for it is of
fundamental importance that justice should not only be done, but should manifestly and
undoubtedly be seen to be done’.
The courts of the United Kingdom are the Queen’s Courts in that ‘all jurisdiction of the
courts is either indirectly or immediately derived from the Crown’;3 but since the end of
the seventeenth century, it has been unlawful for the Sovereign to disturb or delay the
course of common justice, to attempt to force the judges to act otherwise than impartially,
or to use the prerogative powers of the Crown to create courts to administer any other
system of law but common law.
The understanding of the doctrine of the separation of powers4 prevalent in the United
1The established Church of Scotland is the Presbyterian Church with only a limited connection
with the State. Its supreme legislative and judicial body is the General Assembly. A Lord High Com¬
missioner appointed by the Crown is present at the meetings of the General Assembly to represent the
connection between the State and the Church.
2The Law Society is a body incorporated by Royal Charter with the right to make rules to regulate
the professional practice, conduct and discipline of soheitors.
3Blackstone’s Commentaries.
4In the United Kingdom the doctrine of the separation of powers is understood to mean three
things: (a) that the same persons should not form part of more than one of the three organs of Govern¬
ment; (b) that one organ of Government should not control or interfere with the exercise of its
functions by another organ; and (c) that one organ of Government should not exercise the functions
of another. In many continental constitutions, the adoption of this doctrine has meant an unhampered
executive; in the United Kingdom it has meant little more than an independent judiciary.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
68
«
Kingdom has likewise estabHshed the independence of the judiciary vis-a-vis the executive.
Thus, although the Act of Settlement, 1701, laid down that the judges of the superior
courts should be appointed by the Crown to hold office during good behaviour subject to
a power of removal by the Sovereign on an address by both Houses of Parhament,1 it may
be stated with confidence that no such address would ever be moved to interfere with
judicial independence. By the same token, although no court in the United Kingdom
would ever question the validity of an Act of Parhament which had been duly passed by
both Houses of Parliament and duly promulgated and published by the proper authority,
it might, through its interpretation of the statute, come to a decision contrary to the policy
of the Government which introduced the Act. In such a case, it would be open to the
Government to persuade Parliament to clarify or amend the statute, or even to pass a new
Act to reverse the decision of the court. It would not be open to it to penalize the judge or
to try to influence the court in any other way.
Administration of the Judicial System
There is no Minister of Justice in the United Kingdom. The responsibility for the
administration of the judicial system in England and Wales lies partly with the Lord
Chancellor and partly with the Home Secretary.
Crown appointments to the High Court bench and County Court judgeships are made
on the recommendation of the Lord Chancellor, who is also responsible for recommend¬
ing to the Crown the appointment or removal of justices of the peace,2 Recorders of
boroughs and metropohtan and stipendiary magistrates. The administrative business of the
Supreme Court of Judicature and the appointment of court officials is partly in the hands
of the Lord Chancellor and partly in the hands of the appropriate judges. The Lord
Chancellor is a member of the Rules Committee which makes the rules of the Supreme
Court3; he also appoints the County Court Rules Committee and has power to alter or to
disallow the rules made by it. In addition, responsibility for initiating proposals for law
reform, save in the field of criminal law, hes with the Lord Chancellor, who is advised in
this matter by the Law Reform Committee estabhshed in 1952.
The Home Secretary is responsible for confirming appointments of clerks to justices
throughout England and Wales; and for the general administration of magistrates’ courts,
except in relation to their judicial functions in which they can be controlled only by the
Queen’s Bench Division of the High Court. In carrying out his duties, the Home Secretary
is responsible for securing as much uniformity as possible in magistrates’ courts by means
of advisory circulars in regard to such matters as sentences, the collection of fines, and
(occasionally) in regard to the interpretation of statutes and regulations.
In Scotland, power of submission for appointment of judges lies with the Secretary of
State for Scotland on the nomination of the Lord Advocate. Powers of appointment of
justices of the peace rest with the Lord Chancellor. The High Court of Justiciary and the
Court of Session are administered by the Clerk of the Justiciary and his staff and the Prin¬
cipal Clerk of Session and his staff respectively.
1Such an address must always be started in the House of Commons. In Scotland judges of the Court
of Session are appointed for life and cannot be removed except on grounds of misconduct. Sheriffs-
Substitute may be removed by the Secretary of State for Scotland on order by the Lord President and
the Lord Justice Clerk; an order for the removal of a Sheriff would have to lie before both Houses of
Parliament for a period.
2Except in Lancashire, where they are nominated by the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster.
3In its Second Interim Report (March 1951, Cmd. 8176), the Committee on Supreme Court Prac¬
tice and Procedure set up in 1947 (primarily to make recommendations for the purpose of reducing
the cost of litigation and securing greater efficiency and expedition in the dispatch of business) pro¬
posed the establishment of a Rules and Administration Committee, whose duty would be to keep
under constant review the Rules of the Supreme Court and the working of the Law Courts in their
bearing upon procedure. The final Report of the Committee on Supreme Court Practice and Pro¬
cedure, Cmd. 8878, was published in July 1953.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
69
The Legal Profession
The legal profession of England and Wales is strictly divided into two classes of lawyers
—barristers and solicitors. The distinction is due mainly to historical causes, and is practi¬
cally unknown in other countries, except in Scotland where the cleavage between advo¬
cates and solicitors is also complete.
No hard and fast line can be drawn between the work of the solicitor and the work of
the barrister, since there are many barristers who do little advocacy, and there are solicitors
who do little else, and who have made considerable reputations for themselves in the
courts in which they are permitted to appear. In general, however, it may be said that
solicitors are professional men who undertake legal business for lay clients; while barristers
advise on legal problems submitted through solicitors and conduct legal proceedings in
the higher courts.
A barrister is required to have reached an accepted educational standard, to have passed
the legal examinations conducted by the Council of Legal Education and to have become
a member of one of the four Inns of Court—Gray’s Inn, Lincoln’s Inn, the Middle Temple
and the Inner Temple. After ten years as a junior counsel, a barrister may apply to the
Lord Chancellor for a patent appointing him Queen’s Counsel—a proceeding that is known
as ‘taking silk’. The highest appointments in the legal profession, including those of
Attorney-General, Solicitor-General, and other law officers of the Crown, are usually
open only to barristers who have become Queen’s Counsel.
The professional conduct of a barrister throughout his career is subject to the scrutiny of
the General Council of the Bar.
The prospective solicitor must be considered suitable by the appropriate Committee of
the Law Society and enter into ‘Articles of Clerkship’ with a practising solicitor of not less
than five years’ standing before he can begin his professional career. The term of articles
lasts for three or five years, depending upon the educational qualifications of the student.
An articled clerk must pass the necessary examinations held by the Law Society, and, un¬
less he has been a barrister or is a law graduate of a university, he is generally required to
attend a course of studies at a recognized law school. Once a soheitor is qualified, he be¬
comes an officer of the Supreme Court of Judicature. He may also become a member of
the Law Society.
In Scotland, the conditions for admission as, and the standing of, advocates and solici¬
tors are much the same as those applying in the case of barristers and soheitors in England
and Wales.
Legal Aid
Schemes for free legal assistance to persons of slender means and resources were intro¬
duced in some courts, and to a limited extent, during the early years of the present century.
Changing conditions have brought about modifications and extensions to the original
schemes; and the latest revision was made in 1949, when the Legal Aid and Advice Act
and the Legal Aid and Solicitors (Scotland) Act received Royal Assent. These Acts were
introduced to improve and extend the existing arrangements in civil proceedings so that
no one would be financially unable to prosecute a just and reasonable claim or to defend
a legal right, and to make the facilities already available in criminal proceedings more
easily accessible to those who need them. The Acts also provided that solicitors and
barristers acting for persons receiving legal aid should no longer be required to act
gratuitously, but should be remunerated for their services from public funds.
When the system set up under the terms of the Acts comes fully into operation, aid will
be available for both civil and criminal cases in all courts, to plaintiff and defendant alike.
Legal Aid in Civil Cases
Legal aid in civil cases is now available to persons whose income, computed in accor¬
dance with rules applied by the National Assistance Board, does not exceed ^420 a year,
yo
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and whose capital, as so computed, does not exceed ^500. Where an assisted person can
afford to make a contribution to the costs of his case, he is liable to pay an amount which
is settled with due regard to his financial resources.
In England and Wales, legal aid in civil cases is at present limited to proceedings started
in the High Court or in the Court of Appeal.1 The scheme is operated through the Law
Society under the general guidance of the Lord Chancellor. The cost is met from a Legal
Aid Fund, drawn from three sources: contributions and fees from assisted persons; costs
recovered from opposite parties in litigation; and a grant from the Exchequer.
For the purposes of the scheme, England and Wales is divided into twelve areas. In each
of these an area committee, consisting of fifteen solicitors and barristers, is responsible for
the scheme’s initial organization and subsequent administration. Local committees are res¬
ponsible for setting up legal aid centres to which anyone seeking legal aid may apply. Com¬
mittees hear the facts, and if they consider that there is a prima facie case they give it their
support. The person who wishes to bring the action is then allowed to select from a panel
a solicitor and, if necessary, a barrister, who conducts the case in the normal way. To avoid
overloading the courts, certain types of action, including breach of promise, and libel and
slander, are excluded from the scheme.
hi Scotland the Legal Aid Scheme is administered by the Law Society of Scotland
through a Central Supervisory Committee, a Supreme Court Committee and twenty-one
local committees. Legal aid is at present available for civil proceedings in die Court of Ses¬
sion and the Sheriff Courts. An applicant for legal aid in Scotland is required to show a
‘probable cause’ and produce in support of his application a statement corroborated
according to the requirements of Scottish law.
Legal Aid in Criminal Courts
Free legal aid is already available in the criminal courts in England and Wales under the
Criminal Appeal Act, 1907, the Poor Prisoner’s Defence Act, 1930, and the Summary of
Jurisdiction (Appeals) Act, 1933. The Legal Aid and Advice Act, 1949, makes certain pro¬
cedural changes in the system and provides for the transfer of the financial responsibility
for paying for free legal aid from local to central funds.
Pending the full implementation of the Legal Aid and Sohcitors (Scotland) Act, legal
aid in criminal cases is afforded to poor persons in Scotland under the Poors Roll system,
which is administered on a voluntary basis by the legal profession.
The Police Service
The police service of Great Britain is organized and controlled on a local basis under the
guidance of those Ministers of the Crown who are statutorily responsible for the mainten¬
ance of law and order in their respective countries. In England and Wales the responsible
Minister is the Home Secretary; in Scotland, the Secretary of State for Scotland. In Nor¬
thern Ireland the police force (see p. 73) is controlled by an Inspector-General who is res¬
ponsible to Northern Ireland’s Minister of Home Affairs.
Police Forces
There are 126 separate, independent police forces in England and Wales, defined accord¬
ing to area of responsibility as county forces, borough forces, combined forces (which are
forces whose area of responsibility extends over neighbouring counties or boroughs), the
Metropolitan Police Force (which is responsible for the county of London, the county of
Middlesex, parts of adjoining counties and three county boroughs) and the City of
London force. In Scotland there are 33 forces, including county forces, burgh forces and
combined forces.
Eventually the scheme will cover representation in courts of all types, from magistrates courts
up to the House of Lords,
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
71
In England and Wales and Scotland a police force varies in size according to the area
which it serves. Thus the Metropolitan Police Force has an establishment of nearly 20,000,
while the smallest county in Scotland has a police force numbering fifteen.
Police Authorities
Pohce authorities are appointed for each poUce force in England and Wales and Scot¬
land. In the counties of England and Wales the police authority is the Standing Joint Com¬
mittee, half of whose members are members of the county council while the other half are
justices of the peace in Quarter Sessions. In the boroughs the pohce authority is known as
the Watch Committee and is composed of a proportion of the members of the council.
The pohce authority of a combined force is made up of representatives of the constituent
areas as prescribed in the scheme under which they combine.
In the Metropohtan pohce district the Home Secretary acts as both pohce and central
authority. In the City of London the Common Council is the police authority, although
it usually appoints a standing committee to deal with all pohce matters on its behalf.
In Scotland the pohce authority for the counties is the county or joint county council; in
the large burghs it is the town council; where there are combined forces there is a joint
pohce committee.
It is the statutory duty of the pohce authorities to establish and maintain efficient pohce
forces for their areas. They are also responsible for the appointment of the chief officer of
pohce in their areas, subject to the approval of the Home Secretary in the provinces of
England and Wales, to the approval of the Crown in the City of London, and to the
approval of the Secretary of State for Scotland in Scotland. In the Metropohtan pohce
district the chief officer of pohce and his immediate subordinates are appointed by the
Crown on the recommendation of the Home Secretary.
Central Authority
Co-ordination and a certain measure of central control are exercised through
detailed pohce regulations which are issued for their respective countries by the Home
Secretary and the Secretary of State for Scotland, who are required by the Police Act,
1919, ‘to act in consultation one with another’ in this connection. The pohce regulations
cover the ‘government, mutual aid, pay, allowances, pensions, clothing, expenses and con¬
ditions of service’1 of the members of all pohce forces to which the Act apphes.
The ministers are assisted in their supervisory responsibihties by Her Majesty’s Inspectors
of Constabulary, who inspect each force, except the Metropohtan Pohce Force, at least
once a year. There are at present four inspectors in England and Wales and one in Scotland.
Central control also derives from the fact that ah pohce authorities receive a Govern¬
ment grant equal to half their net expenditure reckoned in accordance with the provisions
of Orders made under the Miscehaneous Financial Provisions Act, 1950 (as regards
England and Wales), and the Pohce (Scotland) Act, 1946 (as regards Scodand). These
Orders empower the Home Secretary and Secretary of State for Scotland to withhold
the grant in whole or in part, permanently or for such time as they may determine,
if they are not satisfied that a pohce area is efficiently policed, that a force is properly main¬
tained and administered, or that the rates of pay or allowances are as prescribed or approved
by them.
Centrally Run Services
During recent years the Home Office has estabhshed a number of common services to
supplement those provided by the pohce authorities for their own use. In England and
Wales such services include a forensic science service which provides laboratories for the
1The Secretaries of State are advised on questions relating to the conditions of service of the pohce
by the Pohce Council of Great Britain, a negotiating body estabhshed on Whitley Council lines in
September 1953.
72
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
use of regional groups of forces, the supply on a rental basis of all wireless equipment for
the police, and a training service which provides a number of residential district training
centres and a central police college. In Scotland there is a central police college, which
provides training courses for recruits and courses of higher training; but there is no cen¬
trally run forensic science service,1 and the provision and maintenance of wireless equip¬
ment is a direct charge upon the police authorities concerned.
In addition to the common services, a number of national services2 are provided by
the Metropolitan Police Force, whose functions in this respect include: (a) the maintenance
of the Criminal Record Office, which is a national registry of crimes and their perpetrators
containing a Central Fingerprint Bureau, available to all police forces of the United King¬
dom and certain foreign forces; (b) the publication of the Police Gazette,3 which contains
particulars of people wanted for crime, stolen property, etc., and is supphed without
charge to the police forces of the United Kingdom and to certain Commonwealth and
foreign forces; (c) the organization and control of the Special Branch of the Criminal
Investigation Department at New Scotland Yard,4 whose duties include the protection of
Royalty, Ministers of the Crown and distinguished foreign visitors; and (d) the carrying
out of extradition orders made by the courts.
Police Officers
There are several different kinds of police officer in Great Britain: regular police officers
who usually serve for 25 years or more and thereafter retire on pension; members of the
first police reserve, which is composed almost entirely of police pensioners or men with
previous police experience who are prepared to give whole-time paid service to a par¬
ticular force in an emergency, whether national or local; members of the Special Con¬
stabulary, which consists of volunteers who perform short periods of duty without pay
in their spare time from their normal occupations; the police of certain public services,
e.g., the railway police, the River Tyne police, the Manchester Docks police, and the
pohce of the Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation, who, although not subject to the
supervision of the Home Secretary or the Secretary of State for Scotland, are constables
with duties and powers analogous to those of ordinary constables but limited to the
premises and immediate neighbourhoods of their employers; the police of the defence
services, i.e. the War Department Constabulary, which guards War Office lands and
military property, the Royal Marine Police, who are employed chiefly in dockyards, and
the Royal Air Force Police for Royal Air Force establishments.
Entry into the regular pohce force in Great Britain is open to men between the ages of
19 and 30,5 and, in England and Wales, to women between the ages of 20 and 35, and 20
and 30 in Scotland. The standard police ranks in Great Britain, except in the Metropolitan
police district, are: chief constable, superintendent, inspector, sergeant and police con¬
stable. The following intermediate ranks may also be adopted where the field of opera¬
tions renders them necessary: assistant chief constable, chief superintendent, chief inspector
and, in England and Wales only, subdivisional inspector, station sergeant and acting ser¬
geant. In the Metropolitan police district the chief officer is the Commissioner of Pohce of
the Metropolis. He is assisted by a Deputy Commissioner and four Assistant Commission¬
ers. Next in rank are commanders, then deputy commanders; thereafter the ranks are the
1In Scotland the universities of Aberdeen, Edinburgh, Glasgow and St. Andrews render assistance
when called upon. In addition, the Glasgow pohce force operates an extensive laboratory, the service
of which is available to the whole of the Scottish police.
Tor these services the Metropolitan Police Force receives an additional Exchequer grant.
3 A Scottish Police Gazette is published by the City of Glasgow Police Force.
4The Metropolitan Pohce Force is not the only force with a Criminal Investigation Department; all
provincial forces have their own Criminal Investigation Departments.
5Ex-regular Navy, Army and Royal Air Force men over 30 years of age are also eligible.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION 73
same as in the rest of the country. In the City of London the ranks are the same as in the
provinces except that the chief officer is called the Commissioner of Pohce and the second
in command is an Assistant Commissioner.
Police Duties
Every pohce officer in Great Britain is an independent holder of a public office. His
powers as a constable, whether conferred by statute or by common law, are exercised by
him by virtue of his office and cannot be exercised on the responsibility of any person but
himself. Thus, unless acting in pursuance of a magistrate’s warrant, a police officer is liable
for any wrongful or mistaken action on his part, even if in committing such an action he
was obeymg the orders of the police authority; for he is not the servant of the police
authority and in discharging his duties must rely on his own discretion and his own know¬
ledge of the law.
The mamfold functions of a pohce officer as a constable range from road or street
patrolling and traffic control to arresting persons committing offences or (in certain cases)
under suspicion of acting in an unlawful way. In England and Wales (although not in
Scotland where the pohce investigate cases and report to the prosecutor) the police,
through the police authority’s Prosecuting Solicitor’s Department, are responsible for
initiating, and in most cases conducting, prosecutions.1
In addition to their duties as constables, police officers are sometimes appointed, usually
by the local authority, to be inspectors under an Act of Parhament; as such their duties
may mclude the inspection of weights and measures, diseases of animals, food and drugs
explosives and shops. & ’
The Royal Ulster Constabulary
The general control of the Royal Ulster Constabulary, winch is a State Force, is vested
in an Inspector-General, who is responsible to the Minister of Home Affairs. The cost of
the force is met from the Northern Ireland Exchequer, the County Borough of Belfast
contributing a token sum of .£25,000 annually towards the cost of policing the Citv of
Belfast. J
The present strength of the Royal Ulster Constabulary is approximately 2,900 officers
and men. Conditions of service and pay follow closely on the lines of the police service
in Great Britain, the general duties pertaining to the ranks being similar in all respects.
In addition to the Royal Ulster Constabulary, there exists in Northern Ireland an
auxiliary pohce force called the Ulster Special Constabulary, which is also under the
general control and direction of the Inspector-General. In the main, this force is a part-
time force and its duties cover training and assistance to the regular force on special occa¬
sions. If necessary, however, its part-time personnel may be mobilized for full-time duty
and its duties extended to cover ordinary police duties. The present strength of the Special
Constabulary is approximately 10,000 officers and men.
Treatment of Offenders
It is a basic principle of the English legal system that the prosecution must prove the
guilt of an accused person, no matter what the charge or where the trial, and that such a
person must be presumed innocent until his guilt has been proved.
The underlying objectives of the penal system, to which a person who has been proved
guilty becomes subject, are deterrence and reformation. It is held that the deterrent effect
of the system lies less in the punitive treatment of the detected offender than in its total
action fear of detection, public trial and conviction and the possibility of punishment,
Bixcept for prosecutions which must be dealt with by the Director of Public Prosecutions; these are:
(a) if the offence is punishable by death; (b) when an offence is referred to him by a Government
Department, subject to his discretion; and (c) in any case which appears to the Director ‘to be of
importance or difficulty or which for any reason requires his intervention’.
F
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
74
whether by imprisonment or otherwise, and that the aim in imprisonment as well as in
other forms of treatment should be to concentrate as far as possible on the social rehabili¬
tation of the offender rather than on merely punitive measures.
Various types of penalties, however, may be imposed according to the law and having
regard to all the circumstances of the offence and the offender. The offences of murder and
treason are punishable by death. It is the long established practice for the Home Secretary
to review every capital case before the law is allowed to take its course and to consider
whether there are grounds for advising the Crown to exercise the Prerogative of Mercy.
Where a respite is recommended, the sentence of death is commuted to one of imprison¬
ment for life. The death sentence may not in any case be passed upon a person under the
age of eighteen, upon a pregnant woman, or upon anyone who is found to be legally
insane.
Administrative Authorities
In England and Wales,1 general responsibility for all institutions for the treatment of
offenders is vested in the Home Secretary. His statutory powers and duties in this con¬
nection include the making of rules for the governance of such institutions, the nomina¬
tion of the Prison Commissioners, and the appointment of Boards of Visitors.
In the discharge of his duties relating to institutions for offenders, the Home Secretary is
advised by an Advisory Council on the Treatment of Offenders, which also acts as the
National Working Group for the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations,
and as the National Committee of the International Penal and Penitentiary Commission.
Responsibility to the Home Secretary for the administration and inspection of prisons,
Borstal Institutions and detention centres in England and Wales lies with the Prison Com¬
mission and an appropriate professional and technical staff. The Prison Commission con¬
sists of not more than five Commissioners, who are appointed by the Crown, including
the chairman, who is appointed to that office by the Home Secretary. There are also a
number of Assistant Commissioners who are inspectors under the Prison Acts.
The oversight of each of these institutions is the responsibility of either Visiting Com¬
mittees appointed by the justices for those prisons to which convicted persons are com¬
mitted direct from their courts, or Boards of Visitors appointed by the Home Secretary
for the other prisons and institutions. The main functions of the committees and boards
are: to act as the superior disciplinary authority of the prison or institution; to constitute
an independent judicial body to which any prisoner or inmate may take a complaint or
request; and to report direct to the Home Secretary, both by formal annual report and as
occasion may require, on every aspect of the administration of the prison. In Borstal
Institutions and preventive detention prisons, the boards also advise the Prison Com¬
missioners on the release of the inmates on licence.
Prisons
The superior staff in each institution, i.e. governors, chaplains and medical officers, are
appointed by the Home Secretary; the subordinate ranks which constitute the main body
of the staff are appointed by the Prison Commissioners.
Full-time prison officers of all ranks, except chaplains, are permanent civil servants. At
the end of December 1952 prison staff of all grades numbered nearly 4,000. About 8 per
cent of this number were women.
There are various types of prison in England and Wales, e.g., general local prisons;
special local prisons which may be open prisons, prisons for selected prisoners, etc.; cor¬
rective training prisons to which offenders of 21 years of age or over may be sentenced if
1The prison systems of Scotland and Northern Ireland are the responsibility of the Secretary of
State for Scotland and of the Minister for Home Affairs respectively, and are administered by the
Home Departments in Edinburgh and in Belfast.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
75
their criminal antecedents show that they are no longer novices in crime and are in the
way of becoming professional criminals; and training prisons to which prisoners may be
sent if they have sentences long enough to enable a definite course of training to be under¬
taken, and if they seem likely to co-operate in and profit by the training.
Classification of Prisoners
Every person committed to prison is first received in the local prison serving the
court from which he is committed. Subsequently, he may either serve his whole sentence
at the local prison or he may be sent to another institution, depending on his age, the
length and nature of his sentence, and his personal history and character.
The object of classification is first to ensure the separation of the sexes, of young persons
from adults, of untried prisoners from convicted prisoners and of civil prisoners from
criminal prisoners; secondly to prevent contamination, among convicted prisoners, of the
better by the worse; and thirdly to provide training appropriate to their needs for those
among convicted prisoners who seem likely to benefit therefrom.
Training
The main elements of prison training have been defined as (i) the provision of work
which will, so far as is practicable, help to fit prisoners to earn their living after release, with
technical training in skilled trades for suitable persons, (2) the provision of suitable educa¬
tional facihties, and (3) the provision of every opportunity for the development of a
sense of personal responsibility including (for suitable persons) training in open conditions.
Full training can only be given in prisons set aside for the purpose, which provide voca¬
tional training courses, based on a Ministry of Labour and National Service syllabus, at
which prisoners may receive a theoretical and practical training in a number of skilled
trades. The principles on which training is based, however, hold good for all prisons and
are applied as far as individual conditions permit.
Employment
Prison industries are organized under the control of a Director of Industries, who has a
head office staff of technical officers and supervisors, including a supervisor of farms and
gardens, and industrial managers at the prisons.
Except in training prisons, where the hours are longer, prisoners spend at present about
25 hours a week in the workshops or in other employment such as building, farm work,
domestic work and gardening.
All prisoners are entitled to earn a limited amount from the first week of their sentence;
these amounts may be increased for satisfactory output after a specified lapse of time.
Education
Educational schemes are provided in prisons by the local education authorities with
the support of the Ministry of Education and under the organizational control of the
Director of Education in the Prison Commission. Evening Institutes have also been es¬
tablished, each under its own organizer and with some 50 or more classes during the week.
In addition, a wide range of correspondence courses is made available for those who have
a serious desire to improve their education and qualifications.
Educational schemes are supplemented by periodical lectures, film displays, concerts,
and dramatic performances. Prisoners may use the prison library, which in most cases is
now under the management of the county, city or borough library committee; in certain
cases they may also have books sent in to them by friends.
Welfare
A chaplain of the Church of England and a Roman Cathohc priest are appointed to
every prison. Ministers of the Methodist Church and of other denominations are either ap-
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
?6
pointed or specially called in as required. The chaplain is generally responsible for welfare
in the prison to which he is appointed. Regular services are held, and chaplains and other
ministers may visit prisoners in their cells. Prisoners may also be visited by their relatives
and friends at specified intervals and by recognized prison visitors asked to serve in this field
by the Prison Commissioners. The voluntary work of these visitors is co-ordinated and
guided by the National Association of Prison Visitors.
Remission of Sentence
On reception, all prisoners are credited with remission of one-third of their sentence,
provided that this does not reduce their sentence below one month. In addition, at succes¬
sive stages of a prisoner’s sentence, he becomes entitled to additional privileges; for ex¬
ample, he is allowed to have some of his personal belongings in his cell.
The Governor or the Visiting Committee or the Board of Visitors have power to order
forfeiture of privileges for breaches of disciphne.
After-Care of Prisoners
Prisoners from local prisons are assisted on discharge by Discharged Prisoners’ Aid
Societies, which are local and voluntary bodies supported partly by private and partly by
public funds. The work of the local societies is co-ordinated by the National Association
of Discharged Prisoners’ Aid Societies, which depends on a grant from public funds for its
administrative expenses. For persons discharged from other prisons and from Borstal In¬
stitutions, after-care is in the hands of the Central After-Care Association, which is under
the management of a voluntary council appointed by the Home Secretary.
The Association works through local associates, usually Probation Officers, who, since
the passing of the Criminal Justice Act, have added after-care to their other duties. These
officers make all arrangements for the reception of the prisoner after his discharge, and will
advise, assist and befriend him for as long as is necessary or required by statute.
Institutions for Young Offenders
The Criminal Justice Act of 1948 provided that no court can impose imprisonment on
a person under twenty-one years of age unless it is of opinion that no other method of
dealing with him is appropriate. The following different types of institutions are available
where institutional treatment is considered necessary:
Remand Homes, which are provided by local authorities for the safe custody of boys and
girls before or during their appearance at court, for short periods of punitive detention or
while the court makes inquiries about the best method of treating a young offender. There
are facilities for observation, and valuable reports can be provided as a result of the short
stay in a remand home.
Borstal Institutions, which have been established to provide suitable training for adoles¬
cents in conditions other than those of a prison. There are 17 institutions for boys and 3
for girls. The period of the sentence is in effect four years, the first part being nine months’
to three years’ training in a Borstal Institution, and the second a period of controlled free¬
dom under supervision. The system of training seeks the all-round development of charac¬
ter and capacities, and is based on progressive trust demanding increasing personal de¬
cision, responsibility and self-control. There is much freedom of movement and most
Borstals are conducted in open conditions. An initial period of classification ensures that
each boy or girl is sent to the institution best suited to his or her character and requirements.
Approved Schools, of which there are 130 in England and Wales, classified according to
age and sex, provide residential education and training for young offenders and children
in need of care or protection which cannot be given in their home surroundings. In general,
the education follows the lines of that given in ordinary schools, with vocational training
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION 77
after-care ^ girls' The emP}iasis is on character training and on the provision of
Two new forms of treatment have been introduced on an experimental basis:
Attendance Centres which young offenders must attend during their spare time to be
provided with suitable occupation, the prime object being education in the proper use of
leisure. The scheme is so far in operation only in a few towns and for boys between n
and 10 years or age.
Detention Centres, where offenders over 14 and under 21 years of age may be detained
for short periods, usually of three months, under discipline suitable to their age and char¬
acter. The regime is designed as a ‘short sharp shock’ for those who need to be taught that
the law cannot be defied with impunity. The first centre, for boys of 14 to 17 years of age
is now in operation. ' 3 ’
Probation
The probation system is designed to secure the rehabilitation of an offender while he
remams at work or at school in the community under the supervision of a probation
officer, whose duty it is to advise, assist and befriend him. A cardinal feature of the system
is that it relies on the co-operation of the offender. Before making a probation order the
court must explain its effects to the offender and inform him that if he fails to comply
with its requirements he will be liable to be dealt with for the original offence. Unless an
offender is under 14 years of age, his consent to the making of a probation order must be
given. The order usually requires the probationer (who must keep in regular touch with
the probation officer) to be of good conduct. It may also give instructions as to where an
offender must live (for a period not exceeding twelve months) if his normal surroundings
are unsatisfactory, and, if desirable, it may prescribe mental treatment. The duration of
a probation order must be for not less than one year and not more than three years
There are approximately 1,100 probation officers in England and Wales. Training
facilities are provided by the Probation Advisory and Training Board appointed by the
Home Secretarv. rr ;
III. DEFENCE
THE DEFENCE SYSTEM
Organization
Britain’s defence policy is the responsibility of the Minister of Defence, who, under the
general direction of the Cabinet, of which he is a member, is answerable for the ‘formula¬
tion and general application of a unified policy relating to the armed forces of the Crown
as a whole and their requirements’.
The higher direction of each of the three fighting Services is on similar lines. Supreme
control is in the hands of Parliament, which makes annual financial provision for defence^
needs. By limiting provision to the current year. Parliament ensures an annual review of
the state of each Service. It is then that the Minister must present his Estimates, expound
his plans and defend his actions.
The Minister of Defence answers for all matters common to the three Services and their
supply, and for general policy. Each of the three Service ministers, the First Lord of the
Admiralty, the Secretary of State for War (who deals with the Army), and the Secretary
of State for Air, is responsible to Parliament for the administration of his own Service;
each is assisted by a junior minister or ministers and by the permanent civil servant at the
head of his Department. The Chiefs of Staff Committee, which comprises the professional
heads of the three Services, is responsible for preparing and advising upon strategic plans
and policy and for submitting them direct to the Cabinet.
In addition to his co-ordinating functions as outlined above, the Minister of Defence
also has ministerial responsibility for certain inter-Service organizations such as Amphibious
Warfare Headquarters, the Joint Intelligence Bureau and the Imperial Defence College.
Co-operation between the fighting Services is illustrated in the system of staff training
for officers of the Navy, Army and Air Force. After about 10 years’ service, they are sent
to separate staff colleges at Greenwich, Camberley and Andover respectively, where they
learn the elements of staff work. At a later stage in their careers some of them go to the
Joint Services Staff College at Chesham, where they live and work together and where
particular attention is paid to the specialist inter-Service aspects of staff work. This College
caters for about a hundred students a year from the Navy, Army and Air Force, the Civil
Service and the Commonwealth. Finally, there is the Imperial Defence College, which
caters for a few specially selected senior officers from the Services, the Civil Service and
the Commonwealth.
Policy and Finance
For the purpose of deterring aggression, Britain, acting in consultation with other
members of the Commonwealth and with her allies in the North Atlantic Treaty Organi¬
zation, has embarked on a programme for building up her armed forces, which aims at
increasing both manpower and supplies of armaments and equipment. To achieve these
objects, the period of full-time National Service1 has been increased from 18 months to
two years, and defence production has been greatly expanded. .
When this programme was announced by the then Prime Minister, Mr. Attlee, in
January 1951, it was estimated that its cost would be ^4>700 niillion over the next three
1The National Service Act, 1948, which became operative on 1st January 1949, imposes a liability
on every male British subject ordinarily resident in Great Britain (subject to specified exceptions) who
has attained the age of 18 but has not attained the age of 26 years for a period of whole-time service
in the regular forces and a term of part-time service in an auxiliary force (see p. 79).
78
DEFENCE
79
years. The programme has been subject to periodical reviews in the light of changing con¬
ditions, and in 1952 it was announced by Mr. (now Sir Winston) Churchill that, in order
to keep it within the limits of national economic strength, some modifications had been
made and rearmament would be spread over a longer period. Because of the rise in prices,
the total cost was likely to be substantially higher than at first estimated. Technical pro¬
gress in some forms of production, especially aircraft, would make it possible for the
Government to curtail to some extent earlier plans while pressing forward with newer and
more advanced types. These modifications will enable Britain to increase the export of
war materials to the Commonwealth, to members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organi¬
zation and to other friendly countries.
Notwithstanding these adjustments to the programme, a further very substantial con¬
tribution is being made in 1953-54 towards the modernization, re-equipment and ex¬
pansion of the Services; defence expenditure is at a level unknown before in peace time and
has approximately doubled since 1950-51.
The estimated expenditure for I953~54 (excluding certain expenditure on defence pre¬
parations under Civil Votes) is ^1,636-76 million, becoming -£1,496-76 million after
allowing for ‘sterling counterpart’ of defence aid provided in dollars by the United States
under the Mutual Security Programme. This compares with a total estimated expenditure
in 1952-53 of ,£1,513 ‘5 million (including supplementary estimates), or -£1,428-5 million
after allowing for United States aid. The allocation between the various Services for the
two years is shown in Table 3.
TABLE 3
NET ESTIMATES
j£ million
1952-53
including
supple¬
mentary
estimate
1952-53
after
allowing for
counterpart
1953-54
1953-54
after
allowing for
counterpart
Admiralty
War Office
Air Ministry
Ministry of Supply
Ministry of Defence
Total ..
360-3
556-5
467-6
111-8
17-3
335-3
526-5
437-6
111-8
17-3
364-50
581-00
548-00
123-75
19-51
329-50
526-00
498-00
123-75
19-51
1,513-5
1,428-5
1,636-76
1,496-76
The Ministry of Defence estimate includes a contribution of ^£13-5 million to be made
by the United Kingdom during 1953-54 to the NATO infrastructure programmes.
Strength
Each of the three Services—Royal Navy, Army and Royal Air Force—is made up of
a substantial nucleus of regulars in addition to men called up under the National Service
Acts. Each has a supporting force of reserve and auxiliary forces. Fit male British subjects
between the ages of 18 and 26 must (with certain limited exceptions) serve for two years
in one of the armed forces. After this period of full-time service they must serve for a
period of three and a half years with the Territorial Army or other appropriate reserve,
giving in all five and a half years of whole-time and part-time service. During the latter
period National Service men may be called upon to undergo 60 days’ training.
8o
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Table 4 shows the strength of the various Services on 30thjune 1953:
TABLE 4
United Kingdom
Royal
Navy*
Army
RAF
Total
Regular strength (male)
National Service
Women (including nurses)
131,200
6,800
5,100
207,500
227,600
9,200
191,200
77,000
10,000
529,900
311,400
24,300
Total
143,100
444,200
278,200
865,600
Volunteer Reserve and Auxiliary
Forces and National Service
Reserves
24,800
345,100
121,400
491,300
Combined total
167,900
789,300
399,600
1,356,900
including Royal Marines.
Note: Figures are rounded to the nearest hundred and so do not necessarily add up exactly.
Besides these trained reserves there are large numbers of men with war-time experience
who would be liable, if fit, to recall in case of emergency.
Supply
Production for the Services is carried out to a great extent by private industry on a con¬
tract basis, but also by the Royal Ordnance factories, which are operated by the Ministry
of Supply. At the beginning of the second world war three of these factories were in
operation; at its peak there were 44. The Ministry of Supply’s research establishments
carry out research on behalf of all three Services and naval research is also conducted by
the Admiralty. The practice, introduced in 1952, of according ‘super-priority* to certain
essential types of new equipment, especially aircraft, has done much to ensure that pro¬
duction is not held up for lack of raw materials or components.
Guided Missiles
Britain has developed guided rockets which can travel at well over 2,000 miles an hour,
can rise to heights far greater than can be reached by bombers, and can out-manceuvre any
piloted aircraft.
In addition to missiles fired from the ground or from ships, an advanced stage has been
reached in the development of guided missiles to be launched from fighter aircraft. The
initial development of these rocket weapons takes place in Britain; full-scale trials are
carried out, in collaboration with the Australian Government, on the Woomera testing
range in the South Austrahan desert.
Atomic Weapon Tests
The first test of a British atomic bomb took place successfully on the Monte Bello
Islands on 3rd October 1952 under the scientific direction of Dr. W. G. (now Sir William)
Penney of the Ministry of Supply and with the collaboration of the Austrahan Govern¬
ment. A further series of atomic weapon trials took place in October 1953 at the
Woomera range.
DEFENCE
Si
THE ROYAL NAVY
The Royal Navy is governed by the Board of Admiralty. The First Lord of the
Admiralty is the minister responsible to Parliament for the Navy. The other ten members
of the Board are the Parliamentary and Financial Secretary; the Civil Lord; the Permanent
Secretary, who is a civil servant and responsible for the general conduct of Admiralty
business; the First Sea Lord and Chief of Naval Staff; the Second Sea Lord and Chief of
Personnel, the Third Sea Lord and Controller of the Navy, responsible for engineering,
equipment, ordnance, and research; the Fourth Sea Lord and Chief of Supplies and Trans¬
port; the Fifth Sea Lord and Deputy Chief of Naval Staff (Air), responsible for air matters;
the Vice-Chief of Naval Staff, responsible for operations, intelligence and plans; and the
Deputy Chief of Naval Staff, responsible for special subjects.
Strength
The strength of the Fleet, excluding attendant ships and numerous small craft, consisted
in 1953 of some 550 vessels, falling into the various categories of battleships, fleet and light
fleet carriers, cruisers, destroyers, frigates, monitors, submarines, minesweepers and fast
minelayers. These are divided between the active fleets, those employed on training and
experimental purposes, and those in varying categories of reserve. The emphasis of the
naval production programme continues to be placed on the building up of the mine¬
sweeping and anti-submarine force and the completion of aircraft carriers.
Construction and Conversion
Work is continuing in 1953-54 on one fleet carrier and on six light fleet carriers, includ¬
ing one each for Canada and Australia. Three light carriers should be completed in 1954.
Of the Daring class destroyers, now known as Darings, four in the spring of 1953 had
joined the Fleet, one was about to do so and the remaining three were nearing completion.
Thirteen frigates are in course of construction. These are of four different types: two for
anti-submarine work, a third for anti-aircraft and a fourth for aircraft direction. The first
of this fourth type, HMS Salisbury, was launched in June 1953 • The first anti-submarine
frigate, HMS Dundas, was launched in September 1953.
By April 1953 as many as 47 of the new coastal minesweepers had been laid down and
17 of them launched; 4 8 of the smaller inshore minesweepers had been laid down and 20
launched. Further vessels of both types are expected to be laid down in 1953-54.
Two experimental fast patrol boats are now in service and most of the seaward defence
boats and fast patrol boats on order should be completed in 1953-54.
Modernization is being carried out on one fleet carrier, one light fleet carrier and one
cruiser. Seven destroyers have been converted to anti-submarine frigates and a number of
others are nearing completion.
A number of submarines have been modernized and this process continues.
Research and Development
There has been steady progress in investigations designed to provide adequate defence
against various types of mines, against modern submarines of high underwater speed and
endurance, and against aircraft. Anti-submarine weapons, both shipbome and airborne,
far more effective than anything known during the 1939-45 war, are becoming available,
and arrangements have been made (e.g., by the introduction of the new steam catapult and
the angled flight deck) to enable heavier and faster types of naval aircraft to be handled
in, and operated from, carriers.
The efficiency of the propulsive machinery of ships and submarines has been greatly im¬
proved from the point of view of generating more power for a given weight both of
plant and of fuel. The Admiralty is confident that the work now in hand on propulsion
82
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
machinery will lead to marked advances and that improved machinery of steam, internal
combustion and gas turbine types will be available during the next few years.
Satisfactory progress is being maintained in naval contributions to the development of
guided missiles and in electronic valve research.
The Fleet Air Arm
The Navy’s first jet fighter, the Attacker, has been in squadron service in the fleet carrier
Eagle since 1952. One squadron of Sea Hawk interceptor fighters was formed in March
1953 and further Sea Hawk squadrons will follow during 1953-54- The first squadron of
the turbo-prop Wyvern, the Navy’s new ‘strike’ aircraft, was formed in April 1953, and
first deliveries of the Sea Venom all-weather jet fighter are expected at the end of the year.
Considerable progress has been made in the modernization of naval air stations and in
the improvement of radio aids to provide for the operation of new types of aircraft.
Production of the anti-submarine aircraft, the Gannet, has been given super-priority. A
new type of anti-submarine aircraft, the Sea Mew, has been developed for operation from
light escort carriers.
All the aircraft carriers in the active Fleet have now been equipped with helicopters for
search and rescue duties.
Stations
The Navy’s commands in home waters are Portsmouth, Devonport, Chatham, Rosyth
in Scotland, and the Commander-in-Chief Home Fleet. Abroad there is the Mediterranean
Station with headquarters in Malta and with Gibraltar as a secondary base. This station
covers the Red Sea (but not Aden) as well as the Mediterranean. The East Indies Station
is practically co-extensive with the Indian Ocean. By agreement with Ceylon, the Navy
has a base and dockyard facilities at Trincomalee which are maintained by the United
Kingdom. The Far East Station, formerly known as the China Station, extends to the
east of Singapore. Hong Kong remains the operational base but the headquarters have
now been moved to Singapore. British naval aid to United Nations action in Korea was
based on this station. Largest in area of the stations is the America and West Indies Station,
with headquarters at Bermuda. From this station ships operate in both the North and
South Atlantic and in the Eastern Pacific, except where the Royal Canadian Navy
operates from Halifax and Esquimalt (Vancouver Island). By agreement with the Union
of South Africa the headquarters of the South Atlantic Station are at Simonstown, near
Cape Town. The navies of other Commonwealth nations operate in their respective areas
from their home bases, the use of which may be made available to the Royal Navy at the
discretion of their Governments.
The main Fleet bases at Portsmouth, Devonport, Chatham, Malta, Trincomalee,
Simonstown and Singapore are also dockyards for the Navy. Rosyth, Gibraltar and
Hong Kong are dockyards with major repair facilities. There are also a number of naval
air stations at home and abroad.
Royal Marines
The Corps of Royal Marines is a body of trained men for service on sea or land. Its
official existence dates from 1664. The present-day functions of the Corps are:
1. To supply detachments for HM ships, which (a) man a proportion of the ships’
armament, (b) provide emergency landing parties, (c) carry out guard duties and
the like.
2. To act as Commando units.
3. To provide crews for minor landing craft and certain other parties required for
amphibious assault.
DEFENCE
83
Women’s Royal Naval Service
The WRNS is now a permanent and integral part of the Naval Service. It has its own
disciplinary code. The estimated average strength in 1953-54 is 4,600.
Auxiliary Forces
Royal Fleet Reserve
The RFR consists of men who have taken their discharge from the regular service and
who, either voluntarily or as part of their contract, join this reserve for a minimum period
of five years. During 1953-54 maximum strength is estimated at 20,000.
Royal Naval Reserve
The RNR (officers and men of the Merchant Navy) reopened its ranks again in
February 1950 for volunteers to serve in the Royal Navy in war. The qualification for
service in the RNR is that the candidate should be following the sea as a profession. The
estimated active strength in 1953-54 is about 4,000, with a reserve of men who served in
the last war.
Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve
The RNVR (officers and men who voluntarily train in peace time) is organized in
12 divisions which provide training for general naval service. There are also ten RNVR
Air Squadrons. The Royal Naval Volunteer (Wireless) Reserve consists of specialist
officers, wireless operators and radio electricians. During 1953-54 provision is made for a
maximum RNVR strength of 12,250.
Royal Marines Forces Volunteer Reserve and Women s Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve
The RMFVR and WRNVR are the Royal Marines’ and WRNS’s counterparts to the
RNVR.
General Reserves
Behind these fully trained reserves, available to meet immediate needs on mobilization,
is the vast background of officers and men with past war-time and peace-time service in
the Royal Navy now either in retirement or in civil occupations.
All those still fit for service are liable to recall on the outbreak of war and, after refresher
training where necessary, would help to provide the additional trained manpower re¬
quired to meet the war-time expansion of the Navy as a whole.
Royal Naval Minewatching Service
The RNMWS, a voluntary civilian organization formed in January 1952, is responsible
in time of war for manning posts around the coast and overlooking the main navigable
waterways. Its object will be to spot mines dropped from aircraft, and to plot and report
their positions. In March 1953 some 4,000 applications to join had been received.
Sea Cadet Corps
The Sea Cadet Corps is the oldest pre-Service movement for boys in the country, its
origin dating from the time of the Crimean War in the mid-nineteenth century. As an
organization it was sponsored in 1899 by the Navy League (the objects of which are the
promotion of a strong Navy and instruction in the history and traditions of the sea). The
aim of the Sea Cadet Corps is to give technical training to, and instil naval tradition in,
boys who intend to serve in the Royal and Merchant Navies and also to those sea-minded
boys who do not intend to follow a sea career but will, given this knowledge, form a
valuable reserve for the Navy. It also aims to provide for the social and educational wel¬
fare of the cadets and to develop character and good citizenship. The estimated strength in
1953-54 is about 1,800 cadet officers and 22,000 cadets.
84
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
THE ARMY
The control of the Army is vested in the Army Council, of which the Secretary of
State for War is president. The other civilian members of the Council are: (i) the
Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State of War and Financial Secretary of the War
Office, who performs parliamentary duties, and (2) the Permanent Under-Secretary of
State for War, a civil servant who acts as secretary to the Council. The military members
of the Army Council comprise the Chief of the Imperial General Staff, who is responsible
for strategic policy and plans, operation, intelligence and training, and is also a member
of the Chiefs of Staff Committee (see p. 78); the Vice-Chief of the Imperial General
Staff; the Deputy Chief of the General Staff, responsible for war organization, equipment
and weapons; the Adjutant-General to the Forces, responsible for manpower, personnel,
discipline, medical services, welfare, education and the women’s services; and the Quarter¬
master-General to the Forces, responsible for supphes, transport, and works services.
Strength
The effective strength of the active Army in the spring of 1953 was the equivalent of 111
divisions. Of these, some 80 per cent were serving overseas.
Equipment
Adequate supplies of Centurion tanks for the active Army are available and issues are
now being made to the Territorial Army for their training. A new experimental tank,
the Caernarvon, has been developed, with heavier armour and more powerful drive than
the Centurion, to which it will be complementary. A new scout car and a new armoured
wheel personnel carrier came into full production during 1953 and issues to the forces
have begun.
Much progress has been made on the rearmament of the infantry, especially in the pro¬
duction of anti-tank weapons. A complete ‘family’ of new weapons is being manufactured
and issued to infantry units. It includes: an anti-tank grenade of great destructive capacity
projected from the standard service rifle; a light, short-ranged rocket-launcher; and a new
recoil-less anti-tank gun. Considerable progress has been made in the design and produc¬
tion of new guided weapons, bridging, body armour and radiac instruments.
Organization of the Regular Army
The Army is organized in twenty-five corps or arms, which include the Royal
Armoured Corps (the historic Cavalry Regiments—Dragoons, Hussars, Lancers—and
the Royal Tank Regiment), Artillery, Engineers, Signals, Infantry, and various other
corps such as the Royal Army Service Corps, the Royal Army Ordnance Corps, the
Royal Army Medical Corps, etc. The Infantry has been reorganized since 1946 in the
following groups:
1. The Grenadier Guards, The Coldstream Guards, The Scots Guards, The Irish
Guards, The Welsh Guards.
2. The Royal Scots, The Royal Scots Fusihers, The King’s Own Scottish Borderers,
The Cameronians.
3. The Queen’s Royal Regiment, The Buffs, The Royal Fusihers, The East Surrey
Regiment, The Royal Sussex Regiment, The Queen’s Own Royal West Kent
Regiment, The Middlesex Regiment.
4. The King’s Own Royal Regiment, The King’s Regiment, The Lancashire
Fusiliers, The East Lancashire Regiment, The Border Regiment, The South
Lancashire Regiment, The Loyal Regiment, The Manchester Regiment.
DEFENCE
85
5. The Royal Northumberland Fusiliers, The West Yorkshire Regiment, The East
Yorkshire Regiment, The Green Howards, The Duke of Wellington’s Regiment,
The York and Lancaster Regiment.
6. The Royal Warwickshire Regiment, The Royal Lincolnshire Regiment, The
Royal Leicestershire Regiment, The Sherwood Foresters.
7. The Royal Norfolk Regiment, The Suffolk Regiment, The Bedfordshire and
Hertfordshire Regiment, The Essex Regiment, The Northamptonshire Regiment.
8. The Devonshire Regiment, The Gloucestershire Regiment, The Royal Hamp¬
shire Regiment, The Dorset Regiment, The Royal Berkshire Regiment, The
Wiltshire Regiment.
9. The Somerset Light Infantry, The Duke of Cornwall’s Light Infantry, The
Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry, The King’s Own Yorkshire
Light Infantry, The King’s Shropshire Light Infantry, The Durham Light Infantry.
10. The Cheshire Regiment, The Worcestershire Regiment, The South Staffordshire
Regiment, The North Staffordshire Regiment.
11. The Royal Welch Fusihers, The South Wales Borderers, The Welch Regiment.
12. The Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers, The Royal Ulster Rifles, The Royal Irish
Fusiliers.
13. The Black Watch, The Highland Light Infantry, The Seaforth Highlanders, The
Gordon Highlanders, The Cameron Highlanders, The Argyll and Sutherland
Highlanders.
14. The King’s Royal Rifle Corps, The Rifle Brigade.
Women’s Royal Army Corps
The WRAC, which has replaced the ATS, is a corps in the Regular Army, the officers
and other ranks of which are, with minor exceptions and modifications, subject to the
Army Act and Queen’s Regulations to the same extent as members of any other corps.
Queen Alexandra’s Royal Army Nursing Corps
The QARANC, which has replaced the QAIMNS, is a corps of the Regular Army
and provides the nursing services within the Army. It numbers about 2,000.
Territorial Army
The Territorial Army was reconstituted in 1947 and now forms part of the national
Army. Its role on the outbreak of war would be:
(1) to provide the great bulk of the anti-aircraft and coast defences of the country
and the reinforcements in those arms required at ports and airfields overseas;
(2) to provide, with the active army, a field force wherever required;
(3) to support the civil defence organization in its task of minimizing the effects of
enemy air attack.
From the outbreak of war the Regular and Territorial Armies would be integrated.
In the United Kingdom the combined resources of Regular and Territorial units would
be used together to meet initial operational requirements and to provide the framework
of subsequent expansion.
The Territorial Army is to be brought up to the equivalent of 12 TA divisions, which
should be able to take the field after a short period of formation training, following
mobilization. The TA consists of armoured, infantry and airborne divisions, certain inde¬
pendent brigades, a large proportion of anti-aircraft and coastal artillery units, together
86
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
with Corps and Army troops and administrative units. Its backbone is the volunteer, but
from October 1950 an increasing proportion of its strength has been National Service
men doing their compulsory term of three and a half years’ part-time service in its ranks.
The strength of the Territorial Army in March 1953 was 209,000 men.
Army Emergency Reserve
The object of the Army Emergency Reserve is, broadly, to provide the technical and
administrative units needed to form the essential backing to the fighting formations of
the Regular Army and of the Territorial Army immediately on mobilization. The Army
Emergency Reserve is not part of the Territorial Army but an essential complement to
it. In structure its units are similar to those of the Territorial Army in that they consist
of basic elements of volunteers to provide the senior officers and NCOs, completed
ultimately with National Service men during their part-time service; but the units are
raised on a trade or ‘skill’ basis and not territorially.
Army Cadet Force
The ACF was founded 90 years ago. Its objects are pre-Service training and the en¬
couragement of club life, games, etc. In the 1953-54 Estimates provision is made for about
6,230 officers and 123,800 cadets (of whom about half are in the Combined Cadet Force).
The Home Guard
The Home Guard, instituted during the second world war, was re-established on a
voluntary and limited basis by the Home Guard Act, 1951-
The tasks of the Home Guard in war time would be to guard vulnerable points, parti¬
cularly key factories and airfields, and to assist the civil defence organization in the event
of heavy air attack.
The force is open to men between 18 and 65, unless they are members of the Regular
forces, or of certain reserves, or of the Territorial Army. Women are eligible for service
as clerks and telephonists. Service is for two years and may be extended for one year at a
time. Service is part-time in times of peace, but members of the Home Guard are required
to give whole-time service in the United Kingdom if the unit to which they belong
is mustered to repel an invasion. There is no pay, but allowances are made to cover sub¬
sistence, disablement, travelling, etc., at a flat rate irrespective of rank. When on duty and
mustered, members of the Home Guard will be subject to military law, but no member
would be tried under military law for an offence which could come within the civil code.
The Home Guard was started as the Local Defence Volunteers in 194° and was after¬
wards named the Home Guard on the suggestion of the then Prime Minister, Mr.
Churchill. In the course of the war the organization reached a strength of over if milhon.
It held its ‘stand-down’ parade in December 1944-
THE ROYAL AIR FORCE
The Royal Air Force is administered by the Air Council (a body similar in organization
to the Army Council), of which the Secretary of State for Air is president. The Council
also has five permanent and three additional members. Of these, the Parliamentary
Under-Secretary of State for Air acts as vice-president of the Air Council and performs
parliamentary duties; and the Permanent Under-Secretary of State for Air, who is a
civil servant, acts as secretary of the Air Council. The military members of the Council
include the Chief of the Air Staff, who is responsible for strategic policy and the fighting
efficiency of the RAF and is also a member of the Chiefs of Staff Committee; the Vice-
Chief of the Air Staff, responsible for inter-Service policy, operations, intelligence, haison
with other air forces, standardization and ground defence; the Deputy Chief of the Air
DEFENCE
87
Staff, responsible for the preparedness for war of the RAF, for command, staff and air
training, and for policy regarding future aircraft and weapons; the Air Member for Per¬
sonnel; the Air Member for Supply and Organization; and the Controller of Supplies
(Air) of the Ministry of Supply.
Equipment
In 1952 the Government decided to concentrate on the production of the most advanced
types of aircraft and equipment for the RAF and to reduce purchases of those less ad¬
vanced. The seven aircraft types to which super-priority has been accorded are: the
Hunter, Swift and Javelin (jet fighters), and the Canberra, Valiant, Vulcan and Victor (iet
bombers).
During 1952 additional operational aircraft were brought into service in Commands at
home and overseas, and the number of flying hours was one-third greater than during the
previous year.
Both day and night fighter forces in Fighter Command will continue to expand
throughout 1953-54- During the year the first British-built swept-wing day fighters will
be introduced. The first type in operational service will be the Swift, and all preparations
have now been completed to bring it into squadrons as aircraft become available. Hunter
squadrons will follow. Fighter Command is being further re-equipped with F86 Sabres
with airframes provided by Canada and engines and equipment supplied by the United
States under the Mutual Security programme.
In Bomber Command more squadrons of Canberra twin-jet tactical bombers have been
formed and the expansion of the Canberra bomber force will be gready accelerated during
1953-54- Photographic reconnaissance squadrons are being re-equipped with Canberra
aircraft.
For longer-range strategic bombing three large four-jet types are being developed. The
Valiant, it is hoped, will come into service in 1954. Two new prototypes of exceptionally
advanced design, the delta-wing Vulcan and the crescent-wing Victor, have shown out¬
standing performance during trials, and orders have been placed for both.
A powerful new jet engine, the de Havilland Gyron, is being developed, primarily for
supersonic fighter aircraft.
Commands
The Royal Air Force is organized into Commands administered by the Air Council:
At Home. Bomber, Fighter, Coastal, Transport, Flying Training, Technical Train¬
ing, Maintenance and Home (formerly known as Reserve) Commands.
Overseas. Second Tactical Air Force (Germany), the Middle East Air Force (head¬
quarters at Ismailia, Canal Zone of Egypt) and the Far East Air Force
(headquarters at Changi, Singapore).
Commands are subdivided into groups and wings, a certain number of squadrons being
allotted to each group or wing. Squadrons are subdivided into flights.
Women’s Royal Air Force
Women play an important part in the work not only of the Royal Air Force but of its
reserve and auxiliary formations. The WRAP is a permanent and integral part of the
Royal Air Force and its members train with and work alongside airmen in the same trades,
serving not only in the United Kingdom but in Germany, the Middle East and the Far
East. The estimated strength in 1953-54 is 10,150.
Auxiliary and Reserve Forces
The Royal Air Force auxiliary and reserve formations, administered by Home Com¬
mand, are:
S8
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
1. The Royal Auxiliary Air Force, which consists of units raised and maintained by
Territorial and Auxihary Forces Associations. It includes flying squadrons (fighter,
transport, and air observation post), regiment squadrons and fighter control and
radar reporting units. Each trains and operates as a self-contained unit. The esti¬
mated strength in 1953-54 is 9,380.
2. The Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve, which provides a pool of officers, airmen
and airwomen, who, like the personnel of the Auxihary Air Force, train on a
part-time basis, both as individuals and units.
3. The Air Training Corps, open to boys between the ages of 14 and 18, which has
a strength of over 700 squadrons and some 41,000 cadets, and, like the other pre-
Service formations, seeks to inculcate citizenship as well as training for the RAF.
Royal Observer Corps
Nearly 20,000 men and women from all walks of life form the Royal Observer Corps,
a voluntary civilian organization, which is part of Fighter Command, devoted to the
specialized task of identifying and plotting the movements of aircraft. The corps originated
in the first world war to report the movements of German aircraft and Zeppelins over
Great Britain and was officially established in 1925.
CIVIL DEFENCE
Civil defence is a vital and integral part of Britain’s defence plans. Under the Civil De¬
fence Act, 1948, the Secretary of State for the Home Department (in Scotland the Secre¬
tary of State for Scotland) is given wide powers in relation to civil defence which are
applied by Regulations requiring the approval of Parliament. Other ministers may be
designated under the Act to exercise powers with regard to particular subjects, and the
Ministers of Health, Food, Housing and Local Government, and Transport and Civil Avia¬
tion have in this way been designated to deal respectively with such matters as the casualty
services,1 emergency feeding, evacuation,1 and the maintenance of transport services in
war time.
Thus civil defence in the United Kingdom is the responsibility of a number of ministers
each of whom undertakes the duties which, in war time, will represent a natural extension
of his peace-time functions. The Home Secretary is responsible for the civil defence
activities of the pohee and fire services,1 and he administers the Civil Defence Corps as
well as such matters as war-time lighting restrictions, air-raid shelter policy and the civil
air-raid warning system. He has, in addition, the function of co-ordinating the civil de¬
fence work of all Departments. This necessarily involves much interdepartmental work,
and the necessary committee organization for this purpose has been established at both
the ministerial and the official levels. In addition there is a Civil Defence Joint Planning
Staff, under Home Office chairmanship, on which all Departments with civil defence
responsibilities are represented.
As the development of effective civil defence services involves much detailed planning
and organization at local level, the central Government has enlisted the assistance of local
government authorities throughout the country, of industry and of public bodies of
many kinds, including voluntary organizations.
To provide the personnel required in war for civil defence tasks the following forma¬
tions, in which in peace time only part-time service is required, are raised by voluntary
recruitment:
1. The Special Constabulary, to reinforce the pohee forces in all police functions.
2. The Auxihary Fire Service, to reinforce the fire services maintained by local
authorities under the Fire Services Act, 1947.
1In Scotland these matters are the responsibihty of the Secretary of State for Scotland.
DEFENCE
89
3. The Civil Defence Corps, which was created by Royal Warrant in May 1949.
4. The National Hospital Service Reserve, limited at present to trained nurses and
persons willing to be trained as nursing auxiliaries.
The Civil Defence Corps is the only one of these formations called upon to undertake
tasks which have no peace-time equivalent. It is recruited and organized by certain local
authorities (mainly the councils of counties and county boroughs, or large burghs in
Scotland) in local divisions each subdivided into five sections1 as follows:
communications, special reconnaissance, information and adminis¬
tration, and identification of toxic agents.
supplementary air-raid warnings, damage control, movement of
refugees, reconnaissance and reporting, organization of domestic
self-help parties.
rescue work, stretcher-bearing, first aid, and operational debris
clearance.
ambulance driving and first aid.
escort and welfare of homeless and evacuees, billeting, rest centres,
supervision and welfare of public in shelters, emergency cooking
and feeding, mobile kitchens and canteens, replacement of clothing,
veterinary service, public information centres.
With certain restrictions regarding age and service obligations to the armed forces,
recruits for all four formations are drawn from men and women who are willing to serve
as long as they are able and who will undertake to train approximately five hours each
month. They are not paid, but reasonable out-of-pocket expenses are reimbursed.
Strengths in Great Britain at 30th June 1953 were:
Special Constabulary (recruited since November 1949) .. 39,188
Auxihary Fire Service .. .. .. .. .. .. 18,814
Civil Defence Corps .. .. .. .. .. .. 298,294
National Hospital Service Reserve .. .. .. .. 38,974
To provide central training in civil defence three residential technical training schools
are maintained by the Home Office, and persons nominated by local authorities attend to
enable them to qualify as civil defence instructors. First-aid instructors, however, are pro¬
vided in the main by the St. John Ambulance Brigade (in Scotland, St. Andrew’s Ambu¬
lance Association) and the British Red Cross Society.
There is also a Civil Defence Staff College, providing courses for senior officials in all
aspects of civil defence, and, in its grounds, a Tactical School to provide training for
officers who will be in control of operations at or near damaged areas.
In order to find a basis on which central reserves to help local authorities should be
provided, an experimental mobile column, manned by 150 officers and men of the Army
and RAF, was formed in January 1953, and after four months’ training it made a tour of
Britain for exercises widi local authorities. The role foreseen for a mobile column is as a
tactical force of some 600 men and 250 women.
The Civil Estimates for the year 1953-54 provided ^42*3 million to be spent on civil
defence.
Headquarters:
Wardens:
Rescue:2
Ambulance:
Welfare:
Tour sections in Scotland, which has no ambulance section.
2The former Pioneer Section was amalgamated with the Rescue Section in July 1952.
G
IV. THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
BACKGROUND
The national economy of the United Kingdom offers to the rest of the world one of its
most concentrated markets, particularly for food and the raw materials for industry.
There are some 540 people to every square mile—eleven times as many as in the United
States—and their standard of living is among the world’s highest. But about half of their
food is imported. They grow no cotton, rubber or jute, possess little or no easily mined
deposits of aluminium, lead, copper, tin or zinc, and import four-fifths of their wood and
their wool. The nation that invented steel can now supply only half its needs of iron ore,
and the pioneer of the jet engine buys virtually all its crude oil from abroad.
Yet the national economy of Britain, dependent on the one hand on imported supplies,
is itself the second largest suppUer of the world’s needs: of machinery, electrical apparatus
and vehicles; of fine quality textiles and pottery; of coal, chemicals and cutlery; of whisky,
jet aircraft and fertilizers. About half the world’s trade is conducted in its currency; and in
London, the commercial centre of the world, are held the gold and dollar reserves of the
sterling Commonwealth and other sterling countries.
This economy is a part also of Western Europe: of the association of countries in the
Organization for European Economic Co-operation. As such it is a member of the
European Payments Union through which trade is facilitated, not only between Western
European countries but also between Western Europe and the whole of the sterling area.
It is also the second largest economy to belong to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization,
and is currently producing about a half of all the defence goods made by the alliance on the
eastern side of the Atlantic.
The general description of the economy which follows gives first an account of its
development up to the second world war and the effect of the war upon it; then an
analysis of the composition and distribution of the national income in recent years; and
finally a summary of the main economic tasks confronting the economy today.
The Economy Before 1939
During the nineteenth century Britain secured a leading position as world manufacturer,
merchant, carrier, banker, and investor and so was able to support a rapidly increasing
population at a rising standard of living. The increase of population and wealth con¬
tinued, though more slowly, in the twentieth century, in spite of increasing trade com¬
petition from other industrialized countries and the shocks and financial losses occasioned
by two world wars.
The period from 1870 to 1890 was the high-water mark of British industrial expansion
as compared with that of other countries. Between 1890 and 1914 growing industrial
competition from Europe and America began to make itself felt, but its effects on Britain’s
staple export industries, particularly cotton textiles and coal, were offset by the general
rise in world trade, by the continued demand for British textiles from India and other
eastern countries, and by the continued high level of oversea investment.
The new problems confronting British industry and trade in the twentieth century be¬
came apparent after the first world war. Textiles from India and Japan, where labour costs
were lower, established themselves firmly in the large eastern markets and afterwards con¬
tinued to oust the British product. The extension of the world demand for coal was slowed
90
NATIONAL ECONOMY
91
down by the increasing use of new fuels from oil, while coal from the new European
mines competed severely with British coal.
In the old-established branches of the engineering and vehicles group of industries, e.g.,
locomotives, ships and textile machinery, world demand fell away after a brief post-war
boom, and Britain failed at first to gain a compensating share of the expanding world
trade in the new types of engineering products, e.g., cars and electrical goods. Most
countries were tending towards self-sufficiency, and some sought deliberately to protect
nascent and even established industries by sheltering them behind tariffs and (later) quotas
and exchange restrictions.
Income from oversea investments and a substantial improvement in the terms of trade
(the price of exports relative to the price of imports) cushioned the effect of a fall in the
volume of exports, and imports remained high. The failure to sell abroad led, however,
to a contraction of Britain’s staple industries—coal, cotton, iron and steel, and the older
branches of engineering. The result was heavy unemployment, the general rate of which
averaged 14 per cent in the years 1921-39, reaching a peak of 22 per cent in 1932, when
the slump in world trade was at its worst. In districts relying mainly on one of the staple
industries, the rate was much higher.
After 1932 an improvement in the levels of production and employment took place,
stimulated by an increase in home investment, by some revival in world trade and, after
1:935, by die armament programme.
Effects of the Second World War
The second world war is estimated to have run down British domestic capital by about
£3,000 million, through shipping losses, bomb damage, and arrears of industrial main¬
tenance and replacements. It also resulted in a considerable alteration in Britain’s financial
and trading position, which may be summarized thus:
1. Loss of oversea assets. Over £1,000 million worth of oversea investments—includ¬
ing £428 million in North America—were sold to pay for war supphes. The
income from these had paid for a substantial part of pre-war imports into the
United Kingdom.
2. New oversea debts. New external debts, totalling £3,000 million, were accumu¬
lated.
3. Terms of trade. The price of imported raw materials rose sharply after the war, and
by 1948 about one-fifth more goods had to be exported than in 1938 to bring in
the same quantity of imports.
4. Reduced exports. By 1944 exports fell to less than one-third of their 1938 volume.
5. Smaller reserves. The real value of the gold and dollar reserves was reduced to about
half the pre-war level.
6. World dollar shortage. The physical destruction of the war led to an increased depen¬
dence on the part of Britain, the rest of the sterling area and many other countries
on supplies of all kinds from North America. Dollar earnings by non-dollar
countries were inadequate to pay for these supphes.
In die years after the war the United Kingdom made rapid progress in switcliing its
economy from a war-time to a peace-time footing. Industrial production climbed
rapidly: from 1946 (when it was at about the pre-war level) it rose at some 8 per cent a year
and by 1950 was nearly a third higher than in 1946. Bigger than average gains were shown
by the engineering, shipbuilding, electrical goods and vehicles industries. Supported by
rising production, exports made swift progress: from an end-war volume of about half
pre-war, they had overtaken pre-war volume by 1947. The swift rise continued until 1950
when the volume was nearly two-thirds greater dian in 1947. Imports had to be restricted,
and averaged a little below the pre-war level.
Such an increase in exports would not have been possible had it not been for the restric-
92
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
tion of home demand and the limitation of supplies to the home market. In the post-war
years average consumption per head has remained at about the pre-war level, there having
been a 6 per cent increase in population over the period 1939-52.
THE NATIONAL INCOME 1948-52
Size and Source
In national income per head (which is a very approximate measure of the standard of
living) the United Kingdom ranks in the second group from the top, together with Nor¬
way, Sweden, Denmark, Switzerland, Australia and New Zealand. (Only the United
States and Canada are in the top group.) And from 1948 to 1951 the United Kingdom
national income (or, to be more exact, the gross domestic product, which differs slightly
from the gross national product) is estimated to have risen, in real terms, by about 2 per
cent each year. In 1952 it is estimated that it fell by about 1 per cent.
The contribution of different industries to the total supphes of goods and services pro¬
duced in the United Kingdom has changed little over these four years. The following
table gives the average for 1948-51.
Percentage Contribution to the Total of Home Supplies of Goods
and Services (Gross Domestic Product)
(1948-51 averages)
Agriculture, forestry and fishing
Mining and quarrying
Manufacturing
Building and contracting
Gas, electricity and water
Transport and communications
Distributive trades
Other services
°/
/o
6
4
39
6
2
8
13
10
Public administration and defence ..
Public healdi and educational services
Miscellaneous ..
7
3
2
100
Distribution
To diese supplies from home production, imports added, on average, about one-fifth.
The total supplies from home production and imports were divided as follows:
Distribution of Total Supplies of Goods and Services
(1948-51 averages)
0/
/o
Personal consumption .. .. .. .. .. .. 55
Public authorities’ current expenditure .. .. .. .. 15
Investment, fixed and in stocks .. .. .. .. .. 12
Exports of goods and services . .. .. .. .. 18
100
NATIONAL ECONOMY
93
There has been a significant change in the distribution of personal incomes:
Distribution of Personal Incomes
Employees (wages and salaries, pay and allowances of
Armed Forces, employees’ insurance contributions)
Self-employed persons (professional persons, farmers,
odier sole traders and parmerships)
Rent, dividends and interest (received by persons) ..
Grants from public authorities (National Insurance
benefits, etc.)
1948
o/
/o
67
13
13
7
100
1952
%
71
12
10
7
100
The income from employment has increased more than the income from any other
source. Because of this and of the redistributive effects of taxation, the bulk of personal
income after tax is concentrated in the middle ranges of income and, compared with
1938, the share taken by die highest incomes is reduced (see Table 5).
TABLE 5
Distribution of Personal Incomes after Income Tax and Surtax
Calendar Year 1938
Ranges of income
Before tax
Number of
incomes (a)
[thousands)
Percentage of
total number
Percentage of
aggregate income
after tax
Under ^125
^125-JC249
^250-^499
^500-^999
^1,000-^1,999
Over ^2,000
16,700 (/>)
7,083
1,890
539
183
106
63
27
7
2
1
35
29
15
8
5
8
Calendar Year 1952
Under -£250
£250-£499
£500-£999
£l,000-£ 1,999
£2,000-£9,999
Over £10,000
10,600 (b)
9,600
5,805
740
254
11
39
36
21
3
1
15
36
36
8
5
[a) Income of a married couple is counted as one income.
(b) Approximate figure, comprising all married couples and single persons over 14 years of age
not included in the higher ranges. It includes those without income but not seeking remunerative
work (chiefly single women and students), amounting to about million persons in 1952.
94
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Personal incomes (the figures are averages for 1948-52) were spent as follows:
Personal Outlay
(1948-52 averages)
Taxes on income (including National Insurance %
contributions) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 14
Savings .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1
Personal consumption .. .. .. .. .. .. 85*
*Of this about 15 per cent went in indirect taxes, less subsidies.
Personal consumption was divided between different kinds of commodities as follows:
Divisions of Personal Consumption
(1948-52 averages) %
Food  .. .. .. 29
Drink and tobacco .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 17
Rent, rates, fuel and light .. .. ..   11
Household goods .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 7
Clothing   10
Other goods and services .. .. .. .. .. .. 26
100
This division is influenced by the incidence of indirect taxes. Food is subsidized, and drink
and tobacco are very heavily taxed; expenditure on food is thus a lower percentage of per¬
sonal consumption, and expenditure on drink and tobacco a higher percentage, than
might otherwise be the case.
Govermnent Income and Expenditure
The Government’s share in the total supplies available has been given above as 15 per
cent. But the percentage of total incomes which the Government takes is higher, since
public authorities raise a considerable part of their income, not to spend it on goods and
services, but to redistribute as pensions or subsidies. If the total income of the central
Government, local authorities, and the National Insurance Fund, is compared with the
total income received by everyone (including companies) for work done, the percentage
is about 40.
The following table gives a summary of the way in which public authorities—the
central Government, local authorities, and tire National Insurance Fund—collected and
spent their income in 1952.
Accounts of Public
Revenue %
Taxes on outlay—alcohol, petrol,
purchase tax, entertainments,
betting, etc. .. .. .. 34
Taxes on companies, profits, rent,
dividends and interest .. .. 27
Taxes on income from employ¬
ment .. .. .. .. 12
National Insurance contributions 9
Rates .. .. .. .. 7
Other taxes .. .. .. 11
Authorities in 1952
Expenditure %
Defence .. .. .. .. 25
Grants to persons—pensions, sub¬
sidies, national insurance, etc... 24
Local authorities’ spending (apart
from grants to persons) .. 13
Interest on national and local
debt .. .. .. .. 12
National Health Service .. 8
Other expenditure .. .. 10
Surplus .. .. .. .. 8
100
100
NATIONAL ECONOMY
95
THE ECONOMY TODAY
An Oversea Surplus
The root problem for the United Kingdom economy in the fifties is the maintenance
of a surplus of current oversea earnings in relation to current oversea spending. This is
because the country has to meet four types of oversea financial commitments, as well as
rebuilding the gold and dollar reserves. These commitments are:
(1) repayment of the United States and Canadian loans;
(2) repayment of remaining debt to the European Payments Union;
(3) reduction of sterling indebtedness (from mid-1951 to mid-1953 reduced by ^600
million); and
(4) the financing of commercial and other investment in the Commonwealth and
elsewhere.
Looking furdier ahead, defence aid must be expected to fall, an expanding economy at
home will require larger imports, and allowance must be made for further reductions in
quantitative restrictions on imports. For all these reasons, the most important task facing
British industry is the further expansion of exports.
In 1952, leaving aside defence aid, the United Kingdom succeeded in converting the
serious 1951 deficit of ^414 million into a ^148 million surplus. The main factors in
this improvement, however, were a reduction in the volume of imports and a big favour¬
able swing in the terms on which the country traded with the rest of the world. The value
of exports increased a little, but this was a result of higher prices; the volume of exports
actually declined. Freeing world trade from restrictions and, when circumstances are right,
attaining the convertibility of sterling, are foremost among the oversea objectives of the
United Kingdom economy; but a sustained international effort will be needed.
In the meantime the United Kingdom is seeking to bring about a further improvement
in its own foreign trade, and to assist in the further expansion of the resources of the ster¬
ling Commonwealth. In the sterling area as a whole particular attention is being given to
the need for stimulating economic development, for expanding exports and, consistently
with the maintenance of adequate reserves, for removing progressively restrictions on
trade over as wide an area as possible and especially within die Commonwealth and the
sterling area.
Raising Industrial Production
Industrial production in 1952 was a little lower than in 1951, mainly as a result of a fall
of 5 or 6 per cent in the middle six months of the year. There was a gradual recovery
during the last quarter and by April 1953 recovery was complete. The main reason for the
fall was to be found in changes in demand. Defence requirements rose, but were more
than offset by falls in exports, personal consumption, fixed investment and investment in
stocks of finished and semi-finished goods and work in progress.
But although demand fell in 1952, productive capacity was increased. Before the 1953
Budget some rise in total home demand seemed likely; defence expenditure was rising,
and small increases in fixed investment and personal consumption were probable. But
these claims, together with those of the balance of payments, would have been met if pro¬
duction had merely returned to the 1951 level. There were, however, sufficient resources
of manpower, of most raw materials and of capacity for a much larger expansion of out¬
put. In these circumstances the main objectives of the 1953 Budget were to give incentives
for greater production and to assist the improvement in Britain’s competitive position. The
Budget therefore proposed tax reductions designed to raise demand, particularly for in¬
vestment goods.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
96
The rehefs were:
(1) a reduction of income tax—both on industry and individuals;
(2) the removal of the excess profits levy with effect from 1st January 1954;
(3) the restoration of initial allowances on capital equipment, industrial buildings and
new mining work;
(4) reductions in purchase tax.
The first three of these changes would leave companies with substantially greater revenue
to finance new capital expenditure—for re-equipment and modernization, for the ex¬
pansion of new lines with a ready market abroad, for the development of new lines and
techniques. Such steps would strengthen Britain’s position in the increasingly competitive
markets overseas.
The reduction of tax on personal income would provide incentives to higher pro¬
ductivity, while leading to some increase in home demand. This, combined with the lower
retail prices resulting from the cuts in purchase tax, would help to increase production of
consumer goods (where output in some lines had fallen well below capacity) and thus
enable manufacturers to spread their overheads over greater output. This would facilitate
the quotation of more competitive prices in home and export markets.
Agriculture
Farming is the United Kingdom’s major import-saving industry and in 1952 provided
about half of the country’s food supphes. Since the late 1930s agricultural output has risen
year by year and by 1950-51 had reached 43 per cent above pre-war. There has been a
steady technical improvement since 1939, in management of stock and crops, in improve¬
ments in seed varieties and in the breeding and health of livestock, and there is good reason
to think that these will continue.
By 1950-51 the rise in output had started to slow and in the spring of 1952 the Govern¬
ment called on the industry for a renewed effort, and set a production objective of at least
60 per cent above pre-war by 1956. The industry was asked for an all-round increase in
productivity with particular emphasis on meat (especially beef, veal, mutton and lamb)
and on feedingstuffs, including grass. Output in 1952-53 is provisionally put at half as
much again as pre-war.
At the end of March 1953 Government controls on price and distribution of eggs were
removed, and in August 1953 controls on prices and supphes of cereals were abohshed.
These steps are designed to encourage economy and increase efficiency and make easier the
achievement of the production objectives. They also mean that new methods must be
found for providing for the guaranteed prices and assured markets required by the Agri¬
culture Act of 1947. It h considered that the principles of the Act can be maintained under
conditions of less rigid control than hitherto. Appropriate arrangements are to be made
for each commodity after discussion between the Government and other interests
concerned.
V. FINANCE
PUBLIC FINANCE
Public finance is concerned with the way public authorities finance their activities—
how their expenditure is decided upon and how their revenue is obtained.
Moneys administered by public authorities can be roughly divided into two categories:
1. Exchequer: the moneys of the central Government, raised and disbursed in accor¬
dance with the proposals of the Government, as approved by Parliament (princi¬
pally the House of Commons), in the form of permanent or annual legislation.
There are also funds administered for special purposes by Government Depart¬
ments and wholly or partially maintained by receipts which do not come from the
Exchequer. The only important one at present is the National Insurance Fund,
administered by the Minister of Pensions and National Insurance, used for the
payment of benefits under the National Insurance Scheme and for a small part of
the cost of the National Health Service (see pp. 230 and 236).
2. Local Government: the moneys of local authorities, obtained partly from rates
(local taxes on dwelling houses and other real estate) and income from property,
and partly from grants and loans from the Exchequer. Local authorities may also
raise loans in the open market.1
The following broad account of Government finance will be concerned mainly with
the Exchequer and only incidentally with local government and other public funds.
Financial control, as exercised by the House of Commons, is based on law, parliament¬
ary rights and custom.
As the power of Parliament grew in late medieval and Tudor times, the principle that
taxation by the Crown required parhamentary consent was gradually evolved. The
principle was established, at the end of the constitutional struggles of the Stuart period,
by the Bill of Rights, 1689.
In medieval, Tudor and Stuart times, it is broadly true to say that once the King was
granted the right to raise a given sum by taxation, he was free to spend it as he chose. In
the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the House of Commons gradually developed the
modern system of controlling expenditure through the device of ‘Appropriation’, which
was embodied in its final form in the Exchequer and Audit Departments Act, 1866.
Since the very early days of Parhament it has been established that such financial control
as Parhament possessed was exercised by the House of Commons. This control became
effective, as regards taxation, in the seventeenth century, but as regards expenditure it was
not effective until the nineteenth century. The controlling power of the House of Com¬
mons is acknowledged today in the Speech from the Throne at the opening of a new
session of Parliament, which is addressed to both Houses but contains a special paragraph
addressed to the Commons alone.
The Commons have traditionally claimed that the Lords have no power to modify
financial provisions, though they may reject such provisions. It was indeed to minimize
the chance of rejection that the practice was started in 1861 of embodying the main
financial provisions for the ensuing year in a single Bill. Since the passing of the Parliament
Act, 1911, however, the assent of the House of Lords is no longer necessary for a Bill
certified by the Speaker to be a Money Bill (see pp. 24 and 25).
1For an account of local government finance see p. 61.
97
98
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Today, the authority of the House of Commons has to be obtained for all expenditure
by the central Government itself and for the raising of revenue by taxation or borrowing.
All central Government revenue is paid into the Government account with the Bank of
England—known as the Exchequer Account or the Consolidated Fund. With certain
exceptions (the main one being National Insurance benefits), all payments by the central
Government come out of this account.
The following section outlines the machinery by which expenditure and revenue are
authorized and controlled, the purposes on which public money is spent and the sources
from which revenue is obtained.
Estimates and Expenditure
Classification of Expenditure
Central Government expenditure falls into two main groups: first, expenditure which
is specifically authorized by Act of Parhament without limitation to any particular year.
This expenditure includes the interest, sinking fund and cost of management of the
National Debt, the income of members of the Royal Family, salaries and pensions of
judges and certain high officers whose independence of the Government is thought to be
better guaranteed by permanent grant than by annual vote. These services are called Con-
sohdated Fund Services because they represent a permanent charge on the Consohdated
Fund.
All other Government expenditure is authorized from year to year, though it may also
depend on legislation, such as the National Health Service Acts. This includes all expen¬
diture on defence, education, the health service, housing and food subsidies and the
general administration of the country. These are called Supply Services because Parlia¬
ment, when voting money, is said to grant ‘supplies’ to the Government.
Authorizing Expenditure
The Estimates for these services are considered by the House of Commons in Commit¬
tee of Supply (that is, in Committee of the whole House with the Chairman of Com¬
mittees, instead of the Speaker, in the Chair). The Committee discusses public policy
relevant to the Estimates; any Estimate could be examined in detail if members wished
and if time allowed, but this is not the usual practice.
The Vote System. Estimates for Supply Services in the financial year beginning on
ist April are submitted to the Treasury by each Department in the preceding November
and December. Estimated expenditure is grouped under main headings called ‘Votes’
which are further broken down into subheads and items. If the House of Commons
approves the Estimates, the sums asked for are voted and later confirmed in the Appro¬
priation Act; this Act appropriates the moneys to specific Votes. Inside each Vote, the
spending of money on one subhead instead of on another, or ‘virement’, is permissible so
far as Parliament is concerned, but only with Treasury consent. The way in which sub¬
heads and detail are shown in the Estimates is therefore important for Treasury con¬
trol. Departments are free to distribute expenditure within subheads as they please subject
to Treasury approval of the type of expenditure involved; the greater the number and
the smaller the size of the subheads, therefore, the smaller the scope for variation without
Treasury consent.
An excess of expenditure, or new services not covered by the Vote, or virement of a
magnitude or character which the Treasury considers should be brought to the attention
of Parliament, all require a Supplementary Estimate. The Treasury exercises the same
power of scrutiny over these as over the ordinary Estimates.
Scrutiny of Expenditure
Control of expenditure is maintained by the Treasury, by the Comptroller and Auditor-
FINANCE
99
General, by the Public Accounts Committee of the House of Commons (see below) and
by the Select Committee on Estimates.
The Treasury. The power of the Treasury to control finance arises out of the responsi¬
bility of the Chancellor of the Exchequer to the Cabinet for the financial policy of the
Government.
With regard to expenditure the Treasury’s function centres on its responsibility for
presenting the Civil Estimates to the House of Commons. In considering the Estimates
submitted by Departments, the Treasury has to weigh the advantages of administrative
proposals against the monetary and economic cost, taking into account current Govern¬
ment policy, to decide (where necessary) the relative merits of expenditure proposed by
different Departments and to eliminate overlapping, uneconomic or wasteful expenditure
where this has escaped the net of departmental financial control. Quite apart from the
scrutiny of Estimates, throughout the year the Treasury keeps a close control over such
matters as rates of pay and the aggregate size of the staff in all Government Departments
in addition to exercising a general supervision over all departmental expenditure. The
Treasury also lays down general rules of financial and accounting procedure to govern
Departments and prescribes the principles on which departmental contracts shall be made
and the limits within which losses may be written off.
1 he Comptroller and Auditor-General. Control over issues of money to Departments
and the audit of accounts is exercised by the Comptroller and Auditor-General, who
holds a permanent appointment as an officer of Parliament. Since 1866 he has had two
functions: as Comptroller of the Exchequer he controls entries and issues of public money
to and from the Exchequer Account, and as Auditor he audits departmental accounts and
submits the Appropriation Accounts to Parhament. His statutory function is to ensure
that all expenditure is properly incurred, e.g., that no payments are made which go
beyond any relevant statutory authority, and that Treasury sanction has been obtained
wherever necessary. In addition, however, he has been encouraged by successive Com¬
mittees on Public Accounts (see next paragraph) to examine departmental expenditure
with a view to drawing the attention of that Committee to any cases of apparent waste
and extravagance.
The Select Committee on Public Accounts. The accounts of each Department and the
reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General thereon are considered by the Select
Committee on Public Accounts—the ‘PAC’. This was set up in 1861, by Mr. Gladstone,
for the purpose of ensuring that expenditure was properly incurred in accordance with
the Estimates and with any relevant Acts of Parliament, but it has since developed much
wider powers. Nowadays it may consider whether full value has been obtained for the
sums spent by Departments and examines cases in which the administration appears to
have been faulty or negligent. The Committee has therefore become a powerful instru¬
ment for the exposure of waste and inefficiency. It embodies its findings in Reports which
may be discussed in the House of Commons. Its recommendations are considered by the
Treasury in consultation with Departments and put into effect, so far as they are accepted,
according to Treasury instructions. If the recommendations are not acceptable, a reasoned
reply has to be submitted to the Committee which may either accept the objections or
return to the charge in subsequent reports.
Select Committee on Estimates. This Committee1 was originally set up in 1912 but was
re-formed in 1929 with wider terms of reference. Under these terms it has been re¬
appointed annually except during the war years. The Committee’s functions are to
examine the Estimates, to suggest the form in which they should be presented, and to
report whether there are any economies which could be made without altering the policy
implied in the Estimates. In practice the Estimates for the current year are not affected,
1See also p. 26.
IOO
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
but the Committee’s recommendations may reinforce Treasury control and influence
the nature of expenditure in succeeding years.
Revenue and the Budget
Sources of Revenue
Money to meet the needs of the central Government is in normal years derived mainly
from taxation. The revenue from loans and investments is small, and other sources of
revenue, e.g., trading surpluses of Government Departments and sale of war stores, are
not important.
Taxes can be divided into two groups, direct and indirect, which correspond roughly
to the duties collected respectively by the Departments of Inland Revenue and of
Customs and Excise. The most important Inland Revenue duties—income tax (in¬
cluding surtax), profits tax and estate duties (death duties)—are levied directly on the
income or property of those who, in general, have to bear them. Income tax on individual
(though not on corporate) incomes and death duties are progressive taxes, that is, larger
incomes and estates bear a proportionately higher rate of tax. Stamp duties, although not
a direct tax, are also collected by Inland Revenue.
Most indirect or outlay taxes are, however, Customs and Excise duties and are levied
on commodities or services. They are called indirect because the importer, manufacturer
or wholesaler pays them first and then passes them on to the individual consumer in the
form of higher retail prices.
Customs duties are levied on imported goods, and Excise duties on goods produced,
and services provided, at home. The Purchase Tax is, for all practical purposes, an Excise
duty, although it is also levied on the appropriate imported goods.
Budget Procedure
Budget is an old name for a bag containing papers or accounts. The origin of the term
lies in the phrase ‘The Chancellor of the Exchequer opened his budget’, which was applied
in Parliament to the annual speech of the Chancellor of the Exchequer explaining his
proposals for making revenue and expenditure balance. By the time the Budget is intro¬
duced, the Estimates will have been presented to Parhament and published, and the
expected total of Government expenditure for the year will be known.
The Budget speech is the main occasion of the year for reviewing the financial state of
the nation. But its formal basis is the Chancellor of the Exchequer’s proposals for raising
money by taxation: he estimates the yield of the revenue on the basis of existing taxation
and proposes such changes as will provide whatever surplus or deficit he considers
desirable on general economic grounds. These proposals are embodied in Budget resolu¬
tions which are subsequently examined by the House of Commons’ Committee of
Ways and Means, and later embodied in detail in a Finance Bill.
Budget Policy
The original purpose of the Budget was purely financial—to provide money for
Government expenditure. From an early stage, however, it was appreciated that taxation
would affect the distribution of income and property and the level of the expenditure on
particular goods and services. Later on it was gradually realized that taxation also affected
the nation’s total expenditure and therefore the general level of economic activity. This
idea was crystallized in the late 1930s. Since the war, Budgets have been consciously
designed in greater or lesser degree to bring the total of personal and governmental
demand for goods and services into balance with the supphes which could be made
available.
Direct taxation on income and property affects the distribution of wealth because the
rates vary according to the size of income and property, the proportion of a high income
FINANCE
101
going in tax being much greater than the proportion of a small one; at the same time, the
services provided by the Government (whether in cash or kind) are generally available
to all irrespective of wealth, but in some cases they are specially designed to benefit people
with lower incomes. Indirect taxes do not affect the distribution of income; their main
purpose has always been the raising of revenue, but by discouraging or encouraging
consumption of particular goods they can be used to influence the allocation of resources
and the pattern of trade.
The Budget affects the general level of expenditure (personal and governmental), and
therefore the total demand for goods and services, in the following way: if there is an
increase in Government expenditure without an increase in taxation then total demand
for goods and services will tend to rise; the same thing will happen if there is a decrease in
taxation without a decrease in Government spending. In this way the Budget can be used
to counter unemployment. On the other hand if there is an increase in taxation without
an increase in Government expenditure or a decrease in Government expenditure without
a decrease in taxation then the total demand for goods and services will tend to fall. In
this way the Budget can be used to counter inflation.
For some years after the war, budgetary policy was mainly designed to avoid inflation
by holding down consumer demand for goods and services so that it would not hamper
exports, investment or (since 1950) the defence programme. The Budgets of 1951 and
1952 aimed also to hold down investment in the interests of exports and defence. By
I953» however, as total demand had fallen while productive capacity had increased, some
unused resources became available ; in consequence there was a reduction of taxation in
the 1953 Budget, which aimed particularly at encouraging higher investment and
production.
The Exchequer Accounts
Current Expenditure
Expenditure budgeted for the financial year ending 31st March 1954 may be classified
under three main headings: first, defence preparations and National Debt charges, which
together comprise about 53 per cent of the total expenditure of ^4,259 million; secondly,
social services and subsidies, which form about 36 per cent of total expenditure; and
thirdly, general services, which make up the remaining 11 per cent.
Defence preparations alone absorb ^1,637 milhon1 or 38^ per cent of the total.
National Debt charges—the interest on War Loans, Savings Certificates, etc., and the
cost of managing the Debt—account for £61 $ million or 14^ per cent of total expenditure.
Under the second heading, social services and subsidies, which amount to -£1,552
million, the subheads are: education (-£286 million); health services (.£411 million);
war pensions, national assistance, family allowances, Government contribution to the
National Insurance Fund, etc. (^£394 million); food subsidies (^£221 million); assistance
to local authorities for housing, police, roads, etc. (-£240 million).
The main items under the third heading, general services, which come to -£457 million,
are: Commonwealth and foreign services (-£71 million); Irish services2 (-£56 million);
works and buildings (£62 milhon); tax collection (-£43 million); agriculture and
fisheries (£29 milhon); supply and trading services (>£37 million); employment services
(£l9 milhon); broadcasting (-£17 million); research and development (^£17 million);
Colonial development and welfare (£^16 milhon).
1This figure excludes certain expenditure on defence preparations under Civil Votes; it includes
XI4° million in sterling counterpart of defence aid allotted to the United Kingdom by the United
States.
^Mainly the payment made to Northern Ireland from the United Kingdom Exchequer under the
Government of Ireland Act, 1920, (see footnote 3, p. 19), in compensation for the tax revenue which
is remitted to the Exchequer by Northern Ireland; together with certain services administered in
Northern Ireland by United Kingdom Government Departments.
102
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Current Revenue
The estimated Inland Revenue for 1953-54 is £2,436 million, more than half the total
revenue of £4,368 million. Yields from all main sources are expected to be as follows: in¬
come tax £1,782 million, surtax £127 million, death duties £160 million, profits tax and
excess profits levy £314 million, stamp duties £52 million. (The excess profits levy is,
however, being ended from the 1st January 1954.)
The amount of tax paid yearly by people with different incomes is shown in Table 6.
Since 1943 most wage and salary earners have paid their income tax under a PAYE(‘Pay-as-
you-earn’) Scheme which enables them to keep up to date in their tax payments week
by week (or month by month if they are paid monthly).
The scale of death duties is illustrated in Table 7. In 1946 estates of a net capital value
of less than £2,000 were exempted from payment of death duty and a new scale for
values over £2,000 was introduced. The scale was altered again in 1949, when legacy and
succession duties were consolidated with death duties, and it has since remained unchanged.
Estimated Customs receipts for 1953-54 are £1,044 million and Excise receipts £680
million. The most important items are as follows:
Customs £ million
Spirits  28
Tobacco.. .. .. .. 615
Oil   277
Duties under Import Duties Act 70
Excise £ million
Spirits .. .. .. .. 75
Beer  238
Entertainments .. .. 44
Purchase Tax  260
The total receipts from taxation, including motor vehicle duties (£69 million) are
expected to yield £4,230 million in 1953-54. Revenue from other sources, including
broadcast receiving licences (£16 million) is expected to be £13 8 million
Income
before
tax
200
300
400
500
1,000
2,000
5,000
10,000
TABLE 6
Income Tax and Surtax Paid by Persons with Differing
Incomes and Family Responsibilities
1953-54
Single persons
Income
all earned
income
£ s-
4 9
15 17
35 6
56 12
218 10
568 10
2,428 10
6,353 10
Income all
investment
income*
£ s.
4 9
29 6
60 10
95 10
318 10
768 10
2,631 0
6,556 0
Married couples
without children
Income
all earned
income
£ s-
2 18
12 16
32 4
178 0
528 0
2,388 0
6,313 0
Income all
investment
income *
£ s.
11 5
35 0
64 0
278 0
728 0
2,590 10
6,515 10
Married couples
with two children
Income
all earned
income
£ s-
1 2
101 14
451 10
2,311 10
6,236 10
Income all
investment
income*
£ s-
2 10
17 10
201 10
651 10
2,514 0
6,439 0
... Source: Financial Statement 1953-54
* Some relief is given when the taxpayer (or his wife) is over 65.
FINANCE
103
TABLE 7
Death Duties Paid on Estates of Different Values
Net capital value
of total estate
l
2,000
3,000
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
Duty
l
Nil
30
100
400
1,200
2,400
Net capital value
of total estate
l
30,000
40,000
50,000
100,000
500,000
1,000,000
Duty
l
5,400
9,600
15,500
45,000
325,000
750,000
Source: Ninety-fifth Report of the Commissioners of Inland Revenue
Capital Payments and Receipts
The Government also receives funds and makes payments of a capital nature. In the last
few years the main items of capital expenditure h ave been loans to local authorities for
housing and other investment (for which about -£400 million is budgeted in 1953-54);
loans for the development of new towns; and advances to public corporations. Capital
receipts have come mainly from the repayment of these loans. If, on balance, there is a
deficit, it is met from the proceeds of Government borrowing, while, if there is a surplus,
it goes to reduce the National Debt.
The National Debt
So far borrowing on a large scale has been undertaken only to finance deficits during
or immediately after a war. The National Debt rose from ^650 million in 1914 to
X7>435 million at the end of the first world war, and from .£7,131 million in 1939 to
£23,637 million in 1946. On the 31st March 1953 the total National Debt was £26,050
million, of which about £2,160 milhon was held externally, mainly by the United States
and Canadian Governments. Of the £23,900 million of internal debt, about £5,700
million was short-term debt, mainly in the form of 91-day bills on the Treasury, while
the long-term loans included a variety of stocks, bonds, loans, and certificates carrying
fixed rates of interest (varying from 2f to 4 per cent) and with fixed or indeterminate
dates of repayment.
In November 1951, £^1,000 milhon of Treasury Bills were converted into if per cent
serial funding stocks maturing in 1952, 1953 and 1954; a second funding operation
was carried out in October 1952, and a third in October 1953. On the 31st March 1953
the ‘floating debt’ (i.e. temporary Government borrowing) was about £4,700 million
Since the war new lending by the Government has exceeded loan repayment, as
the main borrowers, the local authorities, repay over a long term, and the procedure
whereby they rely on the Exchequer for most of their loans became fully operative only
in 1945.
BANKING AND PRIVATE FINANCE
The British banking system is long-established and well integrated. It consists of a
Central Bank; of Commercial Banks which carry on the usual main banking services; of
the United Kingdom offices of various banks whose main business is in other countries;
and of various specialized banks and similar financial instimtions.
104
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Bank of England
The Bank of England is the Central Bank and its principal business is to act as banker to
the Government and to the other banks, as the agent of the Government for important
financial operations and as the central note-issuing authority; it maintains relations with
central banks overseas. It was established in 1694 by Act of Parhament as a corporate body
and its entire capital stock was acquired by the Government under the Bank of England
Act, 1946.
As the central bank, the Bank of England acts in conjunction with other banks and
financial institutions in co-ordinating the application of the Government’s monetary
policy. One of the main instruments for this purpose is the Bank Rate—the rate at which
the Bank of England will discount first-class bills of exchange. The Bank Rate was raised
from 2 to 2^ per cent in November 1951 and to 4 per cent in March 1952; it was reduced
to 3^ per cent in September 1953.
As banker to the Government the Bank of England holds the main Government accounts
and it acts as the Government’s agent for the issue and registration of Government loans.
It also operates, for the Treasury, the administration of exchange control which has been
in force since 1939 (see pp. 117-19).
The other banks maintain large balances with the Bank of England and these balances
form part of the bankers’ cash reserves.
The Bank of England has the sole right in England and Wales of issuing bank notes.
Notes thus issued need a 100 per cent cover in gold and securities, the part covered by the
latter being the ‘Fiduciary Issue’, the level of which is subject to parhamentary control. In
practice very little gold is now held by the Issue Department of the Bank of England, the
bulk of the United Kingdom gold (and foreign exchange) reserves being in a separate
account, known as the Exchange Equalization Accotmt because it was originally estab-
lished in 1932 for the purpose of checking undue fluctuation in the exchange value of
sterling. The provision of coin for circulation is the responsibility of a Government
Department, the Royal Mint.
The Commercial Banks
The banks handling the major part of the domestic banking business in the United
Kingdom are, in the main, limited liability companies which are subject to the ordinary
law relating to such companies.
Some of the main distinguishing features of the United Kingdom commercial banks
are:
1. A relatively small number of banks control a large number of branches. Domestic
banking members of the British Bankers’ Association number 27, including seven
in Scotland and three in Northern Ireland; these banks control nearly 12,500
branches and have assets of over -£8,000 million.
2. The volume of cheques handled is very large and, in spite of a tax of 2d. on each
cheque, many payments—and even relatively small payments—are made by
cheque. The value of cheques cleared daily in 1952 through the London and
Provincial Clearing Houses reached £365 million; and many cheques do not, for
various reasons, pass through Clearing Houses.
3. It is the practice of the chief United Kingdom banks to maintain a ratio of about
8 per cent between cash reserves and total deposits (of which about two-thirds are
repayable on demand, the remainder being deposits at interest and subject to
notice).
In April 1953 about 33 per cent of the banks’ deposits were covered by cash and
short-term securities while longer-term securities amounted to about 3 5 per cent,
FINANCE
105
and advances to customers to about 30 per cent of total deposits. It is not the
practice of British banks to participate directly in industry, the financing of which is,
as far as they are concerned, normally limited to short-term advances.
4. Certain banks in Scotland and Northern Ireland have retained limited rights to
issue notes; these issues must, apart from an amount for each bank which is
specified by legislation, be fully covered by Bank of England notes and by coin.
United Kingdom Offices of Banks Operating Mainly Overseas
The importance of London as a financial and trading centre and as the largest city of
the British Commonwealth has encouraged many banks whose main business is in the
Commonwealth and other countries to have London offices; in some cases, indeed,
the institutions concerned are United Kingdom companies and the London office is the
head office. These London offices form part of the complex structure engaged in the finan¬
cing of trade not only between the United Kingdom and other countries but in goods
which are shipped direct between other countries.
Other Banks
Savings Banks and the National Savings Movement
The function of Trustee and Post Office Savings Banks is to provide facilities for the
investment of voluntary savings and particularly of the small savings of persons with small
incomes. Both types of savings banks were well established during the nineteenth century.
The growth of their business was, however, encouraged in the first world war when the
War Savings Committee was set up under Government auspices to promote an official
savings drive. A new type of long-term security for the small investor was inaugurated at
that time. This was the National Savings Certificate, with interest payable only on encash¬
ment, but free of income tax. From this war-time drive originated the present National
Savings movement devoted to the encouragement of the widespread investment of sav¬
ings in Trustee and Post Office Savings Banks and in National Savings Certificates and
Defence Bonds. The policy of the movement is determined by the National Savings Com¬
mittee for England and Wales and similar committees for Scotland and Northern Ireland.
The committees are bodies of independent persons representing regional savings organiza¬
tions and various national institutions connected with such things as finance, industry and
education. They are assisted by a salaried staff of civil servants. Voluntary local savings
committees, often assisted or promoted by local authorities, co-ordinate the work of
voluntary local savings groups.
Trustee Savings Banks are managed by boards of honorary trustees and managers, and
most of the funds deposited with them are ordinary deposits which are withdrawable on
demand or at short notice. These deposits are invested with the National Debt Com¬
missioners, and the Government is responsible to the trustees for the repayment of the
money so invested with accrued interest as and when required. Trustee Savings Banks also
accept, in certain circumstances, deposits for special investment. These deposits, which
may receive a slightly higher rate of interest than ordinary deposits, are invested under the
supervision of the National Debt Commissioners, but the Government is not responsible
to the trustees for the repayment of these investments. Trustee Savings Banks are parti¬
cularly flourishing in small towns. At the end of 1952 there were about 1,250 Trustee
Offices controlled by 85 independent banks.
The Post Office Savings Bank is the largest organization of its kind in the world. It has
over 22 million active accounts; in March 1953 total balances, which carry a Government
guarantee, amounted to £1,803 million, over £80 per depositor. Through a centralized
system of accounting, a depositor can pay in money or make a withdrawal at any one
of some 19,000 post offices throughout the country.
H
io6
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
To ensure that Savings Banks are used primarily by the small investor there is a limit of
^500 on the amount which may be deposited by any individual in one year, and of
,(3,000 on the total balance which may be held by one individual.
Co-operative Banks
The Co-operative Wholesale Society (see p. 124) formed a deposit and loan department
about-the year 1870, and the right of a co-operative society to engage in banking was legally
defined in the Industrial and Provident Societies Act in 1876. The primary purpose of the
Co-operative Wholesale Society Bank was to serve the Co-operative movement, whose
financial centre it has become, but the bank has also come to include among its chents
trade unions and other mutual societies, local authorities and individual depositors.
Other Financial Institutions
It has been the policy of the commercial banks to leave the provision of many special
financial facilities to other financial institutions. These facilities, which are supplementary
to the credit facilities of the banking system, are mainly provided through the Discotmt
Market, Finance Corporations, the Stock Exchange, Investment Trusts and the Insurance
Market. New issues of capital above -(30,000 are controlled by the Treasury with the
advice of the Capital Issues Committee (see p. 108).
The firms engaged in this business are in the main highly specialized, e.g., discount
houses, accepting houses, stockbrokers, insurers, insurance underwriters and brokers. In
addition to these specialist firms, however, there is a class of bank, the merchant bank,
which has been of great importance in the finance of trade and commodity dealings and
in the flotation of major issues of bonds, particularly for oversea concerns and govern¬
ments.
The merchant banks helped to give London an international reputation as the main
world centre for short-term and long-term borrowing. Long-term loans for development
purposes created a continuing claim for interest and attracted to Britain a steady flow of
orders for machinery, textiles and coal. This increasing trade was usually financed by bills
of exchange, which were traded on the discount market and provided an easy method of
transferring debts and claims.
The Discount Market
The main business of the Discount Market consists of trading in and holding com¬
mercial bills of exchange, United Kingdom Government Treasury' Bills and other short¬
term securities.
To the extent to which the various firms which compose the Discount Market have in¬
sufficient funds of their own to finance the bills and securities which they wish to hold,
they obtain loans from the banks and, to a lesser extent, deposits from the public. In the
main these loans and deposits may be called in at any time.
The commercial banks do not, in the ordinary way, buy Treasury Bills at the weekly
tenders except on behalf of customers but purchase, from the Discount Market, bills
which have been taken up by the market and held until they become of a currency
required by the banks.
If the banks call in loans which they have made to the Discount Market and the latter is
unable to cover its needs elsewhere, it will be forced to borrow from the Bank of England.
It is not the practice of the commercial banks themselves to obtain direct loans from the
Bank of England to augment their cash resources if the need arises.
Finance Corporations
Two corporations, the Finance Corporation for Industry Limited and the Industrial
and Commercial Finance Corporation Limited, were set up in 1945 in order to assist in
dealing with the problems of post-war reconstruction and development. Although the
FINANCE
IO7
Government displayed considerable interest in their formation, the Corporations them¬
selves are ordinary limited companies with no official representation on their boards and
having no recourse to public funds. Another finance corporation, the Commonwealth
Development Finance Company Limited, was incorporated in 1953 for the purpose of
assisting development projects within the Commonwealth.
Finance Corporation for Industry Limited. The FCI was formed to assist in the pro¬
vision of capital (in amounts of £200,000 and upwards) for the re-equipment and
development of industry with a view to promoting efficiency and thereby assisting in the
maintenance and increase of employment.
The Corporation has an authorized and issued capital of £2$ million and may borrow
up to four times this amount, making a possible total of resources of -£125 million The
share capital is held as follows: 40 per cent by insurance companies, 30 per cent by trust
companies and 30 per cent by the Bank of England. As at the 31st March 1952 the capital
had been paid up to the extent of 2 per cent (,£ 500,000), the liability of the shareholders in
respect of the uncalled capital representing security to the banks who provide the loan
capital out of which the Corporation makes its advances.
The enterprises assisted by the FCI are concerned with a variety of products, e.g., diesel
engines, permanent prefabricated houses, shipping, electrical components, steel, oil,
chemicals, etc.
Industrial and Commercial Finance Corporation Limited. The ICFC is smaller than the FCI
and has as its main object the provision of credit and finance by means of loan capital
and share capital for industrial and commercial concerns in Great Britain, particularly in
cases where the existing facilities provided by banking institutions and the Stock Exchange
are not readily or easily available.
The authorized and issued share capital of the Corporation is ^15 million which is paid
up as required; the Corporation can borrow up to a further ^30 million and can thus have
a maximum of -£45 milhon available. Although the Bank of England has a token partici¬
pation, the principal shareholders are the London Clearing Banks and the Scottish Banks
in proportion to their size; the loan capital is provided by all the shareholders in the
same ratio as their shareholdings.
The nature of the Corporation’s business is to provide finance in sums ranging between
£5,000 and £200,000 for small and medium-sized concerns. It has a large number of
customers and has established branches in Birmingham, Manchester and Edinburgh.
Commonwealth Development Finance Company Limited. This Company was established
early in 1953. It originated from the Conference of Commonwealth Prime Ministers in
December 1952 and its purpose is to finance development schemes in the British Common¬
wealth. The authorized capital of this company is £15 million but to begin with only 10
per cent of it is being called up; the Company is empowered to borrow up to twice its
issued capital.
The Stock Exchange
The main Stock Exchange in the United Kingdom is in London but there are other
Stock Exchanges in various provincial centres, though London, on account of its size,
provides the main market.
The Stock Exchanges provide a means by which a holder of quoted stock or shares (all
important securities are quoted) can, if he wishes, find a buyer for his securities; the Stock
Exchanges are also a most important element in the raising of new capital by Government
and commercial borrowers.
The Stock Exchanges do not fix dealing prices; the terms on which bargains are made
between members reflect the interaction of supply of and demand for the securities
concerned
io8
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
All the Stock Exchanges operate under strict rules of conduct which they make
themselves.
The Capital Issues Committee
Since 1932 there has been control to a greater or lesser degree over capital issues in the
United Kingdom. The 1932 controls, and such modifications as were made up to 1939,
were without a statutory basis but resulted from public requests by the Chancellor which
the various markets observed. At the outbreak of war in 1939 the Foreign Transactions
(Advisory) Committee, which had been set up in 1936 to advise the Treasury on issues
involving remittances to countries outside the Commonwealth, was renamed the Capital
Issues Committee and was given the wider task of advising the Treasury on the adminis¬
tration of the statutory control of capital issues (and analogous transactions) for which
provision was made in Regulation 6 of the Defence (Finance) Regulations, 1939.
The end of the war in 1945 saw the retention of the Capital Issues Committee with its
primary function unchanged, permanent provision for capital issues control being made
the following year with the passing of the Borrowing (Control and Guarantees) Act,
i94(5.
The Committee is entirely independent of Government Departments and consists of
seven men of experience in commerce, industry or finance, who consider applications to
raise loans or issue capital above -£50,000 and tender their advice to the Treasury upon
them.
Investment Trusts
Investment trusts cater for the investor who does not wish or has insufficient resources to
hold a large number of investments in his own name but who desires to have an interest in
several securities as a means of spreading his risk.
The ordinary type of investment trust is a public company, limited in liability and
registered under the Companies Acts of 1929, 1947 or 1948; investment trusts in this
form have been established in the United Kingdom for about a century. They invest their
share and loan capital over a range of securities, the precise choice depending in part on the
objects of the particular company concerned.
Since 1931 there have also been ‘unit trusts’ in the United Kingdom; a trust of this type
is normally limited by its trust deed to a specified range of securities. The original con¬
ception of the unit trust was that securities could be grouped in fixed proportions to form
units, and these units could be divided into sub-units which could be sold to the public. In
practice, while retaining this unit basis of investment, many unit trusts have considerable
flexibility in their choice of the underlying securities.
The Insurance Market
The British insurance market is in the main divided into two parts, the insurance com¬
panies and Lloyd’s. The company market is the larger, but Lloyd’s is older and has a
greater claim on the popular imagination. The company market consists of about 300
British insurance offices, chiefly incorporated under the Companies Acts, of which some
two-thirds are small or of local or specialized significance, whereas the remainder transact
a general business. Most of the latter are controlled by about 30 very large companies of
international repute. In addition, some 200 oversea companies are represented, emphasiz¬
ing the international nature of the insurance market. The natural focus of the market is in
London, although some of the largest offices have their administrative centres elsewhere.
In addition, there are some 150 Friendly and Collecting Societies devoted solely to in¬
dustrial life assurance1 throughout the country, but these are not part of the insurance
market proper.
Rife insurance for which the contributions are collected weekly (a system convenient to weekly
wage earners).
FINANCE
109
Lloyd’s is an association of individual underwriters who group themselves into what are
known as syndicates. The conduct of insurance business at Lloyd’s is regulated by the
Committee of Lloyd’s, and the affairs of the Society of Lloyd’s in its corporate capacity are
administered by the Committee under an Act of Parliament. In addition to its insurance
activities Lloyd’s maintains a world-wide organization for the collection and diffusion of
shipping intelligence (see p. 183). Although in its earlier history the activities of Lloyd’s
were confmed to the conduct of marine insurance business, during the last fifty years
there has been built up at Lloyd’s a very considerable world-wide market in connection
with the transaction of other classes of insurance business.
The market is completed by the insurance brokers, acting on behalf of the insured, who
are an essential part of the Lloyd’s market and a valuable part of the company market.
Many brokers specialize in reinsurance business, acting as intermediaries in the exchange of
contracts between companies, both British and oversea companies, and often acting as
London representatives of the latter.
The volume of premium income business transacted by the insurance market during the
year 1952 was about ^1,000 milhon.
Over two-thirds of the fire, accident and marine business comes from abroad, partly by
direct placing in London and partly from branch and agency offices established in over 100
countries. The profits on this business, together with interest earned on funds maintained
locally, have produced in recent years a substantial sum in foreign exchange, of which a
large part was represented by dollars. The basic principle of international business is that
resources capable of meeting any potential loss are instantly available for application
wherever necessary.
Behind this large and international volume of business stand the assets of the companies,
aggregating over -£3,000 million in addition to substantial reserves of uncalled capital and
the whole of the deposits, underwriting trust funds and personal fortunes of Lloyd’s
underwriters. British insurers hold over -£1,200 million in British Government and other
public stocks, while about £900 million is invested in ordinary shares, preference shares
and debentures in industry, mostly in the United Kingdom.
VI. TRADE
EXTERNAL TRADE
British oversea markets and sources of supply are world-wide. The wealth and very
existence of the British people has, for over a century, depended on oversea trade. British
imports consist mainly of food and of the various materials, raw and processed, required
by British industries, though finished capital and consumer goods are also imported.
British exports are preponderantly of manufactured goods, but coal and raw wool are
also important exports.
For over one hundred years the value of goods imported into Britain has exceeded that
of goods exported, the balance of imports being paid for in normal years by net invisible
exports, i.e. the net receipts of interest, dividends and profits on previous investment
abroad and income from shipping, insurance and a variety of financial services.
Pattern of External Trade in 1952
In 1952 total imports were valued at .£3,481 million c.i.f.1 and exports of United King¬
dom produce and manufactures at ^2,550 milhon f.o.b.2; re-exports of imported mer¬
chandise totalled ^144 million f.o.b.3 About 40 per cent of total imports (see Table 8)
TABLE 8
Commodity Distribution of Imports and Exports in 1952
*Including small amounts for animals (not for food) and parcel post transactions.
Source: Statistics Division, Board of Trade.
1‘Cost-insurance-freight’, i.e. including shipping, insurance and other expenses incurred in the
delivery of goods as far as their place of importation in the United Kingdom. Most of these
expenses represented earnings by United Kingdom firms.
2‘Free-on-board’, i.e. the cost of the goods to the purchaser abroad, all costs and charges accruing
up to the time of placing the goods on board the exporting vessel having been paid by the seller.
Expenditure on imports in 1952, though considerably greater than in 1950, was appreciably less
than in 1951 (see Table 9). This reflected the combined effect of import restrictions, lower prices and
lower demand in the United Kingdom.
110
TRADE
III
consisted of raw materials (chiefly petroleum, raw wool, raw cotton, wood and
timber, paper-making materials, rubber, and non-metalliferous ores and scrap), while
food and drink items (chiefly grain, meat, beverages and cocoa preparations, and dairy
produce) accounted for 33 per cent and manufactured goods for 34 per cent. In export
trade, on the other hand, manufactured goods accounted for as much as 88 per cent of the
total. The principal groups of exports in 1952 were: vehicles (including locomotives, ships
and aircraft), -£479 million; machinery, -£422 million; iron and steel and manufactures
thereof, -£192 million; cotton yarns and manufactures, -£148 million; chemicals, drugs,
dyes and colours, ^138 million; and woollen and worsted yams and manufactures,
^124 million.
In 1952 the sterling area provided 41 per cent of total imports into the United Kingdom
and took 49 per cent of the total of United Kingdom exports. Trade with member
countries of the Organization for European Economic Co-operation (OEEC) and their
possessions represented about a quarter of total exports and import'-. North America
provided 18 per cent of total imports and took 11 per cent of total United Kingdom
exports.
Of the total imports from North America (^635 million), imports from the United
States amounted to -£316 million and imports from Canada to ^319 milhon. Exports of
United Kingdom produce to those countries amounted to ^144 million and ^127
million respectively.
The principal supphers in the sterling area were: Australia, ^225 million; New
Zealand, -£166 million; Kuwait (petroleum), ^137 million; and India, ^115 million.
The United Kingdom’s principal markets in the sterling area were: Austraha, ^220
million; the Union of South Africa, -£142 million; and New Zealand, XII4 million.
Trends in External Trade Since 1938
Changes in the value and volume of external trade as a whole are shown in Table 9.
Imports rose in value from ^919 million in 1938 to ^1,792 million in 1947 and ^3,481
million in 1952. The rise in value of exports was from ^471 million in 1938 to ^1,139
million in 1947 and ^2,550 million in 1952.
TABLE 9
Imports and Exports: Annual Figures
1938
Value (-£ million)
Total imports c.i.f.
E,TrtSO! V-o.b.
UK goods J
Re-exports f.o.b.
Volume Index Nos.
„ f 1938=100
Total mports^1950=100
Exports of f 1938=100
UK goods \ 1950=100
919
471
61
100
100
1946
1,292
915
50
67
99
1947
1,792
1,139
59
76
89
109
62
1948
2,074
1,583
60
92*
79
1949
2,275
1,786
58
100*
87
1950
2,608
2,171
85
100
100
1951
3,904
2,580
127
113
101
1952
3,481
2,550
144
103
95
*Approximate.
Source: Statistics Division, Board of Trade.
112
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Calculations of changes in the quantity of external trade compared with pre-war tend
to be unrealistic, as the relative values of different classes of goods on which the volume
figures are based have changed considerably since 1938. Broadly speaking, however, the
volume of imports in 1947 was about a quarter less than in 1938; between 1947 and 1952
the volume increased by about 15 per cent. The volume of exports in 1952 was about
two-thirds greater than in 1938.
As compared with pre-war, exports of motor vehicles, aircraft, machinery, chemicals
and electrical goods have greatly increased in importance, while the older staples, such
as cotton and wool textiles, though still considerable, have taken a declining share in the
export total. Before the war Britain s coal exports averaged about 30-40 milhon tons a
year; between 1950 and 1952 the average was about 11 milhon tons.
As a result of the substantial rise in industrial production since 1947, imports of raw
materials have increased much more rapidly than have imports of food, drink and
tobacco.
The area distribution of external trade in 1938 and 1947 ht comparison with that of
1952 is shown in Table 10. Imports from North America, which were 22 per cent of the
TABLE 10
Arfa Distribution of External Trade
Value of Total Imports: Analysis by Source
North America ..
of which: USA
Canada
Other American Account
Countries
Other Western Hemisphere
Countries
Sterling Area
Non-Sterling OEEC Countries
and Possessions
Eastern Europe .
Rest of the World
Total
1938
Value
£ million
1947
199-3
118-0
81-3
15-7
61-6
286-9
220-3
74-3
61-4
22
13
31
23
Value
£ million
536-2
297-1
239-1
0/
/O
1952
Value
£ million
30
17
13
67-6
175-7
558-3
307-8
919-5 100
49-1
99-8
1,794-5
10
31
17
635-2
315-7
319-5
99-1
1,437-3
856-8
165-8
201-0
100 3,481-5
°/
/o
18
86-3
41
25
100
TRADE
113
TABLE 10 (contd.)
Value of Exports of UK Goods: Analysis by Destination
North America ..
of which: USA
Canada
Other American Account
Countries
Other Western Hemisphere
Countries
Sterling Area
Non-Sterling OEEC Countries
and Possessions
Eastern Europe ..
Rest of the World
Total
1938
Value
jC million
44-0
20-5
23-5
7-5
29-5
211-8
118-3
27-9
32-4
471-4
°/
/O
44
26
1947
Value
f million
92-9
48-0
44-9
20-7
62-4
555-1
265-7
44-5
97-6
100 1,138-9
0/
/O
49
23
100
1952
Value
f million
270-9
143-5
127-4
62-9
97-8
1,252-5
644-6
61-4
159-5
2,549-6
0/
/O
11
4
49
25
2
7
100
Source: Statistics Division, Board of Trade.
total value of imports in 1938, rose to 30 per cent in 1947 but declined to 18 per cent in
1952. Imports from the sterling area, on the other hand, rose from 31 per cent in 1947
to 41 per cent in I952- Exports to North America showed a slight percentage increase in
1952 as compared with 1947 and 1938. Exports to the sterling area rose from 44 per cent
in 1938 to 49 per cent in 1947 but showed no important percentage change between
1947 and 1952. Imports from non-sterling OEEC countries and their possessions showed
an appreciable rise between 1947 and 1952—from 17 per cent to 25 per cent of the total.
The Balance of Payments
The main items in the United Kingdom’s balance of payments with the rest of the
world are set out in Table 11. Part A shows how the surplus or deficit on current account
was arrived at, and Part B how it was offset. In 1952 there was an unfavourable balance
in visible trade (imports less exports and re-exports) of £102 million (Table 11, Part A),
but this was more than offset by the favourable balance in invisible items of ^250 million.
Including receipts of United States defence aid, the credit balance on current account
amounted to ^269 million. During the year as a whole the gold and dollar reserves were
reduced by 175 million, there was a net investment overseas of ^95 million and
sterling liabilities were reduced by -£349 million (Table 11, Part B).
TI4
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Since the second world war the United Kingdom has been confronted with difficult
balance of payments problems due to heavy war losses of oversea investments and other
assets, new oversea indebtedness, a strongly adverse movement in the terms of trade and
other lactors. At the heart of these problems is that of the dollar balance, of securing
dollars by exports of goods and services to pay for basic imports from North America,
TABLE 11
United Kingdom General Balance of Payments, 1949-52
^ million
1949 1950
1951
1952
A. Current Account
Debits
Imports (f.o.b.)* ..
Shipping ..
Interest, profits and dividends ..
Travel
Migrants’ funds, legacies, private gifts (net)
Government transactions
Total debits
Credits
Exports and re-exports (f.o.b.)*
Shipping ..
Interest, profits and dividends ..
Travel
Government settlements, war disposals, etc. (net)
Other (net) .. ..  
Total credits
Balance of current transactions excluding defence aid
net (credit, +; debit, —)
of which (a) visible trade
(b) invisible: Government
other
total
Defence aid (grant less US share of counterpart)
Balance of current transactions including defence aid
net (credit, +; debit, —)
1,978
191
106
75
21
174
2,545
1,841
282
200
42
35
176
2,576
2,378
196
121
85
-4
163
3,496
308
183
104
5
187
2,927
327
216
82
7
212
2,939
4,283
3,771
2,252
333
265
61
27
299
+ 31
-137
-139
+307
+168
+ 31
3,237
+298
-126
-136
+560
+424
2,749
443
300
75
36
266
3,869
—414
-747
-151
+484
+333
+ 4
2,825
436
284
80
43
251
3,919
+298 -410
+148
-102
-169
+419
+250
+121
+269
*Owing to differences in timing and coverage and other factors, the figures for imports and exports
used in the balance of payments calculations are not comparable with those used in the Accounts of
Trade and Navigation.
TRADE
US
TABLE 11 (contd.)
£ million
B. Investment and Financing Account
Grants, etc. (to UK, +)
Overseas investment (—), borrowing (+), etc.
Sterling liabilities, etc. (increase, +) ..
Drawings on ( + ) or additions to (—) gold and dollar
reserves
Total of investment and financing
of winch, net change in capital account
1949
+154
-378
+190
+ 3
- 31
-185
1950
+140
- 84
+221
-575
-298
-438
1951
+ 43
-315
+338
+344
+410
+367
1952
- 95
-349
+175
-269
-269
Source: UK Balance of Payments 1946-1953, Cmd. 8976.
and it is linked with that of the balance of the sterling area1 as a whole, for the gold and
dollar reserves of Britain serve also the needs of other sterling area countries. Before the
war Britain’s adverse balance with North America was roughly offset by its favourable
balance with the rest of the sterling area, which in turn had a favourable balance with
North America. In the years immediately after the war tins triangular balance of pay¬
ments was not possible, as the war-time disruption of the economies of south-east Asia
and Europe left Britain, the sterling area and other countries much more dependent on
North America for basic raw materials and foodstuffs, and much less able to pay for them.
Between 1945 and 1947 Britain was able to maintain an adequate level of imports only
by drawing heavily on reserves and by the receipt of external loans, including a line of
credit of $3,750 million from the United States, granted in December I945> and of
$1,250 million from Canada, granted in March 1946.
From 1948 onwards. United States dollars, made available under the European Re¬
covery Programme (ERP), and subsequently under the United States Mutual Defence
Assistance and Mutual Aid Programmes, gave economic support directly to Britain and
Europe and indirectly to the sterling area and the rest of the world. At the same time the
Organization for European Economic Co-operation (OEEC), set up in April I94$>
undertook the administration of dollar aid on the European side and helped to stimulate
recovery by encouraging self-help and co-operative action amongst the European member
countries.2 In 1949 a temporary recession in United States business activity, in conjunction
with other factors, led to a serious drain on the sterling area’s gold and dollar reserves.
To protect these reserves the United Kingdom Government devalued the exchange
value of sterling, on 18th September 1949. from $4.03 to $2.80.
The devaluation, in conjunction with other factors such as the industrial recovery in
iThe essence of the sterling area is the readiness of its members generally to keep most of their
monetary reserves in the form of sterling in London and to use London as their banker. They satisfy
their needs for other currencies by drawing on the sterling area pool, paying for them out of their
sterling holdings. The sterling area now consists of the British Commonwealth (except Canada)
British Trust Territories, British Protectorates and Protected States, together with the Irish Republic,
Burma, Iceland, Iraq, Jordan and Libya. South Africa and Iceland do not draw on the sterling area
pool but meet their dollar needs independently. The sterling area as a whole accounts for about a
third of world trade.
2Two of the major achievements of OEEC have been the formation of the European Payments
Union (EPU) in July 1950, and the various measures taken to liberalize trade, i.e. relax quantitative
restrictions on imports.
n6
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
America and the outbreak of the Korean war, helped to bring about a marked improve¬
ment in Britain’s dollar position in 1950. By December of that year the improvement
in the sterling area’s gold and dollar reserves was such that dollar aid to Britain under
the European Recovery Programme was suspended.1
The improvement of 1950 was, however, followed in 1951 by a serious balance of pay¬
ments crisis which affected both the United Kingdom itself and the sterling area as a
whole. This setback was due in part to the steep falls in the prices of sterling area raw
materials from the peak levels of early 1951, and in part to substantial increases in imports
by the sterling area from the non-sterling world. It resulted in a loss of gold and dollar
reserves of ^55° million in the second half of 1951.
TABLE 12
Balance of Payments of the Sterling Area
million
United Kingdom current balance
with:
Non-sterling countries [a)
Rest of sterling area
Rest of sterling area balance (b) with:
Non-sterling countries ..
United Kingdom..
1951
-695
+297
-398
+164
-297
-133
1952
1st Half
-165
+284
+119
-284
-284
2nd Half
+ 107
+ 65
+172
+135
- 65
+ 70
Year
- 58
+349
+291
+135
-349
-214
Total sterling area balance with non¬
sterling countries
-531
-165
+242
+ 77
(a) Includes defence aid (see Table 11).
(b) The RSA balance, as shown here, includes capital transactions with the non-sterling world. It is
an estimate made in the United Kingdom to fit in with the United Kingdom’s balance of payments;
it does not therefore necessarily correspond precisely to the sum of the individual balances shown
by other sterling area countries, owing to differences in timing, geographical treatment, coverage
and sources of information.
Source: Economic Survey for 1953.
1The total amount of dollar aid allotted to the United Kingdom up to this date was $2,694 million
in grants and loans.
As against the aid received from external sources after the war, the United Kingdom made available
considerable sums to other countries. Between 1st January 1946 and 31st December 1952 the amounts
spent by the United Kingdom on defence purposes overseas, loans and grants to other countries and
the redemption of sterling balances was as follows:
i. Direct United Kingdom military expenditure overseas—.£1,158 million.
ii. Reduction of sterling liabihties to oversea countries—£266 million.
iii. Loans and grants to oversea countries, including United Kingdom dependencies, and to
international organizations—£1,504 million.
Loans and grants received by the United Kingdom in the same period amounted to £2,556 million.
TRADE
II?
For the United Kingdom, and for the whole sterling area, the year 1952 was dominated
by the need to check this crisis. Immediate stop-gap measures, including an increase in
the Bank Rate and other steps to curtail internal demand, and measures to limit imports,
were taken by the United Kingdom in November 1951. In January 1952, at a meeting of
Commonwealth Finance Ministers, action was agreed upon to bring the sterling area into
balance with the rest of the world in the second half of 1952, to stop the drain on the gold
and dollar reserves and to eliminate inflation. The United Kingdom’s part in this was to
achieve a balance on current account with the non-sterling world ha the second half of
1952 (including defence aid) and to be at least in current balance with the whole world
(excluding United States defence aid).
These immediate aims were accomplished. Even without taking United States defence
aid into account the sterling area had a substantial surplus with the non-sterling world in
the second half of 1952, and the United Kingdom was also in current surplus with the
non-sterling world during the same period. The drain of gold and dollars was stopped and
the reserves rose a little during the second half of the year. An important factor in the
strengthening of the reserves was United States defence aid, receipts of which totalled
about ^120 million in 1952. On the other hand, the United Kingdom paid out nearly
-£75 million during the year in interest and amortization on the United States and
Canadian loans.
At the end of April 1953 the reserves had risen to ^813 ($2,273) million compared with
-£594 million a year earlier.
Table 12 analyses the improvement which took place in the sterling area’s balance of
payments between 1951 and 1952.
Tourist Trade
An important invisible item in the balance of payments is the net expenditure on
tourist trade. Although Britain’s tourist earnings are normally exceeded by its tourist expen¬
diture overseas,1 catering for tourist visitors to the United Kingdom is an important and
growing industry. In 1952,733,000 visitors came to the United Kingdom; they spent about
^80 million, of which ^29 million ($82 million) was in dollar currency. The general
task of fostering and developing the tourist, catering and holiday services is undertaken
by the British Travel and Holidays Association, which was established in 1950.2 Control
over the Association’s affairs is vested in a Board of which the Chairman and eight mem¬
bers are appointed by the Board of Trade, while other members represent various tourist
interests.
The Finance and Regulation of Trade
Certain essential foods and raw materials are still imported by Government purchase,
although such control now covers a very much more limited field than in earlier post-war
years. British private trade and payments are broadly governed by the system of exchange
control and of import and export control operated during and since the war. Different
considerations apply of course to trade within the sterling area and to trade with countries
outside it.
Exchange Control
Exchange control began in the United Kingdom on the outbreak of war in September
1939; the legal basis of the purely financial control was provided by the Defence (Finance)
Regulations issued under the Emergency Powers (Defence) Acts. In October 1947 these
temporary war-time powers were, in the main, superseded by permanent legislation—
the Exchange Control Act, 1947, which, except for the control of securities, carried on
with only minor changes the form of control that had been built up during the war. The
1For particulars of the basic currency allowance for United Kingdom tourists visiting certain over¬
sea countries see p. 118.
2The BTHA was formed by merging two organizations—the British Tourist and Holidays Board
and the Travel Association.
n8
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
wide powers contained in the Act are vested in the Treasury, which is responsible for
exchange control policy. Most of the administration is in practice carried out by the Bank
of England as agent of the Treasury—and in turn the Bank of England has delegated to
the commercial banks a wide variety of powers to deal with applications.
Exchange control is primarily a financial control to conserve and allocate foreign
exchange resources, control capital movements, and ensure that investment abroad flows
into desirable channels. This imphes the gathering in of all the foreign exchange earnings
and the control over the use of foreign currency, whether for import payments, for
commercial payments, or for foreign investment. Exchange control inevitably imphes
an element of discrimination since it sets out to restrict certain payments while conserving
foreign exchange for expenditure regarded as essential. In recent years many exchange
restrictions have been relaxed. The relaxations have been made possible by improvements
in the balance of payments.
For the purpose of operating exchange control, non-sterling area countries are arranged
in groups, between and within which sterling payments are controlled in varying degrees.
Residents of other parts of the sterling area are not of course subject to the United King¬
dom Exchange Control Act, but each country in the rest of the sterling area has its own
exchange control system on broadly similar lines. This assists the United Kingdom to
continue to fulfil its traditional role as banker to the sterling area and to allow sterling
both for current and for capital transactions (except so far as they are restricted under the
Control of Borrowing Order) to flow freely to all parts of it.
United Kingdom Residents. All residents within the United Kingdom must surrender
to an authorized dealer (i.e. a bank), against payment in sterling, all receipts of any
foreign currency specified in orders issued by the Treasury, but in practice some
exemption is given to foreign nationals; the reinvestment of any receipts of specified
foreign currency of a capital nature is normally allowed. Permission must be obtained
for all payments, either in foreign currency or in sterling, to persons outside the sterling
area.
The chief payments abroad are for imports. Exchange is granted for goods imported
under the authority of either general or specific licences granted by the Board of Trade.
Foreign exchange is also granted for expenses incidental to trade transactions and may be
authorized in moderate amounts for various personal reasons. A basic travel allowance
of -£50 a year in foreign exchange can be drawn by United Kingdom residents wishing
to travel to any of 47 listed countries, including all European countries1 and their
monetary areas overseas, and many other countries outside the dollar area. Emigrants
to the member countries of the Organization for European Economic Co-operation
are allowed to transfer ^5,000 per family unit in equal annual instalments over four
years, and emigrants to other countries can transfer from 1,000 to £2,000 (dependent
on the number in the family).
Residents Outside the Sterling Area. The transfer abroad from the United Kingdom of
dividends, profits and other current earnings of persons resident in countries outside the
sterling area is freely authorized. But capital assets in the United Kingdom belonging to
non-residents are normally blocked, and, if sold, the proceeds have to be credited to a
blocked account where they are available for investment in any sterling securities maturing
in not less than ten years and quoted on any stock exchange in the sterling area. However,
as a special concession, capital directly invested after 1st January 1950 in projects approved
by Exchange Control may be repatriated at any time to the extent of the sterling value
of the original investment plus capital profits accrued. Since March 1953 there have been
considerable relaxations in restrictions on the use of blocked sterling accounts.
In general, a non-resident may transfer the sterling he holds (other than blocked
1The limit of £50 can be exceeded for Scandinavian countries.
TRADE
119
sterling) freely for any purpose to anyone in his own country or in the sterling area. He
may also transfer it to residents of various other countries1; the extent to which he may
be permitted to do so depends upon the country (or group of countries) in which he lives.
Non-sterling area countries are arranged in the following main groups:
American Account Countries. (United States and dependencies, Bolivia, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Guatemala, Haiti, Hon¬
duras, Liberia, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, the Philippine Republic, Salvador,
Venezuela, and the Pacific Islands formerly under Japanese administration but now
under United States administration.)
Canada.
Transferable Account Countries. (Austria, Chile, Czechoslovakia, Denmark,
Egypt, Ethiopia, Finland, German Federal Republic, Greece, Italian Monetary
Area, Netherlands Monetary Area, Norway, Poland, Spanish Monetary Area,
Anglo-Egyptian Sudan, Sweden, Thailand, and the USSR.)
Bilateral Account Countries. (Argentina, Belgian Monetary Area, Brazil, Bulgaria,
China, Formosa, French Franc Area, French Somali Coast, Germany (Eastern),
Hungary, Israel, Japan, the Lebanon, Paraguay, Persia, Peru, Portuguese Monetary
Area, Roumania, Switzerland and Liechtenstein, Syria, Tangier, Turkey,
Uruguay, Vatican City, and Yugoslavia.)
Unclassified Countries. (All countries not in the groups above, including Afghani¬
stan, Albania, Andorra, Nepal, Saudi Arabia, and Yemen.)
Automatic Transfer Facilities. In addition to transferring sterling within the same country
(or to the sterling area) non-residents may also transfer it to other countries without
individual permission of the United Kingdom Exchange Control in the following
circumstances:
American Account Countries. Sterling held by residents of these countries may
be converted into United States or Canadian dollars or expended for any purpose in
American account countries or Canada or in transferable account countries or
unclassified countries.
Canada. Sterling held by residents in Canada may be converted into United States
or Canadian dollars or expended outside Canada in the same way as sterling held
by residents of the American account area.
Transferable Account Countries. So far as United Kingdom legislation is con¬
cerned sterling on transferable accounts may be transferred freely to any transferable
account country or unclassified country. However, by arrangement with the
monetary authorities in transferable account countries payments from transferable
accounts without the express permission of the United Kingdom Control may
be allowed only for direct current transactions and certain merchanting transac¬
tions involving only the sterling area and transferable account countries.
Unclassified Countries. Sterling held by residents of these countries may be expen¬
ded for any purpose anywhere within the group.
Administrative Transfer Facilities. Transfers otherwise than under the rules described
above are allowed under specific authorization, which is usually given if the transaction
concerned is not likely to harm the United Kingdom or the sterling area. Such transfers
are very widely allowed.
As a result of these arrangements the use of sterling to finance trade outside the sterling
area is considerable and is an important factor in facilitating multilateral world trade.
1This does not apply to China, Formosa and Persia, which are subject to special restrictions
120
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Use of Sterling Transfer Facilities
Import and Export Control
The Import, Export and Customs Powers (Defence) Act, 1939, empowers the Board
of Trade to make Orders prohibiting or regulating the import or export of goods. The
most important of the current Orders made by virtue of this Act are the Import of Goods
(Control) Order, 1940, and the Export of Goods (Control) Order, 1953 (as amended).
Although the powers of both import and export control derive from the same legislation,
the purpose and mechanism are quite distinct.
The control on imports apphes to all goods imported into the United Kingdom from
non-sterling areas. The main purpose of the control is to safeguard the country’s balance
of payments. Licences are issued by the Board of Trade authorizing private imports of
particular commodities from one or more stated sources. Import control is closely linked
with exchange control; a currency allocation is granted in respect of all imports for which
licences are granted.
A number of different methods of licensing imports on private account are used in
United Kingdom import licensing practice. The main ones are as follows:
Open General Licences (OGLs). These authorize any person in the United Kingdom to
import a specified commodity without any limits of quantity or other condition, either
from any country in the world, or from specified countries or groups of countries
‘World OGLs’ are issued in respect of a limited number of commodities. OGLs permitting
imports from specified countries only have been more extensively used.
Open Individual Licences (OILs). These are licences issued to individual traders permit¬
ting them to import specified classes of goods, without Emit of quantity, either (in a few
instances) from any country, or more usually from certain specified countries or groups
of countries.
Individual Import Licences. These licences permit the import of particular classes of goods
in limited quantities. There are three basic methods of determining which persons are
to be allowed to import the goods and in what quantities:
1. Ad hoc consideration of applications for licences.
2. Apportionment of quotas among importers.
3. Apportionment of quotas among exporters to Britain by arrangement with the
governments of the countries concerned.
The choice between these methods of apportionment is, of course, dependent on the
circumstances of the trade concerned.
Export controls, which have latterly been very much reduced, are now imposed for
four main reasons. The first arises from strategic considerations. The second aims through
Exchange Control to prevent, for example, the export of capital in the form of diamonds
or the use of cheap sterling in certain commodities, such as wool. The third aims at the
conservation of scarce materials, such as steel plate for ships, or foodstuffs which are
TRADE
121
rationed or subsidized. Finally, there are balance of payments considerations, e.g., con¬
trolling the amount of dollar materials bought for sterling.
The procedure is to make all the goods and materials in question subject to export
licence and to decide each case on its merits, after taking the advice of other interested
Departments. The mechanism of export licensing control differs from that of import
control in that all goods are held to be freely exportable to all destinations unless there is
a specific ban on their export without licence. Goods subject to export licence are usually
on individual licence (equivalent to the specific import licence), but in a few cases Open
General Licences are issued. In a number of other cases bulk hcences are issued for varying
periods. Certain strategic materials may be exported without licence to the Common¬
wealth, the Irish Republic and the United States, but exports to other destinations are
subject to export licensing control.
Importation by State Trading
Foodstuffs
Since the war a number of important foodstuffs, especially those which have been
rationed, have continued to be imported by the Ministry of Food and its agents. During
the last few years many foods and feedingstuffs have, however, been returned to private
trading, and the process is continuing, e.g., private imports of cereals and feedingstuffs
have been allowed since 1st May 1953.
A wide range of goods purchased by the Government is acquired under short-term
contracts of up to twelve months’ duration or by spot purchases. There are also a number
of long-term contracts, for two years or more, in a variety of forms. Quantities may cover
the total exportable surplus, an agreed percentage of the exportable surplus, or a fixed
amount. Many contracts provide for a periodic price review, usually annual, within a
maximum swing up or down. In 1952 there were 45 long-term contracts covering two
years or more, of which 37 were with Commonwealth countries.
Rato Materials
During the second world war essential raw materials for military and civil industrial
requirements were bought from abroad by the Government. Since the end of the war
many commodities including wool, rubber, all kinds of timber, hides and skins, true hemp,
tin, aluminium, copper, lead, ferro-alloys, zinc, and magnesium have been returned to
private purchase. Raw materials for which the Government remains the sole importer
are: jute and jute goods, flax, sulphur and pyrites, while since July 1951 the Government
has again become the sole importer of tungsten.
Total purchases on Government account of metals and metal ores amounted during
1952 to a value of -£170-7 million f.o.b., while imports on Government account of other
raw materials amounted to ^72-7 million f.o.b.
Private Trade
The export trade and most of the import trade of the United Kingdom is conducted by
private firms.
Methods of export trading vary considerably, according to the firm, the industry, the
product and the market. A good deal of United Kingdom export trade, especially of the
smaller manufacturing firms, is conducted through export merchants in the United
Kingdom; many firms, however, sell to importers and consumers abroad through their
own agents or resident representatives in the countries concerned; in other cases, sales are
made through a firm’s own branch office, distributing organization or subsidiary sales
company established in oversea markets.
Similarly, in import trade, many large firms engaged in manufacture or domestic
trade buy directly from oversea suppliers, while smaller firms may find it more
convenient to buy through intermediaries such as import/export houses, commission
agents, and the representatives of oversea firms.
l
122
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Britain is the home of many important international commodity exchanges. These
were largely closed during the war but have since been reopened as circumstances have
permitted. Those now in operation include the London Rubber Market, the London
Wool Exchange, and the London Metal Exchange. Apart from their use for direct
imports into the United Kingdom, they also transact much business between buyers and
sellers from other countries. The London commodity markets are, in fact, of world-wide
importance.
Government Assistance to Oversea Trade
The United Kingdom Government provides a service of information and advice to
merchants and manufacturers in the export trade. The Government Department most
concerned is the Board of Trade, which calls upon the assistance of oversea representatives.
At each Embassy or Legation there is always an officer of high rank, a Minister, Coun¬
sellor or First Secretary (Commercial), who specializes in commercial matters. These
officers direct the commercial activities of Consular officers in their respective territories.
In the Commonwealth there is at every important centre an officer of the Trade Com¬
missioner Service, who is directly responsible to the Board of Trade.
Oversea officers regularly report on local economic and commercial conditions
and pay special attention to local demand for particular commodities. They indicate
potential demand for individual products and seek out and pass on inquiries for United
Kingdom goods. Assistance is also given to United Kingdom exporters in finding agents
and likely importers. From the records the Department keeps in London, brought up to
date by reports from its oversea officers, it can provide information for any country on:
(1) prospects for United Kingdom exports and requirements of particular markets;
(2) import restrictions and tariffs and duties on particular commodities;
(3) methods of trading;
(4) goods most likely to sell;
(5) local tastes and preferences in design;
(6) probity and influence of firms with which an exporter contemplates entering into
business relations.
British Industries Fair
One of the functions of the Commercial Relations and Exports Department of the
Board of Trade is to sponsor the British Industries Fair, the largest national trade fair held
regularly in any country. The first BIF was held in 1915, and brought together 591 ex¬
hibitors who occupied 88,000 square feet (8,175 square metres). The Fair has since been an
annual event except for a break in 1925 and again from 1940 to 1947. Since 1947 it has
consisted of exhibits by manufacturers within the United Kingdom and representative
displays by the Governments of Commonwealth countries.
Part of the BIF is held at Olympia and Earls Court, London; part is held simultaneously
at Castle Bromwich, Birmingham. The Birmingham section of the Fair is managed by the
Birmingham Chamber of Commerce in close co-operation with the Board of Trade
sponsoring department.
About 113,500 buyers from countries overseas have attended the BIF in the seven years
since its revival in 1947, apart from United Kingdom buyers. The 1953 Fair attracted
nearly 2,300 manufacturers, who exhibited the products of 90 industries. The exhibits were
grouped in sections of closely allied trades, and occupied nearly 900,000 square feet (about
84,000 square metres).
The Export Credits Guarantee Department
The Export Credits Guarantee Department of the Board of Trade is run on commercial
lines and offers facilities to United Kingdom exporters and merchants which enable them to
TRADE
123
insure against the main risks of financial loss incurred in oversea trading. These facilities
have been developed over a period of more than twenty years, and there are now about
4,000 policy holders on the Department’s books.
The risks covered range over a wide field, and include events such as insolvency or
prolonged default on the part of the buyer; exchange restrictions preventing the transfer
of sterling to the United Kingdom; war, civil war in the buyer’s country, etc.; and any
other cause of loss occurring outside the United Kingdom which is beyond the control
of the exporter and the buyer. The risk of cancellation or non-renewal of an export
licence in the United Kingdom, or the imposition of restrictions on the export of goods
not previously subject to licence, is also covered.
Broadly speaking, the types of guarantee issued are divided into three main categories:
(1) Short-term Policies, which cover mainly consumer goods sold on credit terms of
up to six months; these are normally given on a whole turnover basis. In addition
to direct United Kingdom exports, cover may be given for goods of foreign origin
sold by a United Kingdom merchant to third countries, provided this trade does
not conflict with direct United Kingdom exports. Cover may commence either
from the date of the contract or from the date of shipment.
(2) Medium-term Policies, which cover capital and other goods sold on credit terms of
over six months. These are specific guarantees covering individual contracts.
(3) Dollar-Drive Policies, which have been specially devised to assist exports to Canada,
the United States and the Latin American dollar account countries. In addition to
the standard types of policies included under (1) and (2), special policies have been
written to assist exporters to enter or increase their business in these markets by
means of market surveys, advertising and other forms of sales promotion, and
stockholding. This special cover can be offered from the time of purchase of raw
materials to the point of sale, and if desired on a joint venture’ basis. The Depart¬
ment is ready to consider any reasonable and soundly based proposition which
may be put forward by any exporter with a view to increasing United Kingdom
sales to these markets.
In the case of all the Department’s policies, the exporter or merchant is required to
retain an interest in the debt or risk involved, and consequently guarantees are given up
to a maximum of 90 per cent. Premium rates are assessed separately for each country, and
vary according to the risks and terms of payment. They are very moderate in relation to
the magnitude of the risks which the Department is now covering, and to the payments
already made for claims caused, for example, by events in Australia, Brazil and Persia.
DOMESTIC TRADE
The internal trade of the United Kingdom can be divided into two broad categories:
trade in raw materials and intermediate products which do not reach the hands of the
public, and trade in consumer goods. An account of the supply and distribution of con¬
sumer goods is given below.
Wholesale Trade
An indication of the general pattern of wholesale trade before the war is given in some
pioneer unofficial studies, including The Distribution of Consumer Goods, by James B.
Jefferys, pubhshed in 1950.
Jcfferys estimated that the number of wholesalers handling the home wholesale trade
of the United Kingdom in consumer goods in 1938 was between 25,000 and 30,000.
With the addition of wholesaler-retailers, the greatest numbers of which were found in
the tobacco, confectionery and grocery trade, it was estimated that the total would be over
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
124
50,000. Methods of distribution were varied and complex, and their classification difficult.
On the basis of JefFerys’ researches, however, it would appear that 10 to 15 per cent of
sales (by value) are made to consumers through producers’ own selling organizations,
including their own retail shops, and in about half the rest the producers sell direct to
retailers. Where wholesale channels exist, they take a number of forms. Fish, for example,
is auctioned at ports mainly to port wholesalers to sell to inland wholesalers at certain
main distributive centres, who in turn sell to retailers, although a significant number of
retailers buy direct from port wholesalers. Most producers of fresh fruit and vegetables
(many of whom are small growers) market their products through a wholesale market
where most of it is handled by selling agents on a commission basis. Wholesale distribu¬
tion of consumer goods is not, however, generally centralized.
Retail Trade
Retail outlets of the United Kingdom can conveniently be classified into four types:
(a) the independent shop, (b) the departmental store, (c) the multiple shop and the variety
chain store, and (d) the co-operative society. There are as yet few self-service shops in the
United Kingdom.
The Independent Shop. This is the ordinary retail business with a single shop or a few
shops. Such shopkeepers handle more than one-half of the retail trade of the United
Kingdom. Most of them serve customers in the immediate neighbourhood, often supply¬
ing a great variety of commodities. Some specialist shops, however, have a widespread
and even an international clientele.
Departmental Stores, Multiple Shops and Variety Chain Stores. A departmental store is a
shop having a number of departments for different types of goods, while a multiple shop
is a branch of a firm which owns or controls a number of similar retail outlets. Some shops
are multiple departmental stores, i.e. they belong to a firm running several departmental
stores. Similar to these in their wide range of goods are the variety chain stores, which
are multiple shops of a special kind. Their main features are the sale of a wide variety of
goods under one roof, usually with low price limits, and the standardization of layout and
general appearance.
The Co-operative Society. Retail co-operative societies are voluntary, non-profit-
making associations engaged in retail trade and controlled by their members, who are also
their customers. Any operating surplus is returned annually to members as a dividend.
Dividends are proportionate to the value of purchases made in the year and not to invest¬
ment in the society.
Retail co-operative societies sell to the general public as well as to their own members,
but membership is open to anyone willing to pay a small deposit on a minimum share
and entitles the member not only to a dividend but to an equal voice with other members
in deciding the Society’s policy. Investment of individual members is limited to ^500
and the rules of some societies may fix lower hmits. Only a low fixed interest is paid.
Retail co-operative societies are free to buy where they will or to produce their own
goods, but, in order to secure the advantages of large-scale production and trade, they
have collectively established wholesale and production societies.1
At the end of 1951 there were 1,109 retail co-operative societies registered under the
Industrial and Provident Societies Acts, but nearly a quarter of the entire co-operative
membership was provided by the eight largest societies, each of which had a membership
of over 100,000. The total trade of the retail societies in 1951 was £650 million, about
7 per cent of the total national expenditure on consumer goods and services. Analysis of
the 1950 sales shows that in particular categories of goods the proportion of co-operative
lThe two major wholesale societies are the Co-operative Wholesale Society Limited and the
Scottish Co-operative Wholesale Society Limited.
TRADE
125
to total national sales is very much higher, e.g., about 17 per cent for food and over 8 per
cent for clothing.
The 1950 Census oj Distribution
The first report of the Board of Trade’s 1950 Census of Distribution, published in
January 1953, gives details of retail trade in Great Britain in 1950. The report covers
establishments and organizations (an organization is an undertaking operating one or
more establishments) whose chief activity is selling goods to the general public, but not
the catering, motor car and repair and service trades. Included in the report are 531,143
establishments employing 2,265,000 persons (including working proprietors and unpaid
family workers) with a turnover of -£4,923 million and a wages bill of £392 milhon.
Owing to some non-response in the census these figures are not complete but are estimated
to represent about 91 per cent of the total number of retail establishments and about 95 per
cent of the total retail turnover of the trades examined. Table 13 classifies retail establish¬
ments by kind of business. In addition there were nearly 4,000 central offices and ware¬
houses belonging to the larger organizations, employing 117,000 persons with a wages
bill of £42 million.
TABLE 13
Retail Establishments by Kind of Business
Kind of business
Number
Sales
Persons
engaged
Wages
and
salaries
Total
Grocery group..
Other food retailers ..
Confectioners, tobacconists, newsagents
Clothing group  
Hardware group
Booksellers, stationers
Chemists’ goods, photographic goods
group  
Furniture group
Jewellery, leather and sports goods
group  
General group
including:
Department stores
Variety stores
Coal, builders’ materials, corn group
Other non-food retailers
531,143
129,345
126,701
66,312
89,046
30,223
9,528
16,733
16,086
13,944
1,665
529
913
20,137
11,423
£000
4,922,931
1,170,723
917,016
455,085
885,178
218.341
68,328
158,606
259,006
79,766
471,343
308,339
106,431
186.342
53,196
2,265,291
478,398
480,473
224,941
384,425
111,008
51,838
82,232
90,453
42,972
198,659
129,304
52,498
82,128
31,164
£000
392,070
68,102
82.877
14,931
74,330
20,960
7,904
18,936
23,144
7,927
48.878
33,181
10,316
17,382
6,700
Rationing
There are still certain controls in Britain over the production and distribution of con¬
sumer goods for the home market. In the case of the former these are effected by such
means as quotas, licences, and a general supervision of the volume of raw materials
available; in the case of the latter, occasionally by specific rationing to the individual or
the wholesaler, and in some cases by indirect taxation. Schemes of rationing or specific
restriction of the supply of goods to the individual consumer still in force are summarized
below.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
126
Food
Ordinary Rationing. Under the ordinary rationing scheme, the consumer is restricted
to a fixed quantity of each rationed food for a fixed period. The goods still rationed in
this way in October 1953 were carcass meat, fats (butter, margarine and cooking fats),
bacon and certain kinds of cheese. Consumers must register with a retailer for each of
these foods. The amounts of the rations vary with changes in total supplies.1
In addition to the ordinary rations, certain invalids receive special allowances of food
which are based on the recommendations of the Food Rationing (Special Diets) Advisory
Committee of the Medical Research Council. Seamen receive allowances of food in
accordance with the scale laid down in the Merchant Shipping Acts, and the marine
workers share in these arrangements on a modified scale. An extra half-ration of meat is
allowed for expectant mothers. Underground coal miners are also entitled to an extra
allowance of meat, and certain categories of workers who are without catering facilities
receive a special allowance of cheese. Vegetarians also receive a special allowance of
cheese and extra vegetable margarine in place of their meat and bacon rations.
Catering Establishments. Ration coupons need not be surrendered for meals taken in
catering establishments, but people staying in a catering establishment for five nights or
more must produce their ration books to the management in order that the appropriate
coupons may be cancelled. This does not apply to visitors from overseas on a short visit
to Britain (see below).
Supphes of rationed or controlled foods to catering establishments are restricted to
amounts roughly equivalent to those obtained by the domestic consumer. The allowance
is, in general, related to the number of meals served. Special higher scales of allowances
apply to industrial works canteens, commercial catering establishments serving mainly
industrial workers, schools, nurseries, youth centres, etc. Industrial canteens are divided
into two classes; those catering for workers in specified heavy industries receive larger
allowances than others.
A pie scheme, for the distribution of meat pies and packed meals, operates in rural areas
for the benefit of agricultural workers without canteen facilities.
Visitors from Overseas. Visitors from overseas do not require ration documents during
the first 13 weeks of a visit if they stay in catering estabh'shments. If they stay in private
houses they can obtain the necessary ration documents on application (either personally
or by proxy) to any Food Office.
Domestic Fuel
The supply of solid fuel for domestic use is restricted under the Coal Distribution
Order, 1943, by the imposition of ‘maximum permitted quantities’. These are not
rations and provide no assurance that supphes will be sufficient for everyone to purchase
the maximum amount allowed. For the purposes of control, solid fuel is usually divided
into two groups: house coal and boiler fuel (the latter consisting for the most part of
anthracite and coke). It is usual, in defining the maximum permitted quantities under
each of these two headings, to give a total figure for the year from May to April inclusive,
and separate figures for the summer months, May to October, and the winter months,
November to April. The northern regions of Great Britain, north of a line from Bristol
to the Wash, have commonly been allowed rather more house coal than the southern
regions.
Households which use solid fuel for cooking or have other special needs can obtain fuel
additional to the maximum permitted quantity on grant of a licence from the local fuel
office of the Ministry of Fuel and Power.
1The Government subsequently announced that all food rationing would end during 1954.
VII. INDUSTRY
ORGANIZATION AND PRODUCTION
The United Kingdom is one of the most highly industrialized countries in the world.
Nine people work in mining, manufacturing and building for every one in agriculture.
Location
In the early part of the nineteenth century the principal factor in the location of British
manufacturing industry was coal, which was then the main source of industrial heat and
power. It was, however, by no means the only factor; raw materials, such as iron ore in the
West Midlands, West Cumberland, the Cleveland Hills in Yorksliire, and elsewhere, and
salt in Cheshire, had an important influence.
The rapid construction of the railway system between 1840 and 1880 greatly facilitated
the establishment and expansion of manufacture in many parts of the country. During the
present century the development of electric power and of motor transport has further
assisted the dispersal of industry. The dispersal has come about both through outward
growth of the older industrial areas and through the establishment of factories in other
towns, especially towns in the Midlands and South of England; and during the 1920s and
193os the ‘drift to the south’ became very marked. At the same time there was serious de¬
pression in many of the older industrial areas which depended on the traditional heavy
industries. The Government of the day therefore started to encourage new industries to
set up in these older areas and since 1945 the policy has been pursued vigorously.
Industry is concentrated chiefly in eight areas:
London. In the nineteenth century London was not a major industrial centre, though
there was shipbuilding on Thames-side and the variety of consumer-goods industries
natural to a vast city. During the twentieth century, however, a growth of industry, par¬
ticularly in the western suburbs, has both accompanied and contributed to the phenomenal
growth of Greater London. In addition to having building, food and drink industries,
London is the main centre in Britain of the clothing industry, of printing, of the manu¬
facture of furniture, of materials for the arts, of precision instruments and jewellery, and of
many other specialized goods. Small firms predominate in all these industries, so that the
average size of manufacturing firms in London is well below the national average. London
is also an important centre for light engineering and has some heavy engineering. Indeed,
London is so large and its industries so diverse that it is a substantial, if not the principal,
centre for many of the broad groups of manufacturing industries, with the notable ex¬
ception of textiles.
Midlands. The main Midland industrial area consists of the great conurbation centred on
Birmingham and Wolverhampton which includes portions of Staffordshire, Worcester¬
shire and Warwickshire, where there is a wide variety of industry, including notably the
manufacture of electrical and engineering goods and vehicles but also jewellery and pre¬
cision instruments, chemicals, rubber products and domestic metalware. The smaller ad¬
jacent conurbation of North Staffordshire centred on Stoke-on-Trent may be considered
as a separate industrial area and is devoted chiefly to the manufacture of pottery and china
and to the mining of coal. Derby, Nottingham, Leicester and Coventry are the principal
industrial towns in the rest of the Midland area. There are several small coal deposits
scattered throughout the area, while a large coalfield runs north and east of Derby and
Nottingham.
127
128
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Yorkshire. The West Riding of Yorkshire still contains much the biggest section of the
British woollen and worsted industry, though Leeds is now more concerned with clothing
and a variety of steel and engineering products. The modem woollen and worsted in¬
dustry lies farther west, at Bradford, Halifax and Huddersfield. The city of Sheffield, in the
extreme south of Yorkshire, is famous for its high-quality steel manufacture, its cutlery,
plate and tool industry and its heavy engineering. There are extensive coalfields in the
West Riding of Yorkshire.
Lancashire. Manchester is the commercial centre of the cotton textile industry. Most
cotton yam is spun in towns within a ten-mile radius of Manchester, but weaving is mostly
carried on somewhat farther to the north, in the Preston, Burnley, Nelson, Blackburn and
Colne areas. Manchester itself, besides having the variety of industry typical of a large city,
is one of Britain s chief centres of electrical and heavy engineering, while to the west of the
city expanding chemical industries have been developed. There are also coalfields in the
Manchester area. The whole region flanking the River Mersey is industrial as well as com¬
mercial; it is a Development Area (see p. 130). Liverpool, besides being a port and produce
market, is, after London, the greatest centre of food preparation, while shipbuilding and
repairing are carried on there and on the other side of the river at Birkenhead.
South Wales. The industrial area in South Wales and Monmouthshire has long been
dominated by coal, notably anthracite, though there are also steel and tinplate mills. The
steel and tinplate industries are being greatly modernized and expanded, and new light
industries of many kinds have been introduced into the area. Thus, the largest steel plant in
Europe was opened at Margam in July 1951, with a capacity output of 1 million tons a
year, most of which will become sheet and tinplate. Factories making consumer goods and
light engineering products have been opened on the trading estates (see p. 55) established
by the Government with the object of increasing employment and also of diversifying the
industrial structure.
Tyneside. In Northumberland and Durham, near the River Tyne, coal is the principal
industry. This region also has steel and engineering industries: it is one of Britain’s two
greatest shipbuilding areas, the other being in Scotland. Most of the shipyards are on the
lower reaches of the rivers Tyne, Tees and Wear. Additional employment and some
degree of diversification have been introduced during the post-war period by the estab¬
lishment of new light industries in the Development Area.
Scotland. The largest shipbuilding centre in Britain is on Clydeside. It has a marine
engineering industry and important neighbouring coalfields in the Lothians, Fife and
Lanark, although activity in this last field is now declining as the seams are worked out. It
also contains a flourishing steel industry. The commercial importance of Glasgow and the
size and varied appointments of the great ships produced on Clydeside have assured for this
area a variety of manufactures. The whole of the central lowlands of Scotland from the
Clyde to the Forth is industrialized and further industrial development has taken place since
the war, particularly in the Development Area, which includes Glasgow and the Lanark¬
shire coalfield.
Northern Ireland. Another important shipbuilding area is Belfast, in Northern Ireland,
even though it has no local supplies of coal and iron. It has, however, an engineering in¬
dustry, primarily marine engineering, and there is a growing aircraft assembly industry.
The traditional industries of Belfast are linen, rope and tobacco, but many new industries
have been introduced, particularly since the end of the second world war.
There are a number of other localized industries both within and outside the main in¬
dustrial areas, e.g., boots and shoes at Northampton and Leicester; jute at Dundee; hosiery
at Leicester and Nottingham; chemicals on Tees-side; cement on the Thames, Medway and
Humber; glass at St. Helens, Lancashire, and at Smethwick and Stourbridge, near Birm¬
ingham; carpets at Kidderminster, Halifax and Glasgow; tobacco in Bristol and Notting¬
ham; woollens in many of the Border towns of south Scotland; linen in the towns of
MAIN INDUSTRIAL AREAS
Main Industrial Areas
London
Midlands
(Birmingham Area)
West Yorkshire
Lancashire
South Wales
& Monmouth
Tyneside & North-
East England
Clydeside &
Central Scotland
Belfast
Other Industrial Centres
A. Nottingham
B. Stoke-on-Trent
C. Leicester
D. Northampton
E. Gloucester
F. Bristol
G. Southampton
H. Chatham
J. Plymouth
K. Edinburgh
L. Dundee
M. Hull
129
130
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Northern Ireland; sugar confectionery in Yorkshire, Bristol and Birmingham; shipbuild¬
ing and repairing at the main ports and up many of the estuaries. There is also a wide range
of industry scattered throughout the country, mainly concerned with consumer goods and
building and civil engineering.
Distribution of Industry Policy
Areas in Great Britain where there is likely to be a special danger of unemployment may
be scheduled by the Board of Trade as ‘Development Areas’ under the Distribution of In¬
dustry Act, 1945. The purpose of this Act, and of the Distribution of Industry Act, 1950, is
to promote the growth of new industry and the expansion of existing industry in the De¬
velopment Areas. The main advantages which these Acts give to Development Areas are
that the Board of Trade may build factories for letting to suitable industry and the Treasury
may help by making loans or grants to undertakings which are unable to secure finance
through normal channels. There are Development Areas in the following parts of England
and Wales: the mining and coastal areas of Northumberland and Durham; West Cumber¬
land; South Wales and Monmouthshire; Wrexham; South Lancashire; Merseyside; and
North-East Lancashire, which became a Development Area on 3rd March 1953. In Scotland
the industrial area in and around the Clyde Valley, the Dundee area, and part of the High¬
lands have been scheduled as the Scottish Development Area.
The Government cannot direct a firm to go to any particular area or site. But, in ad¬
dition to the special powers in scheduled Development Areas, the Board of Trade has
statutory powers under the Town and Country Planning Acts, 1947, to ensure that new
industrial development throughout Great Britain is carried out consistently with the
proper distribution of industry. A certificate to this effect is necessary before planning
consent may be given by a local planning authority (see p. 255) for a new industrial
building or extension with an area of over 5,000 sq. ft. (464 square metres).
Of the 6,100 new factories and extensions to old ones, representing 130 million square
feet (approximately 12 million square metres) of factory space, built between 1st January
1945 and the end of 1952, 1,660 (40 per cent by factory space and value) were built in the
Development Areas.
The Industries Development Act (Northern Ireland), 1945, gives the Ministry of Com¬
merce of Northern Ireland similar powers in the whole of Northern Ireland.
Government assistance is not limited to Development Areas: it is given to other areas of
high unemployment not listed as Development Areas. The Buckie-Peterhead area in
north-east Scotland, which is heavily dependent on the fishing industry and has a hard core
of unemployment, is not a Development Area but is to receive help through the Develop¬
ment Commission (see p. 265). The Commission has agreed to consider sympathetically
requests for help in building small factories for industrialists who are prepared to go there.
Organization
The pattern of organization and ownership in the manufacturing, mining and building
and civil engineering sectors of British industry is varied; but, as in the rest ofthe economy,
the part played by public undertakings has increased since the war, particularly in mining
since coal was nationalized in 1946. In manufacturing and building, private enterprise still
accounts for the major part of activity, employing, in 1950, 96 per cent of the persons en¬
gaged in these industries. Also in terms of employment, only about 30 per cent of the
public utilities—gas, electricity, water and transport—was the concern of private enterprise.
The percentage for agriculture and mining grouped together was 62. The number of per¬
sons employed in the public sector of the economy as a whole increased by 50 per cent be¬
tween 1945 and 1950, so that by the middle of 1950, 22^ per cent of the total number of
persons in civil employment were in the public sector and 77^ per cent in the private sector.
In mid-1953 the position was still approximately the same.
INDUSTRY
131
Mining and Quarrying
Much the most important of the British extractive industries is coalmining.
The coalmining industry of Great Britain is operated as a single co-ordinated enterprise
under the direction of the National Coal Board, a public corporation (seep. 51) appointed
by the Minister of Fuel and Power. The mining of iron ore is in the hands of private com¬
panies, many of which, though retaining their individual names and managements, were
brought under public ownership by the Iron and Steel Act of 1949. Under the Iron and
Steel Act of 1953 (see p. 170) the companies are in process of being returned to private
ownership. Many of these companies, in addition to extracting ore, are engaged in at least
some of the manufacturing processes of iron and steel production.
Other mining and quarrying (e.g., sand, gravel, chalk, limestone, salt, tin, oil shale and
china clay) is undertaken by private enterprises, usually owned and operated by limited
liability companies.
Manufacturing
Most manufacturing is still in the hands of private enterprises. The companies primarily
concerned with the manufacture of iron and steel which were owned by the Iron and Steel
Corporation, and subject to its policy direction, are being returned to private ownership
under the Iron and Steel Act of 1953. Locomotives and rolling-stock for use on British
Railways are, to a great extent, built in workshops owned and operated by the British
Transport Commission, a public corporation appointed by the Minister of Transport and
Civil Aviation. A considerable quantity of arms and military equipment is made in Royal
Ordnance factories and other factories owned and operated by the Ministry of Supply,
while fighting ships are built in naval dockyards owned and operated by the Admiralty.
Some printing and bookbinding is undertaken by staffs of the Stationery Office, while
the repair, and to a limited extent the construction, of Post Office equipment is carried
on in factories run by the Post Office.
A survey of the size of all manufacturing establishments employing more than 10 per¬
sons was made by the Ministry of Labour and National Service in May I952l the results of
the survey are shown in Table 14.
Over a quarter of all employees in manufacturing industries are in establishments em¬
ploying from 100 to 500 persons. A high proportion of the biggest establishments are in
the heavy industries, while the average size of establishments in industries making con¬
sumer goods is smaller than in manufacturing industries as a whole. Comparisons with
results obtained in earlier surveys on similar lines suggest that there is a slow but significant
trend towards an increase in the average size of manufacturing establishments: in May
1952 establishments with 1,000 or more employees were found to employ 2,224,000
persons, more than twice as many as in 1935.
The size of establishments is not in itself an indication of the size of manufacturing firms,
as a number of firms own several establishments. There are no general surveys of the size
of manufacturing firms comparable to the survey of establishments. It is known, however,
that in a few industries a small number of big companies are responsible for most of the
total production. Shares in these companies are usually distributed among a great number
of holders and it is unusual for a few large holders to have a controlling interest.
The way in which the work of production is divided within and between different firms
varies from industry to industry. In the cotton industry, for example, it is usual for differ¬
ent firms to undertake the various main processes of production (spinning, weaving,
finishing), while in the woollen section of the wool textile industry all these processes are
commonly undertaken within the same firm. Some of the leading establishments in the
vehicles group of industries are primarily engaged on the assembly of parts, many of
which have been built for them under contract by specialist firms.
TABLE 14
Size of Manufacturing Establishments by Industries (May 1952)
BRITAIN : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
132
B
o
H
On GO
CT\ OO CM
<N CO ID
CN O
ON f''
NO 00
no go m ro tn
t-h m 00 (N cn
m 00 'st- no tj-
On n- ON
on 00 m
in on
of nf t-T
m on
no m
m m
co o o ^
ON ON no o o
00 CM ON T—I m cn
5
O
O
m
5 a
W
ON CJ
ON o
W
m r-~
NO OO
rn
00 r-
t-H r—i
CO T“H
mm I cn vo
N—I O
(N
T-l
L" O <N 1-1 O 00
i-H in cn i-H rn no
ni 'T CN CI 1—1
O On i-h
t-i 00
no in m
CNI Cn)
ON NO
m no m it 00 00
no cn cn cnj 1—(
O 1—I 1-H O T—( 00
m
cnT
ON
On
a
w
S
NO t^- o
o m m
co on
On t—i
r-
in cn)
CO-' CnT
o] o in 'T
co 00 10- co ^1- 00
t '' o- o oc
NO
of
o
W
'T o no co i-H in
CO CN CO N" CN
NO CO ON
ON ON N-
in in co
CO O
O CO
CO CO
5
CL,
O
o
t-l
O
b
a
03
a
o -o
a rt
o 8
i-t ^
'-M C
<U t-l ’-O
o
a ^ ^
a "cs
S
ill
S
H U
o
1-1
o
. Wi .
•.a •
’a
-o .
<D .&• ‘
a ^ -S
S R
. oj O
3
^ .a 8 .a
S w >
4-> 10
.a ©
o
a
•2 2
• ^ CD '
8 a
■ 03
a
rt
10
. 'TS
• O
o
tsC
1-1
to
: -a
a
-O
o
03
o
o
fcL ^
•S 8=!
S-S
o a
hn.a
Cfj u
J 8-S^3
"■C ^ 03”'
>< a! O O
CD CJ ' O
H ^ U £
u
fc1 <0 W E
a
03
a
03 £
t-i a
rt »r"
P-i S
bn
.a
(a) Number of establishments, (b) Number of employees (in thousands). Source: Ministry of Labour and National Service.
INDUSTRY
133
Building and Civil Engineering
In building and civil engineering most of the work is undertaken by private firms. Since
the end of the second world war, most new houses have been built by firms under con¬
tract to local authorities, but some have been built by building firms for private sale, and
some by local authorities employing building labour direct. In November 1951 measures
were taken to permit an increase in the proportion of private building of new houses.
A great deal of repair and maintenance work on houses let by local authorities has been
done by directly employed labour, while much repair and maintenance work on public
and industrial building has been done by the maintenance staff of the Ministry of Works
or other Government Departments, of the nationalized industries, of public authority
undertakings, and of industrial and commercial firms.
Building firms may be divided into those undertaking general building and civil engin¬
eering work and those undertaking highly specialized work, many of whom operate out¬
side as well as inside the building industry. Building is an industry of small firms; nearly a
third of building operatives work in firms employing from 20 to 99 persons, while about
30 per cent work in firms employing less than six persons.
Industrial Association
From the middle of the nineteenth century private industrial undertakings have in¬
creasingly entered into voluntary association for a number of different purposes. Some of
the more important of these purposes may be classified as follows:
1. The provision of common services, the exchange of information, liaison with
Government, and representation of their members’ point of view.
2. The regulation of trading practices. Where this involves restrictions on competition,
the Monopohes Commission (see p. 135) can be asked by the Board of Trade to
investigate the effect of such restrictions on the public interest.
3. Negotiation with trade unions about wages and conditions of work.
Associations for the first and third of these purposes cover with varying completeness
almost the whole of British industry but there are wide sectors of industry where there is
no collective agreement to regulate trading practice. Associations which deal with labour
matters generally consist of firms engaged in the same type of manufacturing process.
Organizations mainly concerned with representations to Government, provision of
common services or the regulation of prices are built up round a product or an allied group
of products. In an industrial sector concerned wholly with an allied group of products, a
single association may undertake all required functions.
There are about 270 national federations and probably about 1,600 other employers’
organizations (mostly regional or local, and members or branches of the national federa¬
tions) all concerned with negotiation of wages and conditions of work. Most of the
national federations are in turn affiliated to the British Employers’ Confederation, the national
body representing employers on labour questions affecting industry generally (see p. 220).
No comparable statistics exist for associations concerned with the provision of common
services, etc., or the regulation of trade and prices. There are, however, about 300 national
organizations which are affiliated to the Federation of British Industries, the national body
recognized as the spokesman for British industry on economic, commercial and pro¬
duction (as opposed to labour) questions. The FBI has offices in the main industrial centres
in the United Kingdom and is very widely represented abroad.
A number of the organizations affiliated to the FBI also deal with labour matters and are
affiliated to the British Employers’ Confederation. The two organizations work closely
together on matters of common interest.
Other important national associations of employers are the National Union oj Manu¬
facturers and the Association oj British Chambers of Commerce. The members of NUM are
over 5,000 manufacturing firms, mainly small or medium sized, and some 70 trade associa-
134
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
tions are affiliated to it. Like the FBI it has regional branches. The Association of British
Chambers of Commerce is the central organization to which local Chambers of Com¬
merce are affiliated. There are about 100 of these local Chambers. They are open to all
kinds of producers and traders and exist for promoting the interests of local industry and
commerce. These last three national organizations, all being concerned with industrial and
trading matters, often collaborate in the consideration of particular questions.
Relations with Government
The system has grown up whereby as a general rule each industry has a particular
Government Department as its ‘Production Department’, which is its point of contact
with the Government. The following are some of the responsibilities of a Production
Department:
(1) to consider the place of the industry in the economy as a whole;
(2) to apply to the industry whatever parts of the general economic policy are appro¬
priate to it, and to sponsor its needs, for example for a building licence.
The main Production Departments and the industries and services in which they are
interested are:
Board of Trade
Ministry of Supply
Admiralty
Ministry of Food ..
Ministry of Agriculture and
Fisheries
Ministry of Fuel and Power
Ministry of Transport and
Civil Aviation
Ministry of Works
Ministry of Housing and
Local Government
Ministry of Health
Ministry of Materials
All industries not the responsibility of another De¬
partment, among the most important being textiles
(including clothing), a large part of the chemical
industry and films.
Iron and steel and non-ferrous metals, vehicles, engin¬
eering (including aeronautical, electrical and radio)
and explosives.
Shipbuilding and ship repairing.
Procurement, processing and distribution of foods.
Farming, horticulture, agricultural machinery and
fisheries.
Coal, gas, electricity and oil.
Transport services (including civil aviation), road¬
making, and certain sections of the quarrying industry.
Building, civil engineering and building materials.
House building.
Medical and surgical goods.
Procuring of certain raw materials. Manufactures
made from jute, and the paper industry.
The Treasury and the Ministry of Labour and National Service, though prominent in
economic matters, have no production authority duties.
Some operations of industry and commerce are subject to Government control. Thus
the consent of the Treasury is required for the issue of large amounts of fresh capital or for
the purchase of foreign currency; that of the Board of Trade for the import or export of
certain goods; and that of the Ministry of Works for the construction of new buddings.
The Board of Trade has power to influence the siting of industry (see p. 130), and the
Ministry of Housing and Local Government, acting through local planning authorities,
has general control over the use of land (see p. 255).
In the post-war period an effective control has been that over the allocation, distri¬
bution and use of raw materials. The degree of control has been governed to a large extent
by the supply situation—an important factor in which is the availabdity of foreign ex¬
change—and has varied from time to time. Thus, controls removed in the immediate
INDUSTRY
135
post-war years had to be reimposed in 1951 when the rearmament programmes of the free
world, superimposed on rising civihan demands, caused shortages of many key raw
materials, including zinc, lead, copper, nickel and steel. Since then, an improving supply
position has made it possible to relax most of the controls imposed, and to allow a number
of materials to revert to private trading.
All Departments which are production authorities, and some others, have a responsi¬
bility for promoting increased productivity and efficiency in industry. Production authori¬
ties, for example, encourage the establishment within each industry and within individual
undertakings of joint councils and committees in which representatives of employers and
of workers discuss together improvements in methods and technique. The Department of
Scientific and Industrial Research (see p. 267) encourages and sometimes finances research
on industrial subjects in the universities and in the research associations which many of the
major industries have established among themselves: it also conducts research useful to
industry in 14 organizations under its own control (see footnote 2 p. 267).
Technical advice is available for those firms which ask for it through such services as the
Fuel Efficiency Advisory Service of the Ministry of Fuel and Power, the National Agricul¬
tural Advisory Service of the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, and the Personnel
Management Advisory Service of the Ministry of Labour and National Service.
To ensure that industry is fully aware of Government policy and that policy is framed
with a full knowledge of industry’s needs and difficulties, a number of consultative bodies
have been set up representing Government, employers’ associations and trade unions.
Among the more important of these are the National Production Advisory Council on Industry
and the National Joint Advisory Council. The NJAC consists of representatives of private
employers, the boards of nationalized industries and trade unionists under the chairman¬
ship of the Minister of Labour and National Service, and is concerned with matters affec¬
ting the relations between employers and workers. The NPACI, which covers the wider
problems of industrial production, is under the chairmanship of the Chancellor of the
Exchequer and includes representatives of certain Government Departments as well as of
employers and workers.
These consultative bodies represent United Kingdom interests and approach the study
of problems from a broad national point of view. There are in addition consultative bodies
concerned with the special problems of Scotland and Northern Ireland and of the main
regions of England and Wales. The most important of those in England and Wales are the
Regional Boards for Industry whose main functions are to keep the Government informed
on industrial conditions in the regions and to provide a link between the central Govern¬
ment and local industry. There is also a Scottish Board for Industry, with broadly similar
functions.
Monopolies and Restrictive Practices
Under the Monopohes and Restrictive Practices (Inquiry and Control) Act, 1948, the
Board of Trade has power to refer certain matters to the Monopolies and Restrictive Prac¬
tices Commission for investigation and report. Broadly speaking, a reference may be made
where it appears that at least one-third of the supply, processing or exports of any com¬
modity is in the hands of a single firm or is subject to arrangements which in any way re¬
strict competition. Where the Commission finds that these conditions do prevail and are
contrary to the public interest, Production Departments are empowered by the Act to take
suitable remedial action. The Board of Trade is required to publish an annual report on the
working of the Act, which includes a list of the suggestions and requests made for reference
of matters to the Commission.
Up to September 1953 the Commission had been given references relating to the
following matters: dental goods, cast iron rainwater goods, electric lamps, insulated
electric wires and cables, matches and match-making machinery, insulin, semi-manu-
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
136
factures of copper and copper-based alloys, printing of woven fabrics, imported hardwood
and softwood timber and plywood, certain electrical and allied machinery and plant,
pneumatic tyres, hard fibre cordage, linoleum, and the supply in the Greater London area
of new buildings costing more than ;£ 1,000. Reports had been published on the first six
of these industries.
In December 1952 the Commission began an investigation into the general effect on the
public interest of certain widely prevalent practices, including, for example, arrangements
between a number of traders to discriminate in favour of, or against, a defined class of cus¬
tomer.
In October 1953 a Monopohes and Restrictive Practices Commission Act was passed,
the purpose of which was to strengthen the Monopolies Commission and enable it to
deal at any one time with a greater number of references.
Production
Industrial production (mining and quarrying, manufacture, and building and civil
engineering) in 1950 averaged nearly a third above 1946, when it was at about the pre-war
level. The rate of increase slackened off in 1951, when it was about 3 per cent compared
with annual increases of about 7 per cent in the three previous years. This slackening was
due in part to the effect of steel shortage on metal goods production and in part to a fall in
demand for textiles and clothing. In 1952 production was 3 per cent less than in 1951. The
effects of steel shortage were still being felt, particularly in the first half of the year, but
more important was the fall in demand which took place at home and overseas. Production
and employment fell sharply after the first quarter of 1952 but began to recover in the last
quarter and was higher in the second quarter of 1953 than in the corresponding quarters
of either 1952 or 1951.
Over the post-war period as a whole the greatest increases in production have been in the
engineering, shipbuilding and electrical goods, vehicles and chemicals groups with in¬
creases since 1946 of approximately 60 per cent, 42 per cent and 50 per cent.
In 1946 and 1947 production increased at about the same rate as the civilian labour force,
which grew rapidly as men returned from the armed forces. From 1947 the increase in the
numbers employed slowed, while production continued rapidly to expand: this rise in
productivity was about 3 per cent a year up to 1951. Since 1951 demand has increasingly
become the main determinant of the level of output; in other words, the world sellers’ mar¬
ket has given way to a buyers’ market. The fall of the level of production during the second
and third quarters of 1952 brought an increase in short-time working as well as in unem¬
ployment. Output per person employed, therefore, also decreased markedly. The sub¬
sequent recovery of production levels was accompanied by an increase in output per man
as employees returned to full-time work.
The need to increase productivity has been a constant concern of Government and
industry. One important step was the formation in 1948 of the Anglo-American Pro¬
ductivity Council, whose main purpose was to promote productivity in Britain through
the exchange of ideas between various British industries and the corresponding industries
in the United States. ‘Productivity teams’ made up of representatives of management,
technical and workshop levels from British industries were sent to the United States for
study and, on their return, their findings were made public.
When this Council was wound up after four years’ work, its task of helping to promote
higher productivity in Britain was continued by the British Productivity Council,
formally established in London in November 1952. This is an independent body drawing
its funds mainly from the organizations represented on it: the British Employers’ Con¬
federation, the Federation of British Industries, the Trades Union Congress, the Association
of British Chambers of Commerce, the National Union of Manufacturers and the national¬
ized industries. Its programme of action includes the formation of local productivity
INDUSTRY
137
committees and the exchange of visits between teams from different industrial firms for
the purpose of studying common problems.
Capital Development
In recent years gross fixed capital formation has accounted for about one-seventh of
gross national expenditure. Table 15 shows the breakdown by industries since 1948. In
1952 industrial investment (excluding fuel and power) was lower than in 1951. It was
affected by the steel shortage, by physical restrictions imposed on investment in order to
free resources for export and defence, and, recently, by a reduction in demand for invest¬
ment which no doubt to some extent reflected the effects of the new monetary and fiscal
restraints. An important aim of the 1953 Budget proposals was to encourage the re-equip¬
ment and modernization of productive industry, the expansion of capacity in lines com¬
manding a ready oversea sale, and the development of new lines and techniques. Easier
licensing procedure was also announced for new factories and extensions.
TABLE 15
Gross Fixed Investment by Industries, 1948-52
million at current market prices
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
Expenditure on equipment and buildings:
Agriculture, forestry and fishing
Mining
Manufacturing industry ..
Electricity, gas and water
Transport and communications*
New housing
Social services and administration
Other
Total
Legal fees, stamp duties, etc.
Total gross fixed investment
ofi which:
Vehicles, ships and aircraft
Plant and machinery
New buildings and works and improve¬
ments to existing buildings ..
90
31
373
136
237
340
70
143
1,420
46
1,466
272
518
676
38
420
167
260
315
92
170
89
34
492
196
245
315
111
164
92
37
585
221
235
335
125
179
1,550
49
1,646
51
1,809
53
1,599
1,697
1,862
300
586
713
283
675
739
283
794
785
85
48
625
245
245
430
135
140
1,953
47
2,000
275
870
855
♦Excluding the road goods transport industry which is included in ‘other’.
Source: Cmd. 8800, Economic Survey 1953.
For manufacturing industry, excluding establishments in the public sector of the
economy, estimates for capital expenditure in 1948, 1949 and 1950 have been made on the
basis of an inquiry carried out by the Board of Trade and other Government Departments
in collaboration with the Central Statistical Office. These estimates are given in Table 16.
Average capital expenditure per employee in 1950 was -£63 for manufacturing industry
as a whole. The industrial sectors with the highest rates of fixed capital expenditure per
employee were mineral oil refining (.£3,320), other chemical and allied trades (-£161), and
iron and steel manufacture (^118). Average expenditure per employee varied very litde
for factories of different sizes within any one industry.
K
138
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
TABLE 16
Capital Expenditure in Manufacture (Great Britain)
1948-50
£ million
1948
1949
1950
Industries
Total
Total
Total
Plant
and
machi¬
nery
Vehi¬
cles
New
build¬
ings
and
works
Bricks, pottery, glass, cement, etc.
Mineral oil refining
Other chemicals and allied trades
Metal manufacture
Engineering, shipbuilding and electrical
goods
Vehicles
Metal goods not elsewhere specified
Precision instruments, jewellery, etc.
Textiles
Leather, leather goods and fur ..
Clothing ..
Food and drink
Tobacco
Manufactures of wood and cork..
Paper and printing
Other manufacturing industries ..
Government-built factories
Government-financed expenditure at
private firms’ establishments ..
Total capital expenditure..
less
Second-hand plant and vehicles
TOTAL ..
20
6
39
41
61
28
20
5
39
3
12
47
3
7
26
13
11
19
18
48
52
61
28
19
5
51
3
10
51
3
8
25
13
7
20
32
61
58
66
37
22
4
52
3
10
62
3
11
28
13
5
12
21
45
42
42
27
14
2
38
2
5
40
2
5
23
9
383
25
423
21
496
22
337
13
358
402
474
324
43
9
34
5
11
13
14
16
7
6
1
11
1
3
13
1
2
3
3
5
116
116
Source: Board of Trade.
AGRICULTURE
Although the major part of the population works in urban areas, agriculture remains
one of Britain’s largest industries. It uses some 48 milhon of the 60 million acres of land
(19! million of 24 million hectares) in the United Kingdom and provides employment for
over a milhon people.
Policy and Production
Britain’s agricultural policy is embodied in the Agriculture Act, 1947, the Agriculture
(Scotland) Act, 1948, and the Agriculture Act (Northern Ireland), 1949, the imple-
INDUSTRY
139
mentation of which is the responsibility of the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, the
Department of Agriculture for Scotland and the Ministry of Agriculture in Northern
Ireland respectively.1 It aims at a well-balanced system not only in the country as a whole
but on each individual farm. In 1947 plans were made with the aim of securing by 1952
an increase in the volume of annual agricultural net output to about 50 per cent above the
pre-war level.
This objective has in fact been achieved, the official index number for agricultural net
output in the United Kingdom (pre-war average=ioo) being 149 for 1951-52 and pro¬
visionally estimated at 151 for 1952-53 (Cmd. 8798). A further objective to raise this to
at least 160 by 1956 was announced in 1952 (Cmd. 8556). Table 17 shows the trend in
production of some of the main products.
TABLE 17
AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
(Years beginning 1st June)
Unit
Pre-war
average
1946-47
1950-51
1951-52
1952-53
provi¬
sional
Bread grains:
Total..
Wheat
Rye ..
Other grains:
Total..
Barley
Oats ..
Mixed corn ..
Potatoes
Sugar beet
Milk ..
Eggs(a)..
Beef and veal ..
Mutton and lamb
Pigmeat (a)
Wool (clip)
’000 tons
mill, galls.
’000 tons
1,661
1,651
10
2,781
765
1,940
76
4,873
2,741
1,563
385
578
195
435
34
2,006
1,967
39
5,216
1,963
2,903
350
10,166
4,522
1,665
332
537
141
145
27
2,663
2,606
57
5,118
1,711
2,692
715
9,507
5,216
2,013
488
600
147
341
27
2,363
2,316
47
5,359
1,939
2,616
804
8,284
4,534
2,016
464
617
146
462
29
2,357
2,307
50
5,936
2,334
2,772
830
7,848
4,240
2,046
460
573
171
551
29
Index of net agricultural
output:
Agricultural holdings (b)
Total(a) ..
100
117
141
147
100
122
143
149
150
151
Source : Cmd. 8798.
(a) Includes estimated production from gardens, allotments, pig clubs, and other small producers.
(b) Holdings of one acre and above (or over a quarter of an acre in Northern Ireland). Excludes
output of gardens, allotments, pig clubs, etc.
However, with her population of 50 million, Britain remains a food-importing country.
Before the second world war Britain produced about 31 per cent of her food (in terms of
1These departments are generally collectively known as the Agricultural Departments.
140
BRITAIN! AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
calories for human consumption) but by 1951/52 this had risen to 41 per cent. The com¬
parable figures in terms of values are 34 per cent pre-war and approximately 50 per cent in
1951-52. Imports of food and feedingstuffs accounted for 45 per cent by value of total
imports pre-war and about 38 per cent in 1952.
Types of Farming
There are more than 350,000 holdings in Great Britain with over 5 acres (2-023 ha.) of
crops and grass besides about 100,000 holdings of 5 acres or less. In Northern Ireland there
are 82,700 holdings of over 1 acre, of which 78 per cent are farms of under 50 acres.
The types of farming vary widely with difference of soil and climate. In general the
eastern half of the country is predominantly arable and the western half predominantly
dairying. In England and Wales, pasture types of farming account for 37 per cent of
agricultural land, arable types for 22 per cent and intermediate types for 29 per cent; the
remainder being unclassifiable or of little agricultural value. In many places land of several
types is found intermingled within a small area. Market-gardens are usually found near
towns. Fattening of animals for food is widespread but is carried on particularly in the
Home counties, Midlands and Eastern counties, and stock-rearing is prevalent in the High¬
lands of Scotland, Wales and the North of England.
TABLE 18
Use of Agricultural Land in the United Kingdom
Million acres (1 acre=0-40469 hectares)
1924
1934
1939
1944
1950 1951
1952
Wheat ..
Barley ..
Oats
Mixed com
Rye (threshed)
All cereals
Potatoes
Sugar beet
Fodder crops
Fruit
Vegetables
Other crops
Bare fallow
Total tillage
Temporary grass
Arable land
Permanent grass
Total Crops and Grass
Rough Grazings
1-6
1-5
3-3
j>0-2
10-8
4-7
15-5
17-6
33-1
15-1
1- 9
0-9
2- 5
0-1
1-8
1-0
2-4
/0-1
\0-01
3-2
2-0
3-7
0-4
0-1
2- 5
1-8
3- 1
0-8
0-1
5-4
0-8
0-4
1-2*
0-3
}
0-8
0-4
5-3
0-7
0-3
1-4
0-3
f 0-3
\0-l
0-4
9.4
1- 4
0-4
2- 0
0-3
0-5
0-3
0-2
8-3
1-2
0-4
1-5
0-3
0-5
0-3
0-3
9-3
4-1
4-1
14-5
4-8
12-8
5-6
13-4
18-7
12-9
18-8
19-3
11-7
18-4
12-8
32-1
16-4
31-7
16-5
31-0
17-0
31-2
17-1
2-1
1- 9
2- 9
0-8
0-1
7-8
1-1
0-4
1-5
0-3
0-4
0-3
0-4
12-2
5-8
18-0
13-1
31-1
17-1
2-0
2-3
2-9
0-8
0-1
8-1
1-0
0-4
1-5
0-3
0-4
0-4
0-3
12-4
5-7
18-1
13-1
31-2
17-1
Source : Monthly Digest of Statistics.
*Excluding beans and peas, which, in each of the years, amoimted roughly to 0-15 milhon acres,
and which are here included in ‘other crops’.
142
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In Scotland 4i million acres (1,821,300 ha.), out of 19 million, are under crops and grass,
the rest being rough hill grazings (about 11 million acres—4| million ha.) or land only-
able to support deer and game. The chief crop is oats (903,400 acres—365,000 ha.—in
1952); next come root crops for stock-feeding; potatoes, especially seed potatoes, and
barley are also important crops. The wheat area is small. In the south-west dairying is the
chief branch of the industry, while cropping and fattening cattle is practised mainly in the
east. Sheep-rearing in the hill areas is of great importance.
Northern Ireland is intensively farmed, the chief crops being potatoes, oats, flax and
ryegrass for seed. An average of about 80 per cent of agricultural income is derived from
livestock and livestock products. In 1952 the total of 2-98 million acres (1 -2 million ha.) of
agricultural land included 2-28 million acres (0-9 million ha.) under crops and pasture. Milk
sold off farms during 1952 was about 117 million gallons (532 million litres).
The use of agricultural land for the various crops and the numbers of livestock on farms
in the United Kingdom since 1924 are shown in Tables 18 and 19, and in map on p. 141.
TABLE 19
Livestock in the United Kingdom, 1924-52 (June)
(Millions)
1924
1934
1939 1944
1950
1951
1952
Dairy cattle
Other cattle
Sheep ..
Pigs
Poultry ..
3-4
4.4
22-2
3-6
n.a.
3-8
5-0
24-9
3-9
83-9
3-9
5-0
26-9
4.4
74-4
4.4
5-1
20-1
1-9
55-1
4- 6
5- 9
20-4
3-0
96-1
4-5
60
20-0
3-9
94-3
4- 6
5- 6
21-7
5-0
95-0
n.a.= figures not available.
Source: Monthly Digest of Statistics.
Changes since 1870
Until the middle of the nineteenth century Britain was largely self-sufficient in agri¬
cultural production. Then wool, grain and later meat—all produced cheaply from virgin
lands—were imported, and the farming industry had to undergo a major alteration and
concentrate much more on milk, eggs, pigs and horticultural produce. Changes in pro¬
duction and types of farming in successive attempts to meet changes of fortune resulted in
a continuous trend throughout the period away from an agricultural industry based on
grain to one based on livestock and livestock products and, among crops, an increasing
emphasis on vegetables.
Moreover the meat, dairy and poultry industries were becoming increasingly dependent
on imported feedingstuffs. The arable area in Britain declined continuously from 1872
until 1939, except during the first world war. The outbreak of the second world war was
followed by an immediate reversal of farming policy, for shortage of shipping space for
imports demanded a greatly increased home production of crops for direct human con¬
sumption such as wheat and potatoes, largely at the expense of Uvestock and livestock pro¬
ducts other than milk. The post-war world food shortage and Britain’s balance of pay¬
ments problems made it necessary for Britain to maintain increased grain production, but
since 1947 an expansion of output of livestock, hvestock products and animal feedingstuffs
has been encouraged concurrently with the maintenance of a high level of production of
grain and other crops.
Recent trends in agricultural policy have resulted in greater emphasis on stock-rearing
for meat and less stress on further increases in milk production.
INDUSTRY
143
Horticulture
Horticulture accounts for one-sixth of the value of the agricultural output of the United
Kingdom. The war-time need for self-sufficiency and the shortage of other foods led to a
great increase in the acreage under vegetables, but return to a more normal diet and the re¬
opening of oversea sources of supply have brought about a reduction of the area, which is
now not much greater than before the war. The acreage under fruit remains at about the
pre-war level, but the crops produced on that area have been approximately doubled.
Although the commoner vegetables are grown to some extent all over the country,
there is a tendency for certain crops to predominate in specialized areas, e.g., broccoh in
Cornwall and Kent, carrots and rhubarb in Yorkshire, asparagus and plums in Worcester¬
shire, cherries in Kent, apples in Kent and Hereford, onions in the Fen district, straw¬
berries in Hampshire and tomatoes under glass in the Lea Valley.
During the war the area devoted to flowers was drastically reduced by official controls.
It has taken the nursery industry some time to recover from the setback but the acreage is
now about the same as before the war.
Marketing Schemes and Subsidies
The severe agricultural depression which followed the fall in the general price level
after 1920 resulted in 1931 in the beginning of a programme of financial assistance to
agriculture, including tariffs, subsidies and quotas, which had a stabilizing effect on the
prices of grain, cattle and milk, developed the sugar beet industry and encouraged culti¬
vation of sub-marginal land (i.e. land which it is not profitable to cultivate). Commodity
commissions were set up for wheat, sugar, livestock and bacon. In addition, to enable the
home producer to regulate the marketing of his produce, the Agricultural Marketing Acts
of 1931 and 1933 provided for the establishment of commodity marketing boards in
Great Britain, and by September 1939 there were eight such boards concerned with the
marketing of four products—potatoes, hops, bacon pigs (two boards), and milk (four
boards).
In 1939, when war broke out, the functions of marketing boards, commodity com¬
missions and similar bodies were largely suspended. The Agricultural Departments re¬
mained responsible for matters of production while the Ministry of Food was established
to control distribution. The Hops Marketing Board continued to operate, and milk
continued to be marketed through the Milk Marketing Boards (and the Joint Milk
Council in Northern Ireland) as agents for the Ministry of Food.
The subsidies gave way to the Government’s general food subsidies to stabilize the cost
of living, though minor forms of assistance continued to be paid on a commodity basis.
In 1949 a further Agricultural Marketing Act was passed, giving ministers greater con¬
trol over, and power to nominate members on, marketing boards, and amending the pro¬
visions of existing schemes accordingly. It also extended the powers which schemes could
provide to include the supply of requisites and a wider range of services to registered pro¬
ducers. Marketing boards for wool and for tomatoes and cucumbers have since been
established. A scheme for marketing home-produced apples and pears, under which a
board was to be set up to regulate terms of sale, minimum prices and quality standards, as
well as to undertake market intelligence, advertising and research, in the same way as the
other marketing boards, was approved by Parliament on 21st January 1953 but has since
lapsed. It was the first scheme since the war to fail to secure the support of the requisite
two-thirds majority of producers voting, in terms of productive capacity and of numbers.
Since the second world war the Ministry of Food has bought a large proportion of the
staple home agricultural products at fixed prices, and through various channels has resold
it to consumers, in conjunction with a system of rationing, at prices often below cost, the
difference being met by means of subsidies as in the case of some imported foods bought
by the Ministry. (For changes proposed for 1954 see Appendix.)
144
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Table 20 shows the subsidy per unit of food (home-produced and imported combined)
in 1952-53-
TABLE 20
Unit Subsidies in 1952-53
Commodity
Unit
Bacon ..
Bread ..
Flour
Eggs •• •_  
Meat (carcass), including cost of calf subsidy
Milk, including cost of attested herds scheme
Butter ..
Cheese ..
Margarine (for domestic purposes) ..
Cooking fat (for domestic purposes)
Sugar (for domestic purposes)
lb.
3£ lb.
71b.
doz.
lb.
quart
lb.
lb.
lb.
lb.
lb.
Unit
Subsidy
Pence
5i
4i
64
114
2i
14
84
H
34
34
1
Source: Ministry of Food.
TABLE 21
Food Subsidies 1952-53
Subsidies Administered by the Ministry of Food
Bacon
Bread and Flour..
Shell eggs
Meat (carcass) ..
Milk (liquid)
Butter .. .. .. •
Cheese
Margarine (domestic) ..
Lard and cooking fat (domestic)
Sugar (domestic)  
Miscellaneous
Welfare and Milk in Schools Schemes
Animal feedingstuffs
Total subsidies administered by the Ministry of Food
Subsidies Administered by the Agricultural Departments
Attested Herds Scheme
Fertilizer Subsidy
Wliite Fish Subsidy
Ploughing Grants
Calf Subsidy
Total subsidies administered by the Agricultural Departments
f million
22-3
57-4
25-4
24-4
36-3
18-8
T9
13-4
4.9
9-7
9-8
47-2
29-7
  301-2
9-7
1T0
1*7
6-0
5-4
  33-8
Total Food Subsidies
335-0
INDUSTRY
H5
There are also direct agricultural subsidies, such as those for hill sheep and hill cattle, and
for steer calves and heifer calves (other than those of Jersey, Guernsey, Friesian and Ayr¬
shire breeds) which are suitable for rearing for beef production; grants towards the cost of
field drainage, ditching schemes and farm water supplies; grants for the improvement of
stock-rearing land in hill and upland districts, for increasing food or fodder production on
poor or difficult land; subsidy for livestock improvement and for the supply of fertilizers
and agricultural lime.
Total subsidies on food (home produced and imported combined) for 1952-53 amounted
to ^335 million. Table 21 shows how this sum was distributed. In 1951-52 total subsidies
amounted to ^414 million. They were reduced in 1952-53 as a result of changes in the
1952 Budget; the intention was to bring them down to a rate of ^250 million in a full
year. The 1953 Budget provided for an annual rate of ^220 milhon; it was expected that
this would be achieved as a result of the decontrol of eggs, feedingstuffs, wheat and flour,
and the removal of the subsidy on sugar.
Guaranteed Prices
The four aims of price fixing are: (a) to give the producers a reasonable return; (b) to
encourage production of crops and livestock products at the level required by the nation;
(c) to ensure a sufficiency of a product at all times of year by seasonal variation of the
price (e.g., winter milk), and (d) to discourage relatively wasteful forms of production
(e.g., over-fat livestock).
Prices have been fixed annually since February 1945 for almost the whole output of
agriculture excluding fruit and vegetable crops. The Agriculture Act, 1947, guaranteed to
the farmer an adequate price and a certain market for his principal products: fat cattle,
fat sheep, fat pigs, milk, wool, eggs, wheat, barley, oats, rye, potatoes and sugar beet.
The method, for most products, is for the Government to fix prices annually after a
review of the economic position of the industry. Representatives of the farmers take part
in the review and price-fixing discussions. Prices are prescribed for definite periods to
enable farmers to plan ahead. The price may be a guaranteed fixed or minimum average
price; a rate of deficiency payment related to a standard price; an acreage payment; a sub¬
sidy; or a price calculated in accordance with a formula of which, for example, the price
of feedingstuffs might be the basis.
Controls on prices and supphes of cereals and feedingstuffs were ended in August 1953;
imports had been returned to private trade in May 1953. This has involved the removal of
the existing subsidy on flour, but a National flour of 80 per cent extraction has continued
to be produced and the subsidy on bread made from it has been continued and modified
to take account of the disappearance of the flour subsidy. Maximum prices for cereals were
ended, but for the 1953 harvest the Ministry of Food agreed to buy any supplies offered
under existing arrangements, which would continue until new ones had been brought into
operation. Eggs were decontrolled as from 26th March 1953, and an interim organization,
the National Egg Marketing Organization, was set up to advise the Minister of Food on
their orderly marketing. Under these arrangements producers are guaranteed a minimum
price but are free to sell their eggs, normally to hcensed packing stations, at whatever
prices they will fetch above this minimum.
A guaranteed price is of little value to a farmer unless he knows at the time precisely
what produce it covers, and at what point it is to operate. The price ‘award’ which
follows the annual review specifies the grades which are covered by the guarantee and the
point at which it will be paid.
Provision is made under the Agriculture Act, 1947, for special (in addition to annual)
price reviews when exceptional cost increases (e.g., in wages) take place.
On the decontrol of cereals and eggs, the guaranteed prices for these products at first
became what is described above as ‘guaranteed minimum average prices’, prices actually
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
146
realized by farmers being free to fluctuate above those minima. Further arrangements for
marketing the four cereal crops—wheat, rye, oats and barley—were announced in
September 1953. Beginning with the 1954 harvest a system of deficiency payments, where
the average price realized in any cereal year for grain of prescribed quality falls short of a
standard price, will be administered by the Ministry of Food in conjunction with the
Agricultural Departments.
Promotion of Efficiency
Besides providing stability through guaranteed prices and markets, a policy which has
helped farmers increasingly to invest in capital equipment such as tractors (see p. 150), the
State promotes productive efficiency through local administrative government, through
land management and through various schemes and aids.
Agricultural Advisory Services
Free technical advice on all agricultural and horticultural matters is available to every
farmer and grower in England and Wales through the Ministry of Agriculture’s National
Agricultural Advisory Service (NAAS).
Every county is divided into districts, to each of which District Advisory Officers have
been appointed to act as general advisers to farmers. The District Officers can call on an
extensive system of specialist advisers. Advisers in general agriculture, livestock husbandry,
milk production, farm machinery, poultry husbandry, and horticulture are available in
each county; at the 12 provincial centres and sub-centres there are senior advisers in these
subjects and in crop and grassland husbandry, besides specialists in animal nutrition, bac¬
teriology, soil chemistry, plant diseases and plant pests. These centres are equipped with
laboratories for the analysis of soils, feedings tuffs, etc., and the diagnosis of crop pests and
diseases.
In Scotland the advisory services, similar in scope to the NAAS, are based on the three
agricultural colleges. Northern Ireland has its own separate advisory service which is
closely linked with the research and experimental divisions (see p. 152).
Agricultural Executive Committees
Agricultural policy is carried out in England and Wales under the Minister of Agri¬
culture through County Agricultural Executive Committees (CAECs) set up under the
Agriculture Act, 1947, with the duty of promoting agricultural development and effi¬
ciency. The committees comprise twelve members. Five are appointed directly by the
Minister and seven from panels nominated by the interests concerned, three being
farmers, two landowners and two workers. One of those directly appointed is a member
of the county council; the others are persons with special qualifications or with experience
of local agriculture. The committees are represented in areas within the county by District
Committees. The system of voluntary part-time liaison officers, to interpret Government
pohcy to the CAECs, was revived in 1952. The system differs in Scotland and Northern
Ireland. In Scotland, agricultural policy is carried out under the Secretary of State for
Scotland through the Department of Agriculture by 11 Area Agricultural Executive
Committees. In Northern Ireland, an Agricultural Executive Officer working directly
under the Northern Ireland Ministry of Agriculture is responsible for the carrying out of
the Government’s agricultural pohcy in each county.
The Agricultural Land Commission
The Agricultural Land Commission was set up under the Agriculture Act, 1947, and
assumed the following functions on 1st January 1948: the managing and farming of land
vested in the Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries, or land for which he has become res¬
ponsible; and advising and assisting the Minister in matters relating to the management of
agricultural land. The Commission also advises the Minister on the exercise of his powers
INDUSTRY
147
of compulsory purchase under the 1947 Act, to ensure the full and efficient use of agricul¬
tural land; and it prepares experimental schemes for the readjustment of farm boundaries
and puts them into effect. The Commission manages about 200,000 acres. Nearly half of
this is agricultural land intermixed with other lands used by the Forestry Commission. The
remainder is mostly land acquired by the Minister under the Act on the grounds of en¬
suring its full and efficient use for agriculture.
In Scotland, the management of lands vested in the Secretary of State and the duty of
advising him on management matters are carried out by the Department of Agriculture.
The Agricultural Land Service
In 1943 Rural Land Utilization Officers were appointed to advise planning authorities
on the agricultural implications of development plans in England and Wales. This work,
as well as that of the pre-war Land Commissioner Service, has now been taken over by the
Agricultural Land Service, formed in 1948, which operates now in eight provinces. The
main duties of this service are as follows: (1) to act as agent for the Agricultural Land
Commission, giving technical advice on the acquisition and management of agricultural
land; (2) to give technical advice on measures to ensure good estate management, on the
agricultural aspects of planning and the release of agricultural land for other development,
including afforestation, on schemes under the Hill Farming and Livestock Rearing Acts
and the Marginal Production Schemes, on the provision and management of smallhold¬
ings by smallholdings authorities, and on the provision of allotments by local authorities.
In Scotland similar duties are carried out by officers of the Department of Agriculture.
Security of Tenure
About two-thirds of the occupiers of farms in England and Wales are tenants or mainly
tenants (renting at least three-quarters of their land). The highest proportion of tenant
farmers is found in the northern, north-western and west midland counties of England,
where 70-80 per cent of the cultivated areas in each county is farmed by tenants.
In England and Wales the Agricultural Holdings Act, 1923, required at least 12 months’
notice to be given to quit an agricultural holding and gave a tenant a right to com¬
pensation for disturbance on leaving his holding; a tenant had no statutory right of con¬
testing the notice to quit. The Agricultural Holdings Act, 1948, gave the tenant the right
in normal circumstances to have the matter referred to the County Agricultural Executive
Committee (acting for the Minister); either tenant or landlord could then appeal against
the committee’s decision to an Agricultural Land Tribunal—an independent body, whose
decision is final. The Scottish Act of 1949 applies similar provisions to Scotland, with a
right of appeal to the Scottish Land Court. In Northern Ireland under the various Land
Acts passed between 1870 and 1925 every farmer is either the owner, or is in process of
becoming the owner, of his holding. There are no farm landlords in Northern Ireland.
Under the Agriculture Act, 1947, the Minister of Agriculture has the power to place
under supervision an owner or occupier considered guilty of bad estate management or
bad husbandry. This power he has delegated to the County Agricultural Executive Com¬
mittees. If the owner or occupier fails to show satisfactory improvement in his standard
of management or of husbandry after 12 months under supervision, or earlier if he has
failed to comply with a direction, he may be dispossessed. An owner or occupier may
appeal to an Agricultural Land Tribunal against a proposal that he should be dispossessed.
Smallholdings and Allotments
There are about 1,167,000 allotments1 in the United Kingdom. Most of these are pro¬
vided by local authorities, who have certain powers and duties in this respect under the
Allotments Acts.
1An allotment is legally defined as a parcel of land of not more than 2 acres (0-809 ha.), held by a
tenant under a landlord and cultivated as a farm or garden.
148
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
There are also some 20,000 smallholdings provided by county councils and county
borough councils in England and Wales and by the Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries.
Of these some 11,000 are capable of providing a full-time occupation for the tenant.
These smallholdings are let only to people with practical experience in agriculture, pre¬
ferably agricultural workers, with the object of affording them an opportunity to become
farmers on their own account. Loans may be made to the tenants of up to 75 per cent of
the working capital they require.
Of the smallholdings provided by the Minister of Agriculture approximately 1,000
situated on 18 different estates are managed on the Minister’s behalf by the Land Settle¬
ment Association Limited, which was originally formed in 1935 to develop smallholdings
for unemployed men from industrial areas. The Association provides centrally on each
estate various services which the tenants are obliged to use. These services include the
supply of agricultural stores and requisites, the operation of a machinery pool, and the
packing and marketing of produce.
The Welsh Land Settlement Society, which was also formed to assist in the settlement
on the land of unemployed industrial workers, created a number of profit-sharing farms,
which still operate.
In Scotland the Department of Agriculture provided plots of up to one acre for the un¬
employed. In 1937 there were over 2,000 plot-holders, but there has been a gradual closing
down of schemes since the end of the war and the number of plot-holders had fallen to
419 at the end of 1952.
Land settlement in Scotland has always been carried out by the central Government,
which now owns and maintains some 432,000 acres (174,822 ha.) of Land Settlement
Estates with about 3,900 holdings. On these estates loans up to 75 per cent of working
capital may be granted to new tenants.
There are about 200,000 domestic pig keepers in England and Wales and about 500,000
domestic poultry keepers. They are encouraged by the Small Pig Keepers’ Council and
the National Domestic Poultry Keepers’ Council, respectively, promoted by the Ministry
of Agriculture. In Scotland there are about 7,000 domestic poultry keepers. In Northern
Ireland there are 82,000 poultry keepers and 36,000 pig keepers.
Drainage and Water Schemes
The estimated cost of drainage and water schemes approved for State aid amounts to:
England and Wales (to 31st March 1953)
Farm drainage (since 1940)—^24 million.
Main rivers (since 1930)—over ^27 million.
Minor arterial drainage (since 1937)—over -£10 million.
Farm water supply (since 1941)—over -£14 million.
Scotland (to 31st March 1953)
Farm drainage and arterial drainage (since 1940)—-£6f million.
Farm water supphes (since 1942)—^1,106,858.
Northern Ireland (to 31st March 1953)
Farm drainage and arterial drainage (since 1942)—-£2$ million.
Farm water supplies (since 1942)—million.
Main rivers1 (since 1947)—over -£500,000.
Grants for farm drainage may be up to 50 per cent of the cost; for main river drainage
they can range up to 80 per cent.
lUnder the Drainage Act (Northern Ireland), 1947, the Ministry of Agriculture was constituted
the drainage authority for Northern Ireland.
INDUSTRY
149
Farm Buildings
The provision of many more farm buildings for the industry, including steel Dutch
barns and buildings to house grain-drying and grass-drying plants, is being facilitated.
A scheme for the large-scale production of standardized components for farm buildings
was announced in February 1948. The Ministry of Works, the building trade and agri¬
cultural organizations have co-operated in preparing the scheme, which provides com¬
ponents for buildings that will suit a wide range of agricultural and horticultural purposes.
With these components, buildings either 18 ft. or 3 3 ft. wide can be constructed to a height
of 8 ft., 12 ft. or 16 ft. in bays of 15 ft. The available length is any multiple of 15 ft. The
scheme is increasingly popular, and orders in 1952 were higher than in previous years.
With the decontrol of steel the Ministry is no longer required to give special facilities to
manufacturers of these components, but there is every reason to suppose that continuing
use will be made of standard components for the construction of farm buildings.
Crops and Grass
Recent researches at the Ministry of Agriculture’s Grassland Research Station, Hurley
(see footnote1, p. 269), and elsewhere are directly influencing agricultural practice, notably
in the development of scientific grassland management and the extension of ley-farming
in districts where formerly this alternate husbandry system has not been the usual practice;
in the choice of crop varieties; in crop husbandry; in the application of insecticides and
fungicides; and in the use of disease-free planting material.
One of the main aims of the agricultural expansion programme has been to produce
more livestock from a smaller grass acreage and to import less feedingstuffs than before
the war. It is necessary on the one hand to maintain cropping for human consumption
and increase home production of coarse grains, and on the other hand to improve grazing
in summer and the supply of conserved grass and green crops to replace imported oilcake
in winter. Silage production in the United Kingdom increased from 338,000 tons in 1947
to about 2,011,000 tons in 1952. Artificially dried grass production has increased from a
negligible quantity in 1947 to 222,000 tons in 1952.
Animal Husbandry
Britain is noted for her exports of pedigree livestock and since the end of the war
there has been a marked recovery of the export trade in livestock of high quality.
Horses. To ensure that quality is maintained, stallions must be licensed whether they
travel or stand for service at home. Grants are paid to approved societies hiring out
pedigree stallions of heavy breeds. The number of farm horses has fallen by half since 1939
because of mechanization.
Cattle. It is mainly the beef breeds (e.g., Shorthorns, Herefords, Aberdeen Angus)
which have made a reputation overseas, but interest in British dairy stock is increasing. The
rise in milk consumption since 1940 has resulted in concentration at home on dairy breeds,
but in spite of the change-over to milk, many breeds have maintained the dual-purpose
type of qualifications. In Scotland, while milk production has expanded, an even greater
increase in numbers of beef cattle has taken place. Schemes for communal use of sires are
in operation, with special schemes in the Highlands and Islands for the loan of bulls and
rams (free of charge) to communities of smallholders. Cattle-rearing in the United King¬
dom is encouraged by subsidies on calves reared for beef production and on hill cattle.
Northern Ireland sends to Great Britain all fatstock surplus to its ration requirements.
Licensing schemes operate for bulls and boars in order to ensure sound breeding.
Artificial insemination centres, which are officially licensed, cover practically the whole of
England and Wales and licensed centres are also operating in Scotland and Northern
Ireland. Nearly one-third of the dairy cows in England and Wales are artificially in¬
seminated.
150
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Under a plan introduced in October 1950 for the eradication of bovine tuberculosis on
an area basis, areas containing over three-quarters of a million cattle have already been
cleared. Others are being cleared. At the end of 1952 there were nearly 100,000 attested
herds (3I million cattle) in Great Britain. Northern Ireland has had an Attested Herds
Scheme in operation since 1949; there are 1,125 attested herds (39,185 head of cattle).
Milk. Since October 1949 all dairy farms in Great Britain must be registered, and
regulations lay down conditions under which milk is produced, handled, treated and
stored. Milk may be sold, subject to licence, under special designations: ‘Tuberculin
Tested’ (TT), ‘Accredited’ (in Scotland ‘Standard’), ‘Pasteurized’ and ‘Sterilized’. It is
intended that ultimately there will be facilities for the heat treatment of all milk that is not
tuberculin-tested. Premiums are paid on TT and accredited milk and a bonus on attested
herds.
In Northern Ireland milk has been paid for on a quality basis since 1934. The whole of
Northern Ireland is now a ‘safe milk’ area.
Sheep. The best mutton and lamb throughout the world is largely of British origin. At
home, modem farming conditions have led to a decline in ‘arable’ flocks (i.e. flocks feeding
off root and forage crops grown in rotation with, for example, barley) and an increase in
grass-reared sheep; hill-sheep farming has been maintained in spite of losses in 1947.
Poultry. To raise the standard of poultry stock there is a Poultry Stock Improvement
Plan under which breeding stations and hatcheries are accredited. By December 1952
accredited breeding stock amounted to 2,950,000 birds in England and Wales. Similar
schemes operate in Scotland and Northern Ireland.
Improvement of Livestock Rearing Land in Upland Areas
The Hill Farming and Livestock Rearing Acts provide for grants for owners and
occupiers of livestock rearing land in upland areas who wish to put their farms into sound
working order. The object is to encourage the breeding and rearing of store cattle and
store sheep (i.e. cattle and sheep for further fattening, not for immediate slaughter). Grants
are at the rate of 50 per cent of the cost of work done. The total amount available for grant
in the United Kingdom is ^20 million and this can be increased by -£2 million if necessary.
Marginal Production Schemes
Grants of up to 50 per cent of the cost can be given to occupiers of agricultural land to
help them carry out on their farms operations which would be temporarily uneconomic
without assistance but which would eventually enable them to increase production. About
£2% million is being provided for this kind of assistance in 1953-54.
Mechanization
Mechanization has been one of the important causes of the increase of productivity of
labour on the land in recent years.
The estimated number of tractors (excluding small market-garden types) in the United
Kingdom in 1925 was about 21,000, in 1939 about 55,000, and in 1952,342,070. According
to the Economic Commission for Europe, Britain has the greatest tractor density in the
world, one tractor per 57 acres (23 ha.) of arable land. The increase in some of the newer
agricultural machines has been even more notable; thus, 17,275 combined harvester-
threshers were in use on the 1952 harvest; in 1939 there were only 150. As so often happens
in agriculture the solution of one problem creates another: in a climate such as Britain’s,
the widespread use of these combines gives rise to the need for grain-drying and grain-
storage facilities on a substantial scale. How to provide these on sound technical and
economic lines is a problem which is receiving the closest attention by the many public
and private interests concerned.
INDUSTRY
151
Considerable, but as yet not complete, success has attended intensive efforts to solve
the problem of mechamzing the cultivation and harvesting of root crops especially
potatoes and sugar beet—which make so heavy a seasonal demand on labour. This aspect
of farm mechanization is also receiving close attention.
Great strides have been made in the development of a wide range of equipment to
assist the production of grass in the various forms—silage, hay and dried grass—upon
which British farm livestock depends very largely.
The National Institute of Agricultural Engineering carries out research, testing and
development work in agricultural engineering, and the Agricultural Machinery Advisory
Committee, representative of the industries and Government Departments concerned,
advises on requirements and supply of machinery and the development and production of
new machines.
The home agricultural engineering industry in 1939 made goods to the value (ex works)
of no more than million. In 1952 the output was valued at _£io6 million, about
million of which was exported. Making full allowance for increased prices, this represents
more than a tenfold increase.
In 1952 more than 7,000 tractors as well as other types of agricultural machinery were
owned by county agricultural executive committees in England and Wales and by private
firms of contractors for hiring to farmers.
Research and Advisory Services
Agricultural Research in Britain is planned and co-ordinated by the Agricultural Re¬
search Council (see p. 268). This body advises the Agricultural Departments (see footnote
p. 139) on the programmes, estimates and staffing of the grant-aided Agricultural Re¬
search Institutes (15 in England and Wales and seven in Scotland, listed in footnote1 p. 269),
and itself controls 14 research centres (listed in footnote2 p. 269).
The exchange of information on research in other Commonwealth countries takes
place through the machinery of the Commonwealth Agricultural Bureaux and Institutes
(ten bureaux and two institutes in the United Kingdom and one institute in Canada, see
P-273)-
The Agricultural Improvement Council for England and Wales and the Scottish Agri¬
cultural Improvement Council advise the Agricultural Departments on problems requir¬
ing investigation and on the application of the results of scientific investigation to farming
practice. In reconstructing the Council in 1953 > at die end of a three-year period of office,
the Minister included a prominent landowner and a land agent to assist the Council to
devote more attention to problems of estate management, including buildings and fixed
equipment.
Research and advice are combined in the Provincial Agricultural Economics Service
of England and Wales. The service is attached to the universities and organized in ten
economic advisory centres. In Scotland the Department of Agriculture has a Farm
Economics branch, and agricultural economists are on the staff of the three Agricultural
Colleges. Similar arrangements exist in Northern Ireland.
The Agricultural Advisory Services (see p. 146) provide technical advice and instruction
free to all engaged in agriculture and horticulture, and the Agricultural Land Service in
England and Wales (see p. 147) advises landowners on estate management problems.
Facilities are provided at the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries Experimental
Centres in England and Wales and at Agricultural College Centres in Scotland for field-
scale extensions of research work and investigations of local problems. Experiments are
also carried out at provincial advisory centres and on commercial farms.
The Ministry of Agriculture for Northern Ireland has its own research divisions investi¬
gating problems of animal and crop production. The research divisions work in close
152
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
touch with the Ministry’s county staffs, and also provide technical advisory services for
the farmer. A very close link has been forged between the Queen’s University of Belfast
and the research divisions, since certain officers of the latter are professors and lecture in
the University Faculty of Agriculture.
Control is also exercised by the Plant Disease Division in the disinfection of all flax
seed sown in Northern Ireland. A well-equipped Dairy Bacteriology Division keeps a
watchful eye on the maintenance of the hygienic standards laid down for the production
and handling of milk.
At Hillsborough, in County Down, the Northern Ireland Agriculture Research
Institute owns and operates a farm of some 500 acres (202 ha.). The Institute is endowed
from pubhc funds and, therefore, the officers of the Ministry’s Research Divisions are
afforded facilities for carrying out their field experiments. Another 500 acres at Hills¬
borough are devoted to forestry and are controlled by the Forestry Branch of the Ministry
of Agriculture. Thus there is a close integration of research, education and advisory work
in these research divisions.
Education
Eight universities in England and Wales (Cambridge, Durham, Leeds, London,
Oxford, Nottingham, Reading and the University of Wales) and three in Scotland (Edin¬
burgh, Glasgow and Aberdeen) provide degree courses in agriculture, which are of parti¬
cular value for intending research workers, advisory officers, teachers and other speciaHsts;
in Northern Ireland a degree course is provided at Queen’s University, Belfast. There are
four Agricultural Colleges and two Farm Institutes in England and Wales and three Agri¬
cultural Colleges in Scotland which give two-year diploma courses. These are more
practical than degree courses and are intended mainly for farmers and farm managers.
These courses are also a preparation for the National Diplomas in Agriculture, Dairying,
Horticulture and Poultry Husbandry. In Northern Ireland there are three Agricultural
Colleges catering for young men and women.
There are 34 Farm Institutes in England and Wales and six farm schools in Scotland run
by local education authorities providing courses in general agriculture, dairying, poultry,
horticulture and poultry husbandry. Courses are usually for one year of 3 3 to 40 working
weeks. Various short courses are run during the vacations, and local education authorities
also provide a wide range of part-time instruction which also meets the needs of the
domestic producer.
An important means of voluntary informal education in agriculture is provided by
Young Farmers Clubs, which flourish in villages and towns throughout the United King¬
dom. There are in all some 1,400 with about 61,000 members, mostly between the ages of
10 and 25. Each club is self-governing but has the support of an advisory committee of
farmers and other adults and of the local organizer. Clubs are combined in county federa¬
tions and in National Federations for England and Wales (founded 1932), Scotland
(1937), and Northern Ireland (1929).
FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
The Agricultural Departments referred to in the preceding section on Agriculture are
also the responsible departments for Fisheries, which make an important contribution to
Britain’s food supplies. Forestry is promoted in Great Britain by the Forestry Com¬
mission, which is also responsible to the Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries and the
Secretary of State for Scotland.
Fisheries
Britain’s fishing industry falls into two main divisions: demersal and pelagic1 (white fish
1Demersal fish live on or near the sea-bed (e.g., cod, haddock, plaice, turbot, sole, etc.). Pelagic
fish live in the intermediate waters or near the surface (e.g., herring, pilchard, mackerel, etc.).
INDUSTRY
153
and herring). There are also fisheries for mussels, cockles, whelks and oysters from the
Thames Estuary to the Wash, and on the Cornish and South Wales coasts; for lobsters and
crabs off the Scottish coasts, and for crabs, lobsters and whelks in the east and south coastal
areas of England.
Organization and Production
There were 29,431 persons regularly employed in fisheries in Great Britain at the end of
1952. Landed weight of fish disposed of amounted to a little over 19,000 tons per week;
consumption of fresh, frozen and cured fish in Great Britain amounted to about 17,000
tons landed weight per week.
Northern Ireland consumes about one-third of its own catches and exports the rest to
Great Britain and to the Irish Republic.
Sea Fishing
The chief means of catching fish are by the use of nets—trawl, seine, drift and ring—
and by lining. Trawling is carried on in distant, middle and near waters for demersal fish
throughout the year and seasonally for herring. The deep-sea trawler fleet comprised 1,059
vessels at the end of 1952. Seining is chiefly used on the nearer grounds, the principal
catches being plaice and haddock. About 550 Scottish vessels engage in seine net fishing
during most of the year, while from Grimsby, Fleetwood and Whitehaven 71 such vessels
are in regular operation. Ulster fishermen also use seine nets. Drift nets are mainly used for
herring and pilchards by 429 steam and motor drifters; ring netting, a method of catching
herring mainly in the more sheltered waters, is growing in popularity and is the method
used by about 200 motor-boats. Long lining on grounds too rough for trawling is carried
on by a limited number of vessels (mainly Scottish), while small and hand lining still pro¬
vide employment for a large number of crews in autumn, winter and early spring. Cod,
whiting and mackerel are caught.
The quantity and value of fish landed in the United Kingdom during 1952 were as
follows:
Wet Fish (demersal and pelagic)
Great Britain: 989,902 tons valued at £43,700,608.
Northern Ireland: 5,343 tons valued at £148,875.
Shell Fish
Great Britain: value £1,183,872.
Northern Ireland: value £3,939.
Exports of fish from the United Kingdom—fresh, frozen, cured or canned—in 1952
were valued at £5,839,776.
Freshwater Fisheries
The principal commercial freshwater catches are salmon, grilse, sea-trout and eels. In
Scotland and Northern Ireland fixed nets along the coast and sweep nets in rivers and
estuaries are used; in England drift nets are used for catching salmon in the sea. In Scotland
the value of the salmon catch (both commercial and sporting) amounts to about £1
million, and in Northern Ireland to £200,000, annually. In Northern Ireland eels are
captured by long lines and by eel nets placed in special gaps in river weirs.
Sporting fishing is by rod and line in lakes, lochs, rivers and streams. Salmon, grilse and
sea-trout are the most important species, and the fishing rights command high rentals.
There are also extensive fishings for brown trout. Other freshwater fish taken, particularly
in England, are roach, rudd, perch and dace. Fishing for freshwater fish other than salmon
and trout is of minor importance and figures of catches are not available.
Promotion and Regulation of the Industry
Laws in Britain relating to fisheries and fish are principally directed to the following
purposes: (a) protection of supply by measures against over-fishing, e.g., the Sea Fisheries
L
154
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Regulation Acts, 1888 to 1930, and the Sea Fishing Industry Acts, 1933 to 1938; (b) pro¬
motion of the prosperity of the industry, e.g., the Herring Industry Acts, the Sea Fish
Industry Acts and the White Fish and Herring Industry Act, 1953; (c) protection of the
quality of the product, e.g., the Food and Drugs Act, 1938. The Government Depart¬
ments mainly responsible for the administration of laws in the first two categories are the
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, the Scottish Home Department, and the Ministry of
Commerce for Northern Ireland; the Ministry of Food is concerned with questions of
processing and distribution and, together with the Ministry of Health, with questions
of nutrition and hygiene affecting fish and fish products. The safety and welfare of crews of
fishing vessels are provided for under the Merchant Shipping Acts, which are administered
by the Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation.
The Herring Industry Board (see p. 55) was set up under the Herring Industry Act of
1935, to reorganize, develop and regulate the herring industry; subsequent amending
Acts have also been passed. The Board promotes sales of herrings both at home and
abroad, encourages and carries out schemes of research and experiment into methods of
fishing and processing, grants loans to fishermen for the acquisition of boats and equip¬
ment, and exercises a measure of control over the industry by means of rules and directions
and a licensing option. It operates a scheme for the reduction of herring to oil and meal,
using its own and commercial processing plants. In August 1951 the Board was given
additional powers to participate in the industry, including fishing for herring, and pur¬
chasing, processing and selling herring; such powers, however, are to be used only to
secure proper provision for the needs of the industry and after consultation with the
interests concerned. The Board is assisted by the Herring Industry Advisory Council,
representing various sections of the industry, and by local officers who work at the ports
during the fishing season, and who on occasion act as port arbiters in disputes regarding
herring sales. Sectional committees may be set up to advise the board on matters affecting
a particular section of the industry.
The White Fish Authority (see p. 56) was set up by the Sea Fish Industry Act, 1951, to
reorganize, develop and regulate the white fish industry. It has powers, similar to those of
the Herring Board, to carry on research and experiment, encourage co-operation in the
industry, promote exports, provide processing plant, and grant loans in connection with
fishing vessels or processing plants. The Authority is composed of independent members
working in consultation with the industry through the White Fish Industry Advisory
Council, and has delegated certain of its functions in Scotland and Northern Ireland to a
committee consisting of Scottish and Northern Irish members.
Research
The authorities concerned with fisheries research are the Ministry of Agriculture and
Fisheries, the Scottish Home Department and the Development Commissioners (see
pp. 265 and 271).
Ports
The principal fishing ports in England and Wales are Hull, Grimsby, Great Yarmouth,
Lowestoft, Milford Haven and Fleetwood; in Scotland, Aberdeen and Granton for white
fish, and for herring the Moray Firth ports, and Stornoway and Shetland, together with
the Clyde ports; Ardglass, Portavogie, Kilkeel and Annalong are the fishing centres of
Northern Ireland. London is the principal wholesale distributing centre, and Billingsgate
Fish Market handles an average of 600 tons a day.
Forestry
Only a small part of Britain’s timber requirements is met from its own woodlands; the
greater part—to the value of -£164 milhon in 1952—is supplied by imports. In recent
years, however, the Government has been devoting continuous effort through the Forestry-
Commission to the long-term task of increasing the country’s timber resources, which
INDUSTRY
155
over the centuries, and particularly as a result of overfelling in the two world wars, have
been seriously depleted.
Forest Area
The last census of woodlands (1947-49) disclosed that the total area of woodland in
Great Britain on 30th September 1947, excluding woods under 5 acres (2-02 hectares)
in extent, was 3,448,362 acres (1,395,505 ha.). This represents 6-i per cent of the land
surface of the countries surveyed, or 71 acres (29 ha.) of woodland for every 1,000 of the
population.
According to the Census figures, 3,412,388 acres (1,380,947 ha.), or 99 per cent of the
total area of woodland, were on the mainland and 1 per cent distributed over various
islands. England, with 1,865,046 acres (754,759 ha.) had 54 per cent of the whole; Scot¬
land, with 1,266,838 acres1 (512,672 ha.) had 37 per cent of the whole; and Wales, with
316,478 acres (128,074 ha.) 9 per cent of the whole.
The greatest density of woodland in Great Britain is to be found in the north and east
of Scotland, where the Census showed that ten counties all had 8 per cent or more of
their land area under woodland—Moray, for example, had 21-6 per cent and Nairn
19-1 per cent. The second region of high density lies in the south-east of England and
comprises the following five counties: Sussex, Surrey, Hampshire (in which is to be found
the well-known New Forest), Kent and Berkshire. In Wales, the only county with an
especially high woodland density is Monmouth, with 10-7 per cent of its land area under
woodland at the time of the Census. Every county contains some measurable woodland;
the Census disclosed that even the administrative county of London had 639 acres (259 ha.).
Types of Woodland
Fifty-two per cent of the total woodland area in Great Britain as a whole was classified
in the Census as High Forest, which consists of stands of trees that are normally grown to
maturity from planting, sowing, natural regeneration or, occasionally, from Coppice
shoots; 10 per cent was classified as Coppice (woodland in which the crop is worked or
could be worked on the Coppice system); 15 per cent as Scrub; and 23 per cent as Felled
or Devastated.
Woods which are wholly or mainly coniferous occupy a slightly larger area in the
High Forest of Great Britain as a whole than do the broadleaved species; in Scotland
coniferous woods predominate, with 79 per cent of the total, the broadleaved species
accounting for only 21 per cent. In England, broadleaved species occupy 63 per cent, oak
accounting for 33 per cent, beech for 11 per cent, ash for 7 per cent, birch for 5 per cent,
sycamore for 4 per cent, and Spanish chestnut, elm, and other broadleaved trees for one
per cent each. In coniferous woods, which make up 37 per cent of the total, the Scots pine
is the most common tree, and accounts for 14 per cent of the total. In Wales, where the
conifers again predominate (although only by a small margin), the most common species
are the Norway and Sitka spruces, which account for 29 per cent of the total. The broad¬
leaved trees, amounting to 45 per cent in all, consist mainly of oak, which forms 26 per
cent of the whole.
Volume of Timber
The timber volume of Great Britam’s woodlands (timber over 3 inches in diameter) at
30th September 1949 was estimated at approximately 2,650 million cubic feet (75
million cubic metres), the hardwood amounting to approximately i,55° million cubic
feet (44 million cubic metres), and the softwood to approximately 1,100 million cubic feet
1Sonie 10,000 acres (4,047 ha.) of woodlands, mostly conifers, in the north-east of Scotland were
blown down by the gales of 31st January 1953 which coincided with the flood disaster on the east
coast of Britain.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
156
(31 million cubic metres). The total annual growth of timber was estimated at approxi¬
mately 97 milhon cubic feet (2-75 million cubic metres).
Ownership of Woodlands
Eighty-two per cent of all woodlands in Great Britain is owned by private individuals
or by limited companies, trusts, corporations, local authorities or Government depart¬
ments other than the Forestry Commission. The remaining 18 per cent is under the
management of the Forestry Commission.
The Forestry Commission
The Forestry Commission was established under the Forestry Acts, 1919-51, to pro¬
mote the interests of forestry, the development of afforestation and the production and
supply of timber in Great Britain. Under the Forestry Act, 1945, the Minister of Agricul¬
ture and Fisheries and the Secretary of State for Scotland became jointly responsible for
forest policy; under these Ministers the Forestry Commission continued to carry out
forestry operations, research and the training of foresters; and since 1950 it has been the
licensing authority for the felling of timber. The Forestry Act, 1951, placed responsibility
on the Commissioners for the safeguarding of an adequate reserve of growing trees.
During the years 1919-1952,1 the Forestry Commission acquired 1,855,700 acres
(750,965 ha.) of land through the Forestry Fund3 and under the Transfer of Woods Act,
1923. This total comprises 1,122,900 acres (454,415 ha.) classified as ‘forest land’, which is
either planted or will be planted in due course, and 732,800 acres (296,550 ha.) of‘other
land’ which includes forest nurseries, rough grazing, agricultural land and land unsuitable
for planting on account of soil conditions and locality. The total number of State forests
in Great Britain at 30th September 1952 was 437, of which 175 were in England, 191 in
Scotland and 71 in Wales.
Policy
Great Britain’s forest policy, laid down in the various Acts, is to extend State and private
operations so as to establish, over 50 years, 5 million acres (2-02 million ha.) of well-
managed woodlands, made up of 3 million acres (1-2 milhon ha.) of new planting by the
Commission and the replanting by the Commission and private owners of 2 million
acres (o-8 million ha.) of existing woodland. The annual yield from these 5 milhon acres
should be about 35 per cent of the national timber requirements.
The restoration of privately owned woodlands is being assisted by the Dedication
Scheme, initiated by the Forestry Act, 1947, under which owners are invited to agree to
their land being given over to timber production and to their woods being managed in
accordance with a plan approved by the Forestry Commission; in return the owner is
entitled to financial aid in the form of grants.
Forestry Education and Research
The Commission maintains five forester-training schools: at Parkend and Lynford in
England, Gwydyr in Wales, and Benmore and Glentress in Scotland. Northerwood
Flouse, the Commission’s educational centre in the New Forest, Hampshire, is used for
practical courses for university students, landowners, school teachers and timber firms’
employees.
Higher education in forestry is provided at several universities, suitable graduates being
recruited by the Commission as forest officers.
In 1946 Alice Holt Lodge, Famham, Surrey, was opened by the Commission as a
Tigures for 1952 do not include those for the full year but for the Forest Year 1952, which ended
.30th September 1952.
2See p. 157.
INDUSTRY
157
forestry research station. Grants are made for research on special forestry problems of a
fundamental scientific nature to be carried out by universities and other institutions
qualified to undertake such work. Expenditure on research and experiment in 1952
amounted to -£179,408.
Finance
The Forestry Fund was established in 1919 and from it is paid all the expenditure of the
Forestry Commissioners. The fund is replenished by sums voted annually by Parhament,
receipts from forest produce, rentals and other sources. From 1920 to 1952 Parliamentary
votes totalled £47,545,800 and receipts £15,811,741. Payments were £62,982,054.
National Forest Parks
The Forestry Commission has opened to the public seven National Forest Parks:
Argyll, Glen Trool, Glenmore and Loch Ard in Scotland; Flardknott, Forest of Dean and
Snowdonia in England and Wales. The total area of these parks is about a quarter of a
million acres (101,174 ha.); they include planted areas and unplantable moorland and
mountains. Camping facilities are provided in most of the Forest Parks, and the number of
overnight stays at the camping grounds exceeded 50,000 in 1952.
Forestry in Northern Ireland
In Northern Ireland, forestry has been the responsibility of the Ministry of Agriculture
for Northern Ireland since 1922. At that date die Government had acquired some 4,000
acres (1,619 ba-) for afforestation, of which 500 acres (202 ha.) had been planted. Since
then the State forest area has grown steadily, and at a gready accelerated pace since the
end of the second world war. By 31st March 1953, 59,300 acres (23,999 ha.) had been
acquired for State afforestation, of which approximately 34,400 acres (13,922 ha.) had
been planted. The area of exploitable private woodland is at present some 20,000 acres
(8,094 ba.), and private planting is assisted both by the supply of young trees at cost
price from the Government nurseries and by grants towards the cost of new plantations.
FUEL, POWER, AND WATER SUPPLY
The most important primary sources of the fuel and power used in Britain are coal and
petroleum, and the most important secondary sources are electricity (including hydro¬
electricity) and coal gas. Normally, inland coal requirements are met from within the
country; supplies from the mines also afford substantial exports. Nearly all petroleum is
imported (most of it as crude oil, and refined within the country), only a little being
produced from coal, shale and local oil wells. The fuel and power industries, with the
exception of the petroleum industry and coal distribution, are under public ownership;
water supply continues to be run by local undertakings of various kinds and has not been
nationalized.
Coal
Coal has been worked in Britain for over 700 years and the mining of coal has been
organized as an industry for over 300 years, having reached this stage of development
some 200 years in advance of that of any other European country. British coal exports
dominated the world coal market until about 1910. In 1913—the peak year—the industry
was producing 287 million tons of coal, exporting 94 million tons and employing 1,107,000
workers.
The very fact that the coalmining industry had been developed so early was largely
responsible for the subsequent decline in its prosperity. At a time when other countries
were just beginning, the British coalmining industry was already bound by tradition and
long established practices that were not easy to discard.
BRITAIN : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
158
The industry suffered a further decline during the first world war owing to a shortage
of manpower and to the shortage of plant and materials necessary for undertaking any
mechanical improvement. Moreover, alternative sources of energy and lower prices in
continental countries led to a later decline in exports, which had fallen to 50-8 million tons
in 1925.
Attempts at securing economies through amalgamation date from the Sankey Com¬
mission of 1919. In 1930 a Coal Mines Act established commissioners to bring about the
formation of larger and more efficient units. The Coal Act of 1938 transferred ownership
of the mineral coal to the State and made it the statutory responsibility of the Coal Com¬
mission to accelerate the integration of the industry by still further reducing the number
of separate undertakings. At the outbreak of the second world war in 1939, however, this
process was not far advanced.
In 1942 the Government assumed full operational control of the industry, though the
colliery undertakings continued to own the coal mines. In May 1946 the Coal Industry
Nationalization Act received the Royal Assent; on 1st January 1947 the whole coalmining
industry was transferred to public ownership and control and the National Coal Board,
an independent public corporation (see p. 51), was set up and made responsible for its
efficient operation.
There are minor exceptions to the Board’s exclusive monopoly to work coal in Britain:
for example, it may license private enterprise to work small mines in which the number
of underground workers does not greatly exceed 30. Production on opencast sites, which
had been the responsibility of the Ministry of Fuel and Power, was transferred to the
Board on 1st April 1952.
Location
The main coal-bearing areas, roughly in order of output, are to be found in Yorkshire,
Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire, Durham and Northumberland, Central Scotland,
South Wales, Lancashire and North Wales, Staffordshire, Warwickshire and Leicester¬
shire. There are no coal-bearing areas in Northern Ireland.
Administration
The collieries—about 900—are grouped into 50 Areas which are the basic units for
commercial management. The size of the Areas varies according to geological, geographi¬
cal and other technical considerations; their number and distribution may also vary.
Some of the larger Areas are split up into Sub-Areas the managements of which are
responsible to Area managements for the operation of groups of collieries within the
Area. The Areas are grouped into nine Divisions which roughly correspond to the main
coal-bearing areas. A Divisional Board for each Division supervises and co-ordinates the
work of the Areas within the Division, formulates divisional policy, and is responsible to
the National Coal Board, which is responsible for questions of national policy, finance and
the co-ordinating of major schemes of development. The day-to-day work of running the
collieries is under the direction of colliery managers.
Output and Manpower
In 1952 coal output was 226-4 million tons, including 12-2 million tons from opencast
sites, compared with 190-8 million tons in 1946. There has been a similar upward trend in
productivity: output per manshift rose from 1-03 tons in 1946 to 1-21 tons in 1951, the
highest for any year in the recorded history of the industry. In 1952 output per manshift
fell to 1-19 tons; this fall was partly attributable to the flow of new recruits who had to
be tramed and who also set many colliery managements the problem of providing
capacity for extra manpower. The average number of all workers in 1952 was 716,000
(17,000 more than in 1951).
Exports of coal were resumed after the war and, including bunkers, reached 19-3
TABLE 22 The National Coal Board’s Progress, 1947-52
INDUSTRY
159
CO 04
I 4|- 04
! r-H t-H
I tN
04
1 04
i 04
■'O 04
o\ Ol
04 'cf
04
00 T-H
01 'i-
tj- as
T}"
04
04 04
O 1
04
04 04
O- O
CO ON
00 o
04 O-
>0 CO
ON 04
04 ■'3"
lO,
'ct-
04
CO T-N
ON CO
04 ^1-
00 CO
00 04
04 -f
+
'!T cO
■'T
04
LO
04
NO
vi <L>
^ o
o £
<u
(U a
£ O
o
<
•ti bO
3 rt
-I
LO On
t-H t-H
cn t-h
a
a
u
<U
Cm •
'-d
<u
a
^ Oh CM
G
>-1
O vS
i 0
<D
[J-, <
q
If
o
tj
tM <
o
a.
'MO
'S
tS
r°N ^
U Pm
+
+
LP
O
iH
Pm
•S
bn
S3
-P>
CM
O
i6o
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
million tons in 1949. Thereafter, owing to increased demands from home industry, they
declined to n-6 million tons in 1951, but in 1952 they rose again to a little over 15
million tons including 3-4 million tons of bunkers for foreign-owned vessels.
In 1950 the National Coal Board announced its long-term plan of development for the
industry involving the reorganization and increased mechanization of existing mines and
the sinking of new ones. The plan envisaged a capital investment of ^635 million at 1949
prices between 1950 and 1965 when it was estimated that the annual output of coal would
have risen to about 240 million tons. The plan was not a rigid blueprint, room being left
for modifications in the light of changing circumstances and new knowledge. Actual
capital expenditure in the three years 1950-52 was ^89 million at current prices.
Various estimates have been made of the country’s workable reserves. The latest was
made by the Coal Survey in 1946 which considered there was certainly sufficient coal to
maintain output for 100 years but that in some places economically workable reserves,
particularly of special coals, would be worked out sooner. •
Table 22 shows statistics of the National Coal Board’s progress since its inception.
Petroleum
The petroleum industry in Britain dates back to 1850, when Dr. James Young, a
Glasgow chemist, succeeded in obtaining lamp oil and lubricants from natural mineral
oil occurring in the Derbyshire coal measures. The Scottish shale deposits, yielding similar
products, were first worked in 1858. Current output is drawn from 11 shale mines,
retorted in four crude oil works and the crude products are refined in a central refinery at
Pumpherston. Output of shale reached a peak of 3f million tons in 1913, but the cost of
the processes and other economic difficulties led to a reduction of output. This at present
averages million tons a year, yielding, in 1952, some 107,000 tons of crude shale oil.
From the latter some 100,000 tons of refined products were obtained. In 1952 some
109,000 tons of motor and aviation spirit were obtained from coal by hydrogenation and
175,000 tons of refined benzole from coke ovens and gas works. Prospecting for crude
petroleum has so far led to the establishment of four oilfields in Nottinghamshire, one in
Lancashire and one in Scotland, but sources of crude oil within Britain (including shale
oil) supply altogether less than one per cent of total United Kingdom requirements, the
remainder being imported from overseas.
British and British-Dutch oil companies have been responsible for developing the oil
resources of many countries to mutual advantage, especially in the Middle East and Carib¬
bean areas. In 1950 they together accounted for no less than 18-2 per cent of world produc¬
tion and for over 40 per cent of the oil entering into international trade, and they supplied
some 60 per cent of total Commonwealth needs.
Consumption of petroleum products in the United Kingdom has risen from just over
one million tons in 1900 (mostly kerosene for lamps, and lubricants) to over 17 million
tons in 1952 (predominantly gas, diesel and fuel oils and motor spirit).
Up to 1939 three-quarters of the United Kingdom petroleum supply was refined over¬
seas, in accordance with the view, commonly held in the world oil industry at that
time, that it was more economical to refine at the source of production. Since the
second world war, however, a series of complex factors have operated to favour the siting
of refineries in the consuming areas. Predominant among these, in the case of Britain,
were the need to save foreign exchange (particularly dollars), the advantages of a pet¬
roleum chemicals industry (see p. 177), the relatively low prices of crude oils, which have
not risen as fast as those of refined products, and cheaper transport costs for crudes. Con¬
sideration of all these factors led up to a vast domestic refinery expansion programme
costing about ^150 milhon over the years 1947-52.
At the beginning of 1953 refinery capacity in the United Kingdom amounted to 23
million tons per annum; actual production of refined products rose from about five
million tons in 1948-49 to 22-5 million tons in 1952. Exports of refined products became
INDUSTRY
161
possible, and their value reached over £52 million in 1952 while in the same year that of
imports of refined products fell from -£141 million in 1951 to £96 million.
Electricity Supply
The first public supply of electricity was provided at Godaiming, Surrey, in 1881, fol¬
lowing the development of the vacuum carbon-filament lamp between 1875 and 1880.
From the earliest days a measure of public control has been a feature of the industry, and
the Electric Lighting Act of 1882 authorized the Board of Trade to grant exclusive rights
to local authorities and private enterprise to supply consumers in a given area. By the turn
of the century technical developments had led to a large expansion of distribution areas
and the introduction of the electric motor as a source of motive power. A variety of
independent supply systems had grown up all over the country.
It was not until after the first world war that steps were taken to reorganize the industry
on a national scale in order to realize the benefits of a standard and integrated system of
supply. In 1919 the Electricity Commissioners were set up as a supervisory body and to
secure reorganization through voluntary agreement. Then in 1926 the Central Electricity
Board was established to co-ordinate more efficiently the generation of electricity. Its
main duties were to concentrate the output of electricity in certain stations, selected for
their efficiency and low operating costs; to connect these selected stations with one another
and to local distribution undertakings by means of a national system of main transmission
lines, known as the Grid; and to establish a standard alternating current frequency of 50
cycles. Thenceforward steady progress was made in putting this plan into effect, and by
March 1948, 143 selected stations, out of some 300, were supplying 95 per cent of the
electricity generated for public supply.
The Nationalized Industry
Under the Electricity Act, 1947, the electricity supply industry of Great Britain was
brought completely under public ownership and control and in April 1948 the British
Electricity Authority (the Central Authority) and 14 Area Electricity Boards took over
the assets of the former municipal and private undertakings throughout Great Britain
except the North of Scotland District. The Authority is responsible for the generation and
transmission of electricity, and the Area Boards for its distribution and sale to consumers.
Previously, in 1943, die North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board was established as a
non-profit-making public body mainly to develop the water power resources of the
Highlands and Islands, and to distribute electricity in die more sparsely populated areas
not covered by existing undertakings. The 1947 Act made the Board solely responsible
for all means of generation and distribution in'its area, which was somewhat extended to
include that part of Scotland north and west of a line running roughly from Dumbarton
on the Firth of Clyde to a point just north of Newburgh on the Firth of Tay.
With the exception of a few small non-statutory undertakings supplying a fraction of
one per cent of die total supphes to the public, the industry in Great Britain is now entirely
under public control. Of the total public supplies in Great Britain, the British Electricity
Authority produces some 98 per cent, and the North of Scotland Board most of the
remainder.
The British Electricity Authority and Area Electricity Boards are responsible to the Minis¬
ter of Fuel and Power; and the North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board to the Secretary
of State for Scotland. Consultative councils have been set up to represent the interests of
consumers in the area of each Board. The councils consist of between 20 and 30 members,
of whom between 50 and 60 per cent are nominated by local authority associations. A
council has also been set up for the area of the North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board.
The main function of the British Electricity Authority is the development and main¬
tenance of an efficient, co-ordinated and economical system of electricity supply on a
162
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
national scale. It is responsible for the generation and acquisition of electricity supplies and
for their transmission to the Area Boards, which then distribute them. The Authority also
has the duty of co-ordinating distribution by the Area Boards and it has a general control
over their policy, especially in development programmes, tariffs, general finance, and
labour relations. The Authority undertakes research and may require the Area Boards to do
so. Generation is carried out at 293 stations in the 14 generating divisions of the Authority,
which are based in general on the same geographical regions as the Area Boards.
At 31st March 1953, 49,091 persons were employed by the British Electricity Authority
(Headquarters and Generating Divisions) and 132,273 by the Area Boards; a total of
181,364, ofwhich 11-6 per cent were women.
In Northern Ireland, electricity is generated by two municipal undertakings and one
public board. The bulk of the electricity is acquired by the Northern Ireland Joint Elec¬
tricity Committee set up by statute in 1948, for sale to statutory distribution undertakings.
Of these the Electricity Board for Northern Ireland distributes electricity throughout the
province with the exception of the cities of Belfast and Londonderry, where it is carried
out by municipal undertakings.
Generation of Electricity
Almost the whole of Britain’s electricity is produced in coal-fired steam generating
stations. Plentiful supplies of coal together with good rail and coastal transport for moving
the coal, in contrast with the remote and scattered location of water-power resources, led
to this preponderant development of electricity supplies from thermal generating stations.
The development of hydro-electricity on any scale is comparatively recent.
In 1952, 60,563 million units (one unit = one kilowatt-hour) or 97-1 per cent of the
public supply in Great Britain was generated at steam stations; 1,672 million units or
2-68 per cent from water power and 158 million units or 0-25 per cent by other means,
e.g., diesel and waste heat and refuse destruction. The high rate of expansion of output,
which has been a feature of the industry since its earliest years, has been continued since
the war. Total production in 1952 at 62,393 million units showed an increase of 4 per cent
over 1951, 59,971 million units, and nearly 50 per cent over 1946, 41,253 million units
(see Table 23).
Sales of electricity in Northern Ireland in 1952 totalled nearly 693 million units.
TABLE 23
Production of Electricity in Great Britain
Year
MilUon units
generated
1945
1946
1950
1951
1952
37,284
41,253
54,965
59,971
62,393
Year
1920-21
1925-26
1930
1935
1940
Milhon units
generated
4,275
6,619
10,917
17,569
28,773
Generating capacity in Great Britain as a whole at the end of 1952 totalled 17,823 mega¬
watts (maximum continuous rating) compared with 12,498 megawatts at the end of 1946.
The Authority is at present implementing a large-scale programme of capital investment,
for the regions it controls, which includes the provision of an increase, between the years
1946 and 1955, of 10,600 megawatts (sent out).
INDUSTRY
I63
The Authority is the largest consumer of fuel in Britain and hi 1952 it used approximately
35 million tons, consisting mainly of coal. Average thermal efficiency (i.e. the ratio of
power output to the coal consumed) rose from 20-86 per cent in 1947-48 to 22-04 per
cent in 1951-52 as new plant was brought into use. Five stations were operating through¬
out 1951—52 with a thermal efficiency of over 28 per cent. A policy of standardization of
equipment is being implemented wherever possible, especially in generators, boilers and
other plant. The two standard sizes of turbo-alternators are 30,000 kilowatts and 60,000
kilowatts, and most sets now installed are of these sizes.
Transmission and Distribution
Main transmission lines—the Grid—cover most of the country. Those of the Authority
totalled 4,600 route miles (7,400 km.) at 31st March 1952, of which 4,105 miles were
operated at 132,000 volts and 495 at 66,000 volts and below. Operation of the Grid is
effected through the Authority’s eight operational areas, set up for that purpose and dis¬
tinct from the generating divisions; each has a central control station and the operations
are co-ordinated by the national control station in London.
In order to meet estimated demand during the next 20 years, a new super-grid system
of main transmission at 275*000 volts, which will make British electricity supply the most
closely integrated power network in the world, is being promoted by the Authority.
The first stage, already in progress, is due for completion in 1955. The Authority is also
undertaking development of a plan to link British and French grid systems to take
advantage of different peak periods in the two countries.
The Area Electricity Boards distribute to consumers electricity acquired mainly from
the Authority, but in part from other sources, e.g., collieries. There were 13-5 million
consumers in March 1952, an increase of approximately 3-5 million on those supplied in
March 1939. Industrial users are the group of consumers with the highest consumption,
and demand from this sector is increasing rapidly. The principal domestic uses of electricity
are for lighting, cooking, and for space and water heating, but the demand for numerous
other domestic purposes is increasing. The development of electricity supplies for rural
areas has been facilitated by the change in the structure of the industry under the 1947
Act. During 1951-52 supplies were provided for a further 9,744 farms which raised the
total to 120,121.
The Area Boards are required to promote the standardization of systems of supply and
types of electric fittings. The standardization of low-voltage supplies has been under con¬
sideration for many years, and in 1945 h was decided that the adoption of a voltage of 240
volts would be the practical and economic method of standardization of alternating
current low-voltage supplies. Implementation, however, is restricted by shortage of
labour and materials.
Capital Investment
The comprehensive capital plan to bridge the1 gap between ever-increasing demand
and supply is limited by shortages of equipment and finance. Capital investment by the
Authority and Area Boards in 1952 was approximately ^I48 million, of which £79
million was spent on generation, ^10 million on main transmission, ^54 million on dis¬
tribution, £\ million on repair and maintenance of buildings and £1 milhon on supplies
associated with the defence programme.
The setting up of the North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board in 1943 marked the
beginning of a new era of intensive water-power development in the Elighlands of Scot¬
land. A development scheme drawn up by die Board in 1944* showing the water-power
resources which it proposed to examine, listed 102 hydro-electric projects with an esti¬
mated annual output of 6,274 million units of electricity. The ultimate output of Highland
hydro-electric power is expected to be substantially higher and eventually may exceed
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
164
10,000 million units. In 1952. 889 million units were generated from this source compared
with 322 million in 1949.
Gas Supply
Public supply of gas in Britain dates from 1807, when Pall Mall, London, was first
lighted with gas. In 1812 the London and Westminster Gas Light and Coke Company
received a Royal Charter to supply gaslight in London. In the early years of the industry,
gas was used almost exclusively for lighting and was provided by a growing number of
company and municipal undertakings. Then, after the middle of the century and the
invention of the Bunsen burner in 1869, gas was used increasingly as a source of heat for
many purposes such as domestic cooking and space and water heating, in addition to a
number of industrial uses. After 1880, however, gas for lighting purposes was subjected
to increasing competition from the new electricity supply industry; but the invention of
the Welsbach incandescent mantle in 1887, which raised the efficiency of gas lighting very
considerably, enabled the industry to hold its own while the supply of gas for purposes
other than lighting increased.
The modern gas industry developed during the period between the wars when ever-
increasing competition from electricity had to be met and when changes in social habits
and outlook were taking place. The industry undertook a large-scale programme of
modernization of production and distribution and launched widespread sales promotion
campaigns especially for the numerous uses of gas in the home. By 1939 the industry had
become mainly a supplier of heating instead of a supplier of lighting.
The Nationalized Industry
Under the Gas Act, 1948, the gas industry was brought under public ownership and
control on 1st May 1949. The assets of 982 undertakings, of which 274 belonged to local
authorities, were vested in 12 Area Gas Boards. Together they cover the whole of Great
Britain and are charged with the statutory duty to develop and maintain an efficient,
co-ordinated and economical system of gas supply to domestic, industrial and other con¬
sumers. The chairmen of these boards constitute the Gas Council, which is headed by an
independent chairman and deputy-chairman and is responsible for advising the Minister
of Fuel and Power on questions affecting the gas industry.
The Gas Boards, which are autonomous bodies, are charged inter alia with the responsi¬
bility of manufacturing and distributing gas to consumers. Their powers differ from those
of the Electricity Area Boards, which are limited to the distribution and sale of current,
while the central executive body—the British Electricity Authority—is charged with the
duties of generation and transmission. A link between the industry and the consuming
public was established under the nationalization scheme by the creation of a Consultative
Council in each board area. These councils consist of not fewer than 20 and not more than
30 members, of whom between 50 and 75 per cent are chosen from panels of persons
nominated by the local authority associations.
In Northern Ireland, as in the case of electricity, the gas supply industry remains in the
hands of a number of municipal undertakings and statutory and non-statutory companies.
Production and Consumption
In 1952 in Great Britain 27- 5 million tons of coal were carbonized by gas undertakings
and 25-2 million tons by coke ovens operated outside the gas industry. About one quarter
of the output of gas from coke ovens is sold to gas undertakings for general distribution;
the remainder is consumed at the ovens or at colheries or steelworks.
In 1921, 250,300 million cubic feet (7,100 million cubic metres) of gas was manu¬
factured by authorized gas undertakings or acquired from coke ovens, and the number of
consumers was 7-5 million. By 1952, gas manufactured and acquired from coke ovens
INDUSTRY
165
for distribution had risen to 569,300 million cubic feet (16,111 million cubic metres)
and the number of consumers had risen to about 12-25 million, an increase of 127 per
cent in the volume of gas available and of about 63 per cent in the number of consumers.
The total number of persons employed in the gas industry in December 1952 was
148-6 thousand including 13 thousand women. There has been an increase of 13 thousand
in the number of workers since September 1948. Table 24 illustrates the trends in the
manufacture of gas over the last 30 years, showing the steady rise in the manufacture of
gas at gasworks and the very rapid increase in the acquisition of supphes from coke
ovens, etc.
TABLE 24
Production and Availability of Gas in Great Britain, 1921-1952
Thousand million cubic feet*
Year
Gas made at gasworks
Coal
gas
Water
gas
Other
gas
Total
Gas bought
from coke
ovens and
other sources
Total gas
available
1921 (a)
1925 (a)
1930 (a)
1935 (a)
1940 (a)
1945
1950
1951
1952
194-5
231-3
255-3
260-5
260-8
302-4
382-4
399-1
408-3
49-9
48-2
39-5
32-4
29-8
65-3
84-8
84-1
79-2
4-6
4- 3
5- 0
6- 0
7- 1
8- 5
14-1
14-9
13-8
249-0
283-8
299-8
298-9
297-7
376-2
481-3
498-1
501-3
1-3
4-8
13-2
20-5
36-9
51-5
63-1
65-9
68-0
250-3
288-6
313-0
319-4
334-6
427-7
544-4
564-0
569-3
*1,000 million cubic feet=28-3 million cubic metres.
(a) Statutory undertakings only.
Nearly three-fifths of all gas produced is sold for household use and the remainder
for industry, commerce and public services. (See Table 25.)
TABLE 25
Consumption of Gas in Great Britain, 1948 to 1952
Thousand million cubic feet*
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
(provisional)
Domestic
Industrial
Commercial ..
Public administration
Public lighting
288-2
105-0
52-6
11-1
8-2
286-5
109-2
58-0
9.9
10-4
287-7
122-6
61-8
11-2
11-6
294-2
133-2
68-9
11-2
11-0
289-1
136-4
71-8
11-1
11-0
Total
465-1
474-0
494.9
518-5
519-4
*1,000 million cubic feet=28-3 million cubic metres.
166
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Domestic Use. While an accurate statistical analysis of the domestic load is not possible,
evidence given before the Ridley Committee (on Fuel and Power Policy), appointed by
the Minister of Fuel and Power in 1951, suggested that about 70 per cent of the domestic
load was used for cooking, the remaining 30 per cent being spread over space heating,
water heating and other installations. Most homes in Britain are now supplied with gas.
The principal exception is in rural areas where, owing to difficulties in storage and trans¬
mission, gas is not economic. These difficulties have been overcome in some areas by the
use of local high-pressure storage tanks, but this development is unlikely to grow owing
to the steady extension of rural electricity supplies.
Industrial and Commercial Use. Gas is especially suited to industries which require a
simple control of temperature to a fine degree of accuracy. Among such industries are
pottery and certain processes in the manufacture of iron and steel products. Industrial
use of gas increased greatly during the second world war and reached 103 thousand million
cubic feet in 1943. By 1951 industrial consumption had risen further to 133 thousand
million cubic feet.
Capital Investment
The structure of the nationalized industry has already permitted considerable integra¬
tion by the linking of undertakings for the transmission of gas, enabling production to be
concentrated in the most efficient units. Progress is also being made in interconnections
for the reception of gas from coke ovens, notably in the East and West Gas Grids of
South Wales.
The chief objects of capital expenditure since the war have been to overtake arrears of
maintenance and plant renewal; plans for substantial expansion have had to be postponed.
Capital expenditure in 1952 was -£47 million, compared with ^41 million in 1951 and
^34 million in 1950.
By-products
With the rapid increase in the volume of gas produced, the problems of the disposal of
what were regarded originally as the ‘waste’ products of the carbonization of coal (notably
tar, benzole, sulphur and ammonia) became increasingly important.
Production of coke at gas works in 1952 was 12,578,000 tons, and at coke ovens
17,092,000 tons. The gas industry and coke ovens jointly produce over 2J million tons of
crude coal tar and about 100 million gallons (455 million litres) of crude benzole a year.
These products together with those of the sulphur and ammonia type provide a source for
the manufacture of a long and ever-growing list of essential derivatives which includes
dyestuffs (of which Britain now produces more than 80 per cent of its requirements),
fertilizers, plastics, germicides (the sulphonamides and sulphanilamides), insecticides,
refrigerants, perfumes, and synthetic yarns.
With further research and development, more especially in the field of organic
chemistry, the production of coal carbonization derivatives is becoming of increasing
importance to the economy of the industry.
Water Supply
Britain has a sufficient rainfall to ensure enough water to supply all her domestic and
industrial requirements. Water problems are mainly concerned with abstraction, storage,
treatment and distribution. Supplies are obtained partly from surface sources such as
mountain lakes, streams impounded in upland gathering grounds and by river intakes,
and partly from underground sources by means of wells, adits and boreholes.
Unlike other public services in Great Britain, such as electricity and gas, water supply
has not been nationalized. It remains in the hands of a large number of water undertakings
of different kinds. In September 1953 in England and Wales there were 893 local authority
INDUSTRY
167
water undertakings, 55 joint water boards (including bulk supply boards) and 16 commit¬
tees, 106 statutory water companies, 46 non-statutory water companies, 5 private pro¬
prietors with statutory powers, and well over 1,000 private proprietors without statu¬
tory powers, mostly affording small supphes. Water undertakings vary greatly in size;
of the statutory undertakings, 26 (about 2J per cent of the total) supply about 50 per
cent of the population, and 123 supply 75 per cent. Over the past 80 years there have
been a number of amalgamations; the outstanding example has been the Metropolitan
Water Board (see p. 54) which was established in 1902. Eight separate undertakings
were combined to form the Board, which is probably the largest single water under¬
taking in the world, and supphes about 350 million gallons (1,591 million litres) daily
to about 7 million people in Greater London.
Water undertakings together supply about 1,750 milhon gallons (7,955 million litres)
a day. They spend about £20 million a year on capital development, financed by loans,
the interest on which, together with running costs, is paid by the undertakings from a
total annual income of some ^50 milhon. This income is derived from local water rates
or charges levied on domestic consumers in proportion to the annual rateable value of their
property and from prescribed charges for meters in the case of most industrial users. In
addition to supplies from water undertakings, large quantities of water are taken by
industry from rivers or underground sources.
Today, piped water supplies reach some 95 per cent of the total population of England
and Wales. The provision of piped supplies for rural districts was assisted by an initial
grant of £1 million under the Rural Water Supplies Act, 1934; further grants of up to
^45 million (in England and Wales) were provided under the Rural Water Supplies
and Sewerage Acts, 1944 and 1951. More than 70 per cent of persons living in rural areas
have piped water supplies or are within easy reach of water mains.
Ninety-five per cent of the total population of Scotland is reached by piped supplies, as
compared with eighty-two per cent in the country areas. Although the water problem
in Scotland is broadly similar to that of England and Wales, the differences in geography,
law and organization have led to special legislation being enacted. The Water (Scotland)
Act, 1949, provides for a £20 million grant for rural water supplies, sets up the Scottish
Water Advisory Committee to advise the Secretary of State for Scotland who is the
responsible authority, and makes the domestic water rate uniform over the country area
of a county.
Northern Ireland has abundant supphes of fairly uniform soft water. Gravitation water
systems supply the large towns. Belfast is supplied principally from a reservoir in the
Mourne mountains holding approximately 3,000 million gallons (13,600 million litres).
A second reservoir is shortly to be constructed in the same area. Londonderry also has an
upland reservoir supply.
The Water Supplies and Sewage Act (Northern Ireland), 1945, places certain statutory
obligations on local authorities with regard to water supply, drainage and sewerage, and
provides grants towards the cost of improvements which are made.
The steady growth of towns in England and Wales has meant increased demands for
water, and, in so far as such growth involves covering the ground with impervious
material so that water which previously would have percolated through to underground
natural reservoirs is now carried off in drains and rivers, some diminution in water
supphes may result. On the other hand, improved methods of purification in recent years
have resulted in greater use being made of water drawn from the lower reaches of rivers.
Growth and Development of Water Supplies
It was not until the nineteenth century that the provision of water supplies became a
general public service and then only after long and bitter controversy. It was largely due
to the efforts of Edward Chadwick and his colleagues, who demonstrated the dangers to
i68
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
pure water supply and sanitation brought about by the new industrialization, that the
Health Act, 1848, became law. The Act laid down a common minimum standard of
sanitary service and became the foundation of all subsequent legislation on sanitation. For
example, the Sanitary Act of 1866 prescribed that local authorities should inspect their
areas and suppress nuisances. Through the establishment of separate water undertakings
from the middle of the nineteenth century onwards, the water supply system developed in
piecemeal fashion with some overlapping and waste.
To meet the urgent need for co-ordination and long-term planning the Ministry of
Health was assisted from 1923 onwards by an Advisory Committee on water, and in 1924
the Ministry started to encourage the formation of Regional Advisory Water Committees
for important areas having a common water problem.
The Water Act, 1945, gave the Minister of Health powers to implement national water
policy to promote the conservation and proper use of water supphes in England and
Wales. Provision was also made for a Central Advisory Water Committee to advise the
Government on general questions relating to water. The Act dealt with the local organi¬
zation of water supplies and the powers and duties of local authorities and water under¬
takings. Local authorities were required to supply piped wholesome water to every part
of their districts where there were houses or schools, to maintain wells, springs, and water
mains, and to ensure that supphes were free from pollution.
On the formation of the Ministry of Local Government and Planning in January 1951,
the responsibilities of the Ministry of Health in regard to water were transferred to that
Ministry, renamed the Ministry of Housing and Local Government in December 1951.
Inland Water Survey
A survey of all inland water resources has been started to provide information on the
yield, behaviour and quantity of the nation’s water resources to Government Depart¬
ments, water undertakings, industry, agriculture and other water users. An advisory body,
the Inland Water Survey Committee, which is not a statutory committee, was set up in
1950, and consists mainly of engineers. The committee is not at present sitting. The field
work on surface water is being carried out mainly by the new River Boards. The other
two aspects of the survey, rainfall and underground water supplies, are the responsibility
of the Meteorological Office and the Geological Survey and Museum, respectively.
River Boards
Under the River Boards Act, 1948, 32 River Boards have been set up to carry out
and co-ordinate the various aspects of river management previously performed by a large
number of separate authorities, including 53 catchment boards responsible for land drain¬
age, 45 fishery boards and 1,600 pollution authorities. In particular, the River Boards are
directed to concern themselves with the conservation of water resources in their areas to
meet the increasing demand from industry and domestic users.1
Each River Board covers a River Board Area. The River Board Areas together com¬
prise the whole of England and Wales, except the Thames and Lea Catchment areas
(which remain under the Conservators of the River Thames and Lea Conservancy
Catchment Board, respectively), the administrative County of London, and areas adjoin¬
ing that county not included in any catchment area.
River Boards are composite bodies representing local government, agricultural and
fishery interests, and their expenses are apportioned among the councils of the counties or
county boroughs concerned in them in proportion to the rateable values of property in
the River Board Area.
1Under the Coastal Flooding (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1953, the Minister of Agriculture and
Fisheries may authorize River Boards to enter upon land, to construct new embankments, to obtain
clay and other materials, and to build access roads, etc., in order to expedite necessary work in
emergencies such as the East Coast flood disaster of January 1953.
INDUSTRY 169
River management in Scotland and Northern Ireland has not been centralized to the
same extent.
Prevention of River Pollution
A sub-committee to investigate measures for the prevention of river pollution was set
up by the Central Advisory Water Committee in 1949. Its recommendations were incor¬
porated in the Rivers (Prevention of Pollution) Act, 1951, which revises and strengthens
previous legislation. There is a similar Act for Scotland. It is now an offence for any person
to permit any polluting matter, solid or liquid, to enter a river. Enforcement of the Act
is vested in the River Boards and the Thames and Lea Conservators.
SOME MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES
In terms of production and exports the most important British industries are the metals
and metal-using group, the textiles group and the chemicals group. This section gives
notes on some of the industries in these broad categories as well as on some traditional
British craft industries and some newer industries with an expanding export trade.
Metals and Metal-using Industries
The metals and metal-using industries contributed as much as 52 per cent of total
United Kingdom exports in 1952. They consist chiefly of the industries producing iron
and steel and various non-ferrous metals; the vehicles industries (motor vehicles, cycles,
aircraft, ships and locomotives); the electrical engineering industry; the machinery
industries, a large group embracing all kinds of metal products from machine tools to
lawn mowers; and the cutlery, hardware, implements and instruments industries.
Iron and Steel Industry
Iron and steel are the basic materials of this whole group of industries. Britain pioneered
the appheation of coal to the smelting of iron ore from the seventeenth century onwards
and was responsible for the technical development which led to the great expansion of
steel-making in the second half of the nineteenth century. Today Britain is the world’s
third largest producer (after the United States and the Soviet Union) and is renowned
for the quahty of its special alloy steels.
British steel production at the start of the twentieth century averaged about five
million ingot tons a year, and was about twice this amount in the years before the second
world war. Output in 1945 was n-8 million ingot tons.
Modernization of the industry, begun on the establishment of the British Iron and Steel
Federation in 1934 as the central trade association for the industry, but interrupted by the
war, was resumed in 1946, when a five-year plan drawn up by the Federation was sub¬
mitted to the Government. The general objective was to modernize steel-making capacity
in Britain and increase it to 16 million tons a year. The total estimated cost at 1945 prices
was £168 million, or about £340 million at 1952 prices. Actual expenditure to the end
of 1952 was over £300 million (^400 million at I952 prices). Target capacity was
exceeded, 16-4 million tons being produced in 1952. The index of productivity in steel
smelting and rolling measured in output per head had increased from 106 in 1945
(1938 = 100) to 143 in 1952.
The largest plant built under this plan, which was completed in 1953, is the Abbey
Works at Margam in South Wales, employing some 7,000 people and costing £60
million, which since July 1951 has been producing steel sheets, plates and strip. A new
tinplate works at Trostre, South Wales, started operation in October I951 and a new
cold reduction mill is planned at Velindre, also in South Wales.
A second five-year plan to raise United Kingdom steel production to at least 20 million
tons by 1957-58 has been submitted to the Government.
M
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
170
Public supervision of the iron and steel industry dates from 1932, when a Government-
appointed body, the Import Duties Advisory Committee, gave special attention to the
reorganization of this industry. Detailed control was exercised in the second world war
by the Iron and Steel Control of the Ministry of Supply, and from 1946 to 1949 the
industry was supervised by an Iron and Steel Board. On 15th February 1951 the greater
part of the industry came into public ownership by virtue of the Iron and Steel Act, 1949.
On that day the Iron and Steel Corporation of Great Britain, established under the Act,
took over from private shareholders the ownership of 92 major companies and some 150
associated companies, though the companies retained their separate identities and manage¬
ments. The Government elected in October 1951 passed, in 1953, another Iron and Steel
Act to repeal the 1949 Act and to return these companies to private ownership and to set
up an Iron and Steel Board to provide public supervision over the industry.
Direct exports of the industry in 1952 were valued at ^192 million and about 470,000
persons were employed in all branches.
Non-ferrous Metals Industries
Non-ferrous metals industries in Britain contributed direct exports to the value of ^82
million in 1952. Apart from a httle mining of lead, tin, tungsten and copper, the British in¬
dustry consists of factories for smelting, rolling, extrusion, drawing, casting and fabrication,
chiefly of aluminium, copper, lead, zinc, tin, magnesium and the precious metals. These
and other non-ferrous metals, such as nickel, molybdenum and tungsten, are used in steel
alloys, and science is finding new uses for non-ferrous metals of all kinds which are vital
to industries as diverse as, for example, production of nuclear energy (uranium), jet
aircraft engines (aluminium, columbium, magnesium, titanium), and electronic apparatus
(selenium, tungsten, germanium).
The Vehicles Industries
The vehicles industries make the largest contribution to the export trade (some -£451
millions in 1952), and employed at the end of 1952 over one million people: 210,000 in
shipbuilding and repairing, 293,000 in manufacture of motor vehicles and cycles, 210,000
in manufacture and repair of aircraft, 141,000 in the manufacture of parts and accessories
for motor vehicles and aircraft, and 170,000 in manufacture and repair of locomotives,
railway carriages, wagons and trains.
Motor Vehicles Industry. In size and value the vehicles industries are headed by the motor
vehicles industry, which comprises the manufacture of cars and commercial vehicles other
than tractors. Exports in 1952 (including parts) were valued at ^241 million. Britain is
the world’s largest exporter of these products, and has been responsible for some of the
latest technical advances, such as the application of the gas turbine engine to motor car
propulsion, for which at least four British manufacturers have patents.
On the production side, some of the new assembly plants in Britain, electrically con¬
trolled and using the minimum of labour, may stand comparison with similar plants
anywhere in the world for efficiency and reliability.
Total production of motor vehicles in Britain rose from 10,500 in 1908 to a peak of
783,672 in 1950. This total fell slightly in 1951, through steel shortages, and again in 1952,
through restriction in some export markets, but rose again to record levels in 1953. An
encouraging factor in the 1953 recovery has been the very large increase in exports to the
United States and Canada. The United States is now the largest individual market by
value for British cars.
The industry is to be found mainly in the Midlands and in London and in south-east
England, but is represented in most regions. Motor vehicle producers may be divided
into four main groups: (1) the ‘Big Six’, which control between them 12 establishments
producing over 90 per cent of the output of cars and light vehicles; (2) specialist producers
INDUSTRY
171
of cars; (3) specialist producers of cars and commercial vehicles; (4) manufacturers of
commercial vehicles excluding the ‘Big Six’ and specialist producers. The two largest
firms in the first category, Austin and Nuffield, were acquired by a holding company,
the British Motor Corporation, in February 1952, with the object of obtaining economies
and standardization. This group, with assets totalling ^66 million, is the fourth largest
motor manufacturing group in the world, representing some 50 per cent of British output.
The principal trade association in the industry is the Society of Motor Manufacturers
and Traders (SMMT), founded in 1902, which holds in London a Commercial Motor
Exhibition every two years, and a Motor Exliibition annually.
Research is carried out by the Motor Industry Research Association, founded in 1946,
at Bindley, Warwickshire, an autonomous body partly financed by the Department of
Scientific and Industrial Research (see p. 267) but mainly by the industry and the SMMT;
and also by DSIR’s Mechanical Engineering Research Laboratory at East Kilbride, Scot¬
land.
Cycle Industries. Exports of motor cycles, motor tricycles and cycles (including parts)
made in Britain earned ^42 million in 1952. Exports of pedal cycles and parts alone were
valued at ^31 million. The industry making cycles is quite separate from, though akin
to, the motor vehicles industry. Britain is the world’s largest exporter of these products.
A Scotsman, McMillan, built the first pedal cycle in 1840. Factory production began in
1868, when a sewing-machine firm undertook a contract for 100 pedal cycles. The
modern pedal cycle industry is one of the most concentrated in the country, three large
firms being responsible for about two-thirds of the output. Cycle manufacturers buy
some components from specialist component manufacturers, who are often the same
firms which supply the motor vehicles and aircraft industries. The chief centres of pro¬
duction are at Nottingham and Birmingham. The labour force is about 20,000, excluding
persons employed by specialist component firms. Output has risen from two million
cycles in 1935 to four million in 1952.
Aircraft Industry. Aircraft exports, including parts other than tyres, reached a value of
-£43 million in 1952 and are expected to approach f6o million in 1953. British contri¬
butions to aeronautical science are numerous, from the early nineteenth century, when
Sir George Cayley founded the science of aerodynanucs, to the twentieth century, when
the use of a gas turbine for jet propulsion, for which Sir Frank Whittle was granted a
patent in 1930, came to fruition with the flight of the first jet-propelled aircraft on
15 th May 1941. Since the second world war, the United Kingdom aircraft industry
(which dates from 1905) has concentrated mainly on the development and production
of gas turbine aircraft for civil and military purposes, although a range of piston-engined
types is still produced. Progress with transport aircraft in particular was shown when
on 2nd May 1952 the Comet inaugurated the first scheduled air service in the world
employing gas turbine propulsion, between London and Johannesburg. The Comets,
Viscounts and Britannias are being ordered in large quantities by oversea as well as British
airlines. Orders in hand for them at the end of 1952 amounted to ^50 million and many
more orders are expected as airlines renew their fleets. This is apart from military aircraft,
which earn Britain foreign currency through exports and production under licence in
foreign countries.
A new private company entitled Air Finance was formed in September 1953 to assist
aircraft manufacturers to promote exports by offering credit facilities to oversea
customers.
The industry employs about 210,000 people compared with 134,219 in 1948, i'8
million in 1944 (the war-time peak) and 35,890 in 1935.
The representative body of the United Kingdom aircraft industry is the Society of
British Aircraft Constructors, founded in 1916. The annual exhibition and flying display
held by this society at Farnborough is a fixture of international importance.
172
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The greater part of research on fundamental problems of aerodynamics, structures,
engines, etc., is carried out by the Ministry of Supply. This work is done in collaboration
with the industry and results are made known to manufacturers, who are in close and
constant touch with the Ministry’s establishments. The actual design, construction and
initial testing of aircraft are, however, carried out by the manufacturer. British technical
achievements recently disclosed include the by-pass type of engine (the first distinct step
forward in the evolution of the aircraft gas turbine engine), and the delta and aero-
isoclinic wing shapes.
Shipbuilding. Ships built in British yards exported to other countries in 1952 were valued
at ^36 million, compared with ^53 million in 1951.
Britain has for centuries been one of the most important shipbuilding countries. Modern
shipbuilding dates from the middle of the nineteenth century, when the iron and steam-
driven vessel replaced the earlier sailing ship. Britain led the way in the substitution of
steel for iron and in the development of the steam turbine. Between 1890 and 1913
Britain produced more than half the world’s new tonnage, and in 1920 she launched
over two million tons, still the peace-time record for the industry. The problem of surplus
capacity and periodic heavy unemployment appeared in all shipbuilding countries during
the inter-war years. During the second world war the industry was fully occupied in
building and repairing warships and merchant ships of all kinds, and a high level of
activity in the building and repair of merchant ships has continued since 1945.
Shipbuilding is mainly an assembly trade, and Britain’s economy is well equipped to
meet this demand, with a highly developed iron and steel industry to provide plates,
sections, angles, etc., and a widely diversified pattern of general industry to supply the
numerous components that go to the making of a ship.
About 73 per cent of the total output of ships is produced in two main areas: along the
lower Clyde in Scotland, where vessels of all kinds are built, including fast ocean-going
vessels and cross-Channel steamers; and in north-east England along the lower reaches of
the rivers Tyne, Wear and Tees and in the towns of Hartlepool and West Hartlepool,
where there is a special emphasis on tankers, ‘tramp’ steamers and colliers. The other ship¬
building areas are smaller: Belfast in Northern Ireland specializes in liners, refrigerator and
motor ships; Merseyside undertakes naval construction, luxury liners, and motor ships;
Barrow in Lancashire specializes in liners and naval vessels. Ships are also built in the
Southampton area and along the Forth and Tay estuaries, while numerous places along
the coast produce fishing vessels, yachts, barges, and small craft.
Repair yards and dry docks are situated in all the great ports and there are important
repair facilities in all the shipbuilding areas.
There are many firms engaged in shipbuilding, although, as with other engineering
industries, nearly half the output of new ships is concentrated in the hands of about a
dozen. Practically the whole of the marine engineering industry is owned by shipbuilding
firms.
In the years 1946 to 1950 Britain launched nearly half the world’s total new tonnage,
and 30 per cent in 1952. From 30 to 40 per cent of launchings are for oversea customers.
More than half the two million gross tons under construction at the end of 1952 was
tanker tonnage, and this proportion is tending to increase.
In December 1952 there were about 210,000 employees in the shipbuilding and repairing
industries, including the Royal Dockyards.
Locomotives Industry. Locomotives and rail vehicles provided exports valued at nearly
^37 million in 1952.
Britain was the first country to develop the locomotive railway and British engineers
pioneered railway development in all parts of the world.
The locomotives industry in Britain has come to be divided into two separate sections:
one of these comprises the locomotive works of the main British Railways, and is
INDUSTRY
173
engaged in building and repairing locomotives and rolling-stock for their use; the other
consists of private firms providing locomotives for all purposes, but mainly for export.
The first section of the industry was taken over from the main railway companies of
Great Britain by the British Transport Commission, when rail, long-distance road and
inland waterways transport was nationalized.
Locomotive building and repairing by British Railways is carried on in such railway
centres as Crewe, Swindon, Doncaster, Darlington, Derby, Eastleigh and Ashford, and
in a number of small construction and repairing shops. Total British Railways staff
employed on locomotive construction and repairing was about 40,000 in 1952, while
about 42,000 were employed on construction and the repairing of rolling-stock.
The second section of the industry comprises a number of firms who make steam,
diesel and diesel-electric locomotives as part of their other engineering activities. These
firms employ about 60,000 workers but not more than one-third are employed in loco¬
motive building. Of this third, 13,000 are engaged in the production of steam locomotives,
mainly in a few large firms in south-east Lancashire and the west of Scotland, and, on a
smaller scale, on the north-east coast and in the West Riding of Yorkshire.
The following table shows the production of locomotives by British Railways work¬
shops and private firms during 1952 analysed according to type of locomotive and its
destination:
UK Railways Industrial Export
Steam .. .. .. .. .. 210 50 299
Diesel and diesel-electric .. .. 62 182 407
During the same period 25 electric locomotives were also produced for main line
railways in the United Kingdom.
The Electrical Engineering Industry
The electrical engineering industry in its present form is not much more than fifty
years old. Output in 1951 was valued at ^700 million compared with ^14 million in
1907 and ^310 million in 1946. This shows a rate of expansion unequalled by any other
leading British industry. Some 650,000 people are employed in the industry in all its
branches, including electrical manufacturing, the production of radio electrical equip¬
ment and lamps, wires and cables, telegraphs and telephones, other electrical goods and
contracting.
The industry is the seventh largest individual British exporting industry, following
after vehicles, machinery, iron and steel, cotton, chemicals and wool in value; and Britain
is one of the two largest world exporters. In 1951, the industry as a whole, including
radio and other domestic products, contributed the equivalent of ^97 million towards
payment for essential imports. Over half these exports went to Commonwealth countries,
particularly India, Malaya, Austraha, the Union of South Africa and New Zealand.
Europe and North and South America also took large quantities.
Machinery Industries
Machinery in one word embraces a vast range of industries including agricultural
machinery (see p. 179), ball and roller bearings, boilers, motors, excavators, mechanical
handling equipment, furnace plant, gas and chemical machinery, machine tools, oil
refining plant, office machinery (see p. 179), packaging machinery, prime movers,
pumps, sewing machines, textile machinery, electrical machinery, etc. Exports of this
whole group in 1952 totalled in value ^422 million, compared with ^3*53 milhon in 1951
and ^318 million in 1950.
Textile Machinery. One of the oldest of Britain’s mechanical engineering industries is
the textile machinery industry which developed rapidly following the introduction of
mechanical spinning and weaving towards the end of the eighteenth century. The
industry now gives employment to about 70,000 people and comprises some 600 firms
174
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
making every kind of machine and accessories for processing all types of natural and
synthetic fibres. It enjoys a world-wide reputation, not only for the high quality of its
products but also because it can offer a complete and modem range of equipment con¬
sisting of: spinning machinery, including machinery for all the preparatory processes;
winding machinery and machinery for other processes prior to weaving; weaving
machinery; knitting, hosiery and lace machinery; printing, dyeing and other finishing
machinery; bast and leaf fibre machinery, of which the United Kingdom is still by far
the world’s largest supplier; and, of course, all types of mill stores and textile machinery
accessories. In 1952 exports were valued at over ^50 million.
To assist the efforts of the home mills to maintain their pre-eminence in world textile
production, and to keep its own place as the world’s traditional supplier of textile
machinery, the industry is spending more and more of its resources and time on research
into the structure and peculiarities of various fibres and into new and improved methods
of processing. By this research it is developing machines capable of producing more
efficiently yarns and fabrics of higher quality. The research laboratories and design
departments of the machinery makers are energetically and successfully seeking the
solution of new problems arising from the introduction of the synthetic fibres, such as
nylon, ‘Terylene’ and ‘Ardil’.
Textile Industries
The textiles and clothing group as a whole, including manufactures of wool, cotton,
linen, jute, silk, rayon and synthetic fibres, lace, hosiery, woven apparel and carpets,
exported in 1952 goods to the value of £381 million, or 15 per cent of total United King¬
dom exports. Over 1,400,000 people were employed in these industries at the end of 1952,
including 154,000 in cotton spinning and doubling, 120,000 in cotton weaving, etc.,
206,000 in woollen and worsted, 86,000 in rayon, nylon and silk, 119,000 in hosiery and
knitted goods, 91,000 in textile finishing, 162,000 in other textiles, and 494,000 in clothing
(excluding footwear).
The Wool Textile Industry
The wool textile industry is the most ancient of Britain’s staple industries and has been
an important source of wealth since medieval times. There are two main branches—
woollen and worsted. Over 80 per cent of woollens and over 90 per cent of worsteds are
made in Yorkshire. Scotland and the West of England have retained their importance as
specialized producers of high-quality woollen cloth. The woollen side of the industry is
normally organized on a vertical basis, with each firm undertaking the full process of
manufacture from raw material to finished product, but for a variety of reasons the
worsted industry is mainly organized horizontally—combing, spinning and weaving
being done by separate firms. Small firms employing fewer than 300 workers predominate
in the industry. Output reached a post-war peak at the end of 1950. There was a down¬
ward trend for most of 1951 and recession—reflecting a world-wide recession in textile
trade—became marked in the last quarter of that year. The first half of 1952 was a period
of much reduced activity, but production recovered thereafter. Average monthly pro¬
duction in 1952 was 19‘26 million lb. of tops (combed wool), 23 •! million lb. of woollen
yam, 14-84 million lb. of worsted yarn, 18-47 million square yards of woollen fabrics,
13 -02 million square yards of worsted fabrics and 2-50 million square yards of blankets.
The wool industry remains one of Britain’s leading export industries; the total value
of exports of woollen and worsted yarns and manufactures (including carpets) in 1952
was ^123-9 million, or nearly 5 per cent of all exports. After the tourist trade, vehicles
and machinery, the wool industry is Britain’s best dollar earner; exports of all wool
manufactures to the United States and Canada were valued at ^30-6 milhon in I952-
British tops are used by worsted spinners in all parts of the world.
INDUSTRY
175
Research is carried on mainly by the Wool Industries Research Association, which
receives a grant from the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research. Research is
also financed by a statutory levy on the industry.
The Cotton Industry
Spinning and weaving of cotton for the making of fustian with a cotton weft and linen
warp began to assume importance in the United Kingdom in the sixteenth century; but
it was the invention of mechanical spinning and weaving in the second half of the
eighteenth century that led to cotton becoming Britain’s chief consumer-goods industry
and cotton piece-goods its largest export.
In the twentieth century increasing foreign competition and the tendency of many
countries, notably India, to set up their own textile industry cut progressively into
British markets. During the second world war numbers of mills were closed and,
though many have since been brought back into production, the industry still employs
only about two-thirds as many workers as in 1937. It remains, however, one of Britain s
largest consumer-goods industries, being the principal source of the clothing worn in
Britain and playing an important part in the export trade.
Since the war a vigorous drive for quality and efficiency has been pressed forward by
the industry with support and assistance from the Government. Important in this drive
are the Cotton Board, a statutory body with the constitution and powers of a Develop¬
ment Council, and the British Cotton Industry Research Association (Shirley Institute),
founded in 1919 for promoting scientific and technical research in connection with cotton
and its utilization.
Production rose steadily from 1945 until the end of 1951, when the industry began to
feel the effects of the world textile recession. Production did not begin to recover until
the second half of 1952. In 1953 it was still well below the peak 1951 figure, which was
itself less than the 1937 level. Output of cotton yarns, including cotton waste yarns, totalled
968 million lb. in 1951 and 853 million lb. in 1952, compared with 741 million lb. in 1946
and 1,358 million lb. in 1937. Output of cotton cloth was 2,202 million linear yards in
1951 and 1,691 million linear yards in 1952, compared with 1,626 million linear yards
in 1946 and 3,640 million linear yards in 1937-
There were about 154,000 persons employed in the spinning section of the industry in
December 1952, and 120,000 in weaving. About two-thirds of the workers in the industry
are women.
Despite the contraction of the industry between 1914 and 1945 and the recession in
1952, cotton remains a leading export industry. In I952 exports of cotton yarn and manu¬
factures, including 35'7 million lb. of yarn, 9'4 million lb. of finished thread and 7io-8
million square yards of woven cotton piece-goods, were valued at ^148 million, or over
Si per cent of total exports. The bulk of the industry is located in south and east
Lancashire.
Other Textiles
Linen was made in Britain nearly 1,000 years ago. Today it is an industry of small
firms, chiefly in Northern Ireland (the greatest linen manufacturing region in the world).
The principal raw material of the industry is flax. Elsewhere in the United Kingdom linen
manufacture is confined mainly to Scotland, where, in general, coarser linens are produced.
The main products are yarn and thread, and, among the piece-goods, household textiles
and interlinings and industrial cloths predominate. Technical problems are investigated
by the Research Institute of the Linen Industry Research Association, formed in 1919-
Exports in 1952 were valued at over ^22 million, the United States being the chief market.
Jute, most of which comes from India and Pakistan, gives rise to a considerable industry
centred in Dundee. The principal products are bags, yarns for backing carpets, and canvas
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
I76
for linoleum, rope and tarpaulin cloth. Exports other than cordage were valued at about
.£3 million in 1952; the Commonwealth and United States were the chief markets.
Silk goods are exported to many markets, and are appreciable dollar earners. Raw silk
is supphed mainly from Japan and Italy.
Rayon is a fibre produced from cellulose, either in the form of wood pulp or cotton
linters. Its early development took place to a large extent in Britain. Production is spread
throughout the Midlands and Lancashire, with outposts in other areas. Of the eleven
companies in the rayon industry in 1952, six companies produced viscose rayon (which
accounts for over half the total output), three acetate rayon, one both viscose and acetate,
and one cuprammonium rayon.
Other Synthetic Fibres. Nylon is produced from a combination of chemical substances,
most of which are obtained from indigenous raw materials. It was discovered in the
United States and first used in Britain in the second world war for parachutes. ‘Terylene’,
a product of research in the laboratories of the Calico Printers’ Association, Manchester,
is at present being made in Britain by Imperial Chemical Industries, Ltd. (ICI), in a pilot
scale plant, but a ^10 million plant is under construction with an annual capacity of
over 11 million lb. scheduled for operation in 1955, and a further sum of -£7 million is
to be spent on doubling the capacity of this new plant. ICI is also setting up a plant in
Canada, and the fibre has been made for some years under licence in the United States
under the name ‘Dacron’. It is also to be made under licence in France and Italy. ‘Ardil’ is
a protein fibre, resembling wool, evolved in the Scottish laboratories of ICI. Filaments
were first produced in 1938 and a plant with a capacity of 10,000 tons a year, started in
1949, is now in production. Alginates, derived from seaweed harvested around Scodand,
provide valuable non-inflammable fibres, such as calcium alginate, which is insoluble and
rather like silk in its other properties.
At the end of 1952, 36,000 people were employed in the production of rayon, nylon and
similar continuous filament yarn and staple fibre, and exports of these goods for the year
totalled £10 million. A considerably larger number of people were employed in the
production of spun yams and the weaving and knitting of rayon, nylon and similar goods,
exports of wliich totalled about ^39 million for 1952.
Since the advent of rayon in its various forms, and more recently of the new synthetic
fibres, British textile manufacturers have been developing a number of ways of blending
natural and other fibres. By this means they can produce economically fabrics and gar¬
ments with attractive and useful new combinations of texture, colour, finish, moisture
absorption, hard-wearing and crease-resistant properties.
Chemical Industries
Broadly, the chemical industries include the manufacture of such products as paints,
polishes and matches, as well as of acids, alkalis, dyestuffs, plastics and pharmaceuticals-
The industry employs about half a milhon people, contributes about 3 per cent of the
total national output of goods and services, and in 1952 exported goods valued at ^138
million, or over 5 per cent of visible exports. British pioneers made great contributions to
the science of chemistry, as the names of Robert Boyle, Joseph Priestley, Michael Faraday
and John Dalton testify.
Heavy Chemicals and Dyestuffs. In the heavy chemicals section sulphuric acid is being
made increasingly from anhydrite (calcium sulphate), of which the United Kingdom has
immense deposits. In the past 35 years the dyestuffs section of the British chemical
industry has been responsible for three out of the five major world discoveries. In 1920
‘Caledon’ Jade Green, the latest and most attractive green yet made, was discovered in
Britain. Then came the ‘Dispersal’ and later the ‘Dunanol’ dyes for acetate rayon which
INDUSTRY
177
alone made the commercial exploitation of that new fibre possible. Thirdly, there was
the ‘Monastral’ fast blue, an entirely new pigment, depending on a hitherto unknown
colour principle. More than a thousand different dyestuffs are available.
Petroleum Chemicals. The large-scale manufacture of organic chemicals from petroleum
in Britain has developed since the second world war. Previously they were made almost
entirely from coal, coal tar, molasses and calcium carbide. Nearly £30 million are
invested in the five major petroleum chemicals plants built since 1945. The principal
products include gases, e.g., ethylene and propylene from which are made industrial
alcohol, solvents and other chemicals and intermediate products used in plastics (see
below), synthetic fibres (see above), leather finishing, paint and detergents.
Detergents possess qualities associated with soap but are in addition free from scum
formation and are able to break up and remove grease. Estimated United Kingdom pro¬
duction of synthetic detergents rose from 12,000 tons in 1946 to over 100,000 tons in
1952, of which 11,100 tons were exported.
Fertilizers. The British scientists Lawes and Gilbert contributed to the evolution of
fertilizers, which now constitute a major branch of the chemical industry. Scientific know¬
ledge has increased rapidly in recent years and the research carried on in the United
Kingdom at Rothamsted, Hertfordshire (see p. 269), and the Macaulay Institute of
Aberdeen (see p. 269) is of world-wide importance. Production in 1951-52 (June to
June) of phosphatic fertilizers totalled 277,000 tons, of nitrogenous fertilizers 286,000
tons and of compound fertilizers i| million tons.
Pesticides. Pesticides have been used for hundreds of years but it was not until 1920 that
they have been based on accurate scientific methods. Important discoveries in Britain
in the last decade have led to major developments in the production of selective weed
killers, e.g., methyl chloro phenoxy acetic acid (MCPA) and insecticides based on
benzine hexa-chloride (BHC).
Exports of disinfectants, insecticides, etc., rose in value from £880,000 in 1939 to
£6 million in 1952.
Pharmaceuticals. Pharmaceuticals provided exports valued at £32 million in 1952
compared with £3 million in 1938. The present annual rate of United Kingdom output
is valued at about £90 million. About three-quarters of the pharmaceutical products sold
today have been introduced within the last twenty years, including sulphonamides, anti¬
biotics (e.g., penicillin), hormones, anti-malarial drugs (e.g., ‘Paludrinc’ and ‘Daraprim’),
liver extracts and anti-tubercular drugs.
Plastics. Plastics are man-made materials, generally of organic and synthetic origin,
which at some time in their manufacture are in a plastic (i.e. flowing) condition and thus
capable of being shaped under heat and pressure. The industry falls into two separate and
self-contained groups. The first, the production of plastics materials, falls within the
chemical industry, but the fabricating side which uses those materials does not.
Production of plastics materials has risen from 30,000 tons in 1939 to 100,000 tons in
1950 and an estimated 190,000 tons in 1952. Exports reached a peak value of over £16
million in 1951 but fell to a little over £13! million in 1952.
Traditional Craft Industries
There are a number of industries noted for the quality of their traditional craftsmanship
wliich make an important contribution to Britain’s export trade. Foremost among these
is the pottery industry.
Pottery. When the demand for earthenware and porcelain cups was suddenly increased in
the eighteenth century by the spread of the fashion of drinking tea and coffee, Wedgwood
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
I78
and Spode introduced developments which transformed a domestic craft into a factory
industry with a flourishing domestic and foreign trade. Today the industry is one of
Britain’s most successful dollar earners, and is almost completely independent of oversea
raw materials. The manufacture of high-grade pottery requires china clay found in
Cornwall and ball clay from Devonshire and Dorsetshire. Suitable clays are found in
Staffordshire for items such as drainpipes, chimney-pots and roofing tiles.
Between 75 and 80 per cent of the industry is concentrated in the area of Stoke-on-
Trent in Staffordshire, comprising the six towns of Stoke, Burslem, Tunstall, Hanley,
Fenton and Longton. For domestic pottery alone the figure is about 90 per cent. The
industry employs about 3 5 per cent of the whole working population of the area, while
a large proportion of the rest is employed in allied industries. Other centres include
Worcester, Derby, Bristol, and Poole (in Dorset). The industry is divided into distinct
sections. The largest section produces domestic pottery, subdivided into china, earthen¬
ware, stoneware, and Jet and Rockingham used mainly for tea and coffee-pots. The other
main sections produce respectively glazed tiles, sanitary ware and electrical porcelain (e.g.,
insulators and fittings). There are about 300 firms, of which about 200 make domestic
pottery. The labour force is nearly 81,000 including over 45,000 women.
Since the second world war steps have been taken to increase output per man-hour.
Improved factory layout, standardization and semi-automatic ‘making’ machines have
been introduced. Perhaps the greatest advance has been the installation of gas and electric
tunnel kilns, through which trolleys, stacked with clay shapes, pass continuously.
The modem industry benefits from an ancient tradition of good design and craftsman¬
ship, made world-famous by a long line of great British potters, which is the basis of the
large oversea and domestic demand for its products. Among the famous makes of British
pottery are: Wedgwood, Spode, Royal Worcester, Royal Doulton, Minton, Royal
Crown Derby and Coalport.
Research is carried out by the British Ceramic Research Association, financed partly
by the industry and partly by the Government through the Department of Scientific and
Industrial Research. The Association’s new laboratories atPenkhull, Stoke-on-Trent, were
opened in 1951.
Of the -£29 million worth of domestic pottery produced in 1951, ^17 million worth
was exported. The chief customers for china (excluding electrical porcelain) were Canada,
the United States and Australia, and for earthenware Canada, Australia, the United States
and the Union of South Africa.
Scientific Instruments. Scientific instruments were made commercially in Britain at the
beginning of the seventeenth century and probably earlier. At that time navigational aids,
such as barometers, and microscopes (mainly for medical purposes) were made.
The industry increased in size during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, but in
1914 it was still small; it manufactured a variety of optical, mechanical and electrical
instruments for laboratory and industrial uses. The first world war proved that its pro¬
ducts were of prime importance to the war effort and when peace came it expanded under
the protection afforded by special tariffs.
During the second world war the industry expanded again very substantially to meet
defence needs. Since 1945 its production has further increased to meet the pent-up
demands from home and overseas for instruments for use in research and in industry,
where their extended use has become recognized as essential to efficiency. Some 50,000
people, mostly skilled craftsmen, are now employed. In 1952 goods were made worth
about ^40 milhon, of which about ^13 million were exported directly, i.e. excluding
indirect exports of instruments as part of plant and equipment.
INDUSTRY
179
Every two years the industry holds an exhibition devoted to instruments in commercial
production, instruments under development being the subject of an annual exhibition
held by the Physical Society.
Jewellery, Gold and Silverware. This is a craft industry in which British craftsmen are
heirs to a great tradition. Exports in 1952 were valued at over £11 milhon. Of the 1,860
firms producing in 1950, 135 were in the southern counties, 76 in the northern, 64 in
Wales and the Midlands, and 46 in Scotland. The chief centres are Birmingham, London
and Sheffield. A Design and Research Centre for the gold, silver and jewellery industries
was incorporated in 1951, with headquarters at the Goldsmiths’ Hall, Cheapside, London.
Whisky. Whisky is one of the United Kingdom’s largest single dollar earners. Exports
in 1952 were valued at -£33 milhon, over half of which went to the United States. The
earhest mention of Scotch whisky was in the fifteenth century, and in the following years
domestic distillation became very common. During the eighteenth century illicit whisky¬
making was practised frequently in remote places. The world-wide popularity of
Scotch whisky may be said to date from the end of the nineteenth century when
blending became generally adopted. Before that time distilleries either bottled their own
whisky or blended it with that of other distilleries. ‘Single’ whiskies are still produced for
local consumption on a small scale, but modern whiskies are blends of twenty or more
different kinds, some made from malted barley and others from other grains.
The Leather Industry. The leather industry in Britain is one of the largest in the world,
employing over 30,000 workers and exporting goods (including footwear) to the value
of over -£22 million. The Leather Industry Research Association, costing about £50,000
a year, has, according to a survey conducted by DSIR, saved the industry some -£305,000
a year. The British Boot, Shoe and Allied Trades Research Association encourages the
application of science and mechanization in an industry based upon traditional craft. The
bulk of the Association’s work is now carried on in new laboratories at its headquarters at
Kettering, Northamptonshire.
Expanding Export Industries
Some industries which really belong in the main categories already mentioned are
singled out here as having rapidly increased or started a considerable export trade since
the second world war. They illustrate the flexibility of British industry in adapting itself
to changing world markets.
The Agricultural Machinery Industry. This industry has grown to be one of the largest
in Britain, employing 40,000 people with an annual output valued at over ^jioo million.
In 1952 it produced among other implements 154,000 tractors, 48.329 mouldboard-
ploughs, 14,560 disc harrows, 73,600 mowers, 5,306 combine harvesters, and 9,895
milling machines. Britain, where production dates virtually from 1933 when the Enghsh
Ford Company produced 2,788 tractors, now has the largest annual output of tractors in
Europe and the second largest in the world, exports the greatest proportion of its output
and is the second largest exporter in the world. Exports of agricultural tractors in 1952
were valued at ^42 million compared with -£28 million in 1950. Important markets are
Australia, New Zealand, Turkey, Sweden and Denmark. Exports of other agricultural
machinery were valued at nearly £(18 milhon in 1952 compared with under £10 milhon
in 1950.
The Office Equipment Industry. This industry is now second in size only to that of the
United States and provides an example of remarkable expansion since the second world
war. The value of its output is now over £40 milhon a year compared with about £2
million in 1939, and its exports of office machinery alone reached nearly £10 million in
1952, of which nearly £2 million went to North American dollar markets.
i8o
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Petroleum Refining Industry. This industry, in which capital of some ^150 million
has been invested since 1947, provided exports of refined petroleum products valued at
over ^52 million in 1952 compared with ^30-1 million in 1951 and ^12-8 million in
1950. At the same time imports of refined products fell from -£140-9 million in 1951 to
■£95-7 million in 1952.
The Prefiahricated Buildings Industry. The British prefabricated buildings industry, based
on long experience dating back in various forms to before 1830, has contributed to solving
the problem of housing shortage not only in Britain but in many other countries of the
world. Exports of prefabricated buildings increased in value from -£2,800,000 in 1950
to nearly ^£7 million in 1952, when they were sent to over fifty different countries, includ¬
ing Canada and some other dollar countries.
Radioactive Isotopes. The United Kingdom is now the largest exporter in the world of
radioactive isotopes, produced as a by-product from nuclear reactors (see p. 270). During
the year ended June 1952, the Radio-Chemical Centre at Amersham, Buckinghamshire,
a dependency of the British Atomic Energy Research Establishment at Harwell, sent out
9,578 consignments of radioactive isotopes, 3,053 of which went overseas by air to 37
countries. Owing to the growing urgency of demands from different countries the British
Overseas Airways Corporation has converted a fleet of Argonauts to carry the isotopes in
their wing-tips and is considering suggestions for similar modification to Comet II aircraft.
This method reduces the cost of transport by over 60 per cent by cutting out the cost of
heavy lead containers. Radioactive isotopes are used mainly for medical purposes, but
also increasingly in scientific research and in industry.
The Refrigeration Industry. This industry falls broadly into three classes—domestic,
commercial and industrial. It has made remarkable strides since the end of the second
world war. Although before the war production of commercial and industrial refrigera¬
tion machinery was well established, domestic refrigeration production, now large, was
then quite small.
The 200 firms engaged in the industry employ some 12,000 workers and produce
annually goods worth nearly -£30 million (nearly ten times the value of production in
1935), of which about £13 million is exported. A full range of refrigeration machinery
and equipment is available.
Contractors’ Plant. Production in the United Kingdom before the war was mainly con¬
cerned with excavators, concrete mixing machinery and road surfacing plant, including
road rollers. But now many new machines, especially for earth-moving, are in production.
Examples are motor graders, scrapers, trenchers, dozer equipment, dumpers, rippers
and rooters.
Whereas output in 1935 was valued at only £2 million, in 1952 it reached nearly £48
million, of which £22 million was exported.
Recent developments in the manufacture of the heaviest types of crawler tractors,
bottom dumpers, motor scrapers and mobile crushers will ensure the continued expansion
of this industry.
The Electronics Industry. British engineers invented radar and pioneered the first public
television transmission, and Britain now has the largest electronics industry outside the
United States. The industry has grown enormously in the past fifteen years. It now
employs over 130,000 people, and the value of its annual production is some £110
million, of which nearly £25 million was exported in 1952, compared with less than £2
million in 1938. Only 40 per cent of this production is of radio and television sets; the
remainder is of such important products as military equipment, radio and television
transmitters, communications equipment, navigational aids and industrial equipment.
VIII. TRANSPORT AND
COMMUNICATIONS
SHIPPING
British shipping is not nationalized1 and, in peace time, State control is largely limited
to seeing that the safety and other regulations provided for by the various Merchant
Shipping Acts are carried out.
Composition
With a merchant shipping fleet, in 1952, of over i8| million tons gross (vessels of
100 g.t. and over, including fishing and miscellaneous craft), 21 per cent of the world
total of 90 million tons, the United Kingdom has the world’s largest merchant navy in
active employment, although the United States holds first place for the highest tonnage
registered.2 The United Kingdom fleet carries an estimated 40 per cent of the world’s
international sea-borne traffic (passengers and goods). Its capital value is not known but
it has been estimated, by a leading shipping authority, that if by an extraordinary catas¬
trophe it were entirely lost and had to be replaced at current (1952) prices, the cost would
be not less than -£2,000 million.
The importance of merchant shipping to the British economy derives partly from the
fact that it is a considerable earner of foreign exchange. During 1952 earnings from ship¬
ping (excluding tanker shipping) totalled ^£43 3 million, while expenditure on the same
services amounted to ^£325 million, leaving a net invisible income of ^£108 million com¬
pared with a total of ^£261 million for all net invisible income.
The tonnage of i8f million tons comprises about 6,000 ships. More than 3,000 of these
are trading vessels manned by about 190,000 men, of whom some 45,000 are Asiatics. It
includes the largest privately owned tanker fleet in the world—4-2 million tons, or 6’6
million tons deadweight (d.w.). With Government-owned tankers, the tanker fleet
totalled 4- 5 million tons out of a world total of 20 million tons in 1952. The rapid growth
of world and United Kingdom tanker tonnage in recent years reflects the great increase
in world oil consumption in the twentieth century.
Among recent trends, of which the increase in tanker tonnage is the most marked,
have been the growth in the average size of all types of vessel, the change from coal to
oil burning in steamships, and the replacement, reflected in building programmes, of
steamships by motor vessels. The latest development is the investigation being made into
the use of gas turbine engines in ships. In March 1952 the tanker Auris made the first
crossing of the Atlantic of any ship propelled solely through gas turbines.
The greater part of the British merchant fleet is engaged in foreign trade, where for
centuries it has maintained a reputation for high standards of service and competitive
efficiency, and has thus played a valuable part in promoting wider and freer multilateral
trade. In passenger transport British shipping has also been noted for generations for
the provision of an efficiently organized service over a world-wide network of routes.
1With the exception of certain cross-Channel shipping services which were taken over by the
British Transport Commission as part of the main-line railway undertaking (see p. 190).
2Nearly half the United States merchant tonnage consists of US Government-owned vessels with¬
drawn to reserve fleet.
l8l
182
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Some British Shipping Lines
Among the best known British lines and ships are:
Cunard White Star Ltd. This famous company, which operates on the North Atlantic
route, owns the world’s two largest liners. The Queen Elizabeth (over 83,000 gross tons)
entered service in 1940 and was very soon requisitioned for war service with the rest of
the company’s fleet, which during that period carried nearly 4! million passengers and
handled more than 11 million tons of cargo. The Queen Mary (over 81,000 gross tons)
came into commission in 1936, and in 1938 established a record for the Atlantic crossing
which remained unbroken until 1952. The Caronia (34,000 gross tons), launched in 1947,
is the latest of the Cunard’s several smaller but fast ocean liners on the Atlantic route.
Furness, Withy & Co. Ltd. This company is also predominantly a liner organization.
It operated the first motor vessels on its North Pacific-United Kingdom service, and
subsequently, between the two world wars, developed an extensive passenger trade by
motor vessel between New York and Bermuda. It controls Shaw, Savill and Albion Co.
Ltd., which operates on the Australia and New Zealand route, and whose largest ship is
Dominion Monarch (over 26,000 gross tons). It has also a substantial interest in Royal
Mail Lines Ltd., which operates on the North, South and Central America routes and
whose largest ship is the Andes (over 25,000 tons).
Union-Castle Mail Steamship Co. Ltd. This line has provided the principal link with
south and east Africa for over 100 years, first as freight carriers then with growing mail
and passenger services. Its two post-war liners, the Pretoria Castle and the Edinburgh
Castle, are each over 28,000 gross tons. A new motor vessel, the Bloemfontein Castle,
operates from London to South and East African ports. Two new vessels, Rhodesia Castle
and Kenya Castle, each over 17,000 tons, are to be operated on a ‘Round Africa’ service.
Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Co. Ltd. The famous ‘P & O’ line has operated
on Far East routes since the opening of the Suez Canal in 1869, at which time it had a
well-established service to Spain and Portugal. A large fleet now operates on the India,
China and Australia route. The largest ‘P & O’ ship is the Himalaya (nearly 28,000 gross
tons). Another ship of the same tonnage, the Arcadia, was launched in May 1953 and is ex¬
pected to make her maiden voyage to Australia early in 1954.
Other important lines include:
The Orient Line to Australia through the Suez Canal. Its largest ship is the Orcades (over
28,000 gross tons). Another ship of the same tonnage, the Orsova, intended for the
Australian service, was launched in May 1953 and will be completed early in 1954.
Ellerman Lines to South and East Africa. Ellerman Lines also operate services to the
Mediterranean, North America and the Far East.
Elder Dempster Lines, which were originally famous for the transport of tropical fruit,
now operate mail, passenger and cargo services to South and West Africa.
The Blue Star Line, which is famous for its pioneer work in meat transport from South
America and Australasia by refrigerated ship.
The Tanker Fleet
The two principal tanker companies are:
The Shell Fleet, i.e. the Anglo-Saxon Petroleum Co., an associate of the Shell Transport
and Trading Co., has about 570 vessels totalling over 6 million tons (d.w.), half of which
is chartered, and half directly owned. Its building programme includes a number of very
large tankers, at a cost of ^45 million.
The British Tanker Company Ltd., a shipping subsidiary of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Com¬
pany Limited, has 152 ships in service and 27 under construction and on order, including
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
183
several of 32,000 tons (d.w.). Eventual tonnage will be nearly 2! million tons (d.w.). In
addition, the Company charters about 150 ships, bringing the tonnage operated to about
4 million tons.
The Whaling Fleet
The largest specialized ships of the merchant fleet are whaling ships, including four
factory ships which on board process the whole catch into whale oil (which they carry in
numerous tanks). The United Kingdom’s whaling factories are large ships and range from
14,400 to 23,000 gross tons.
Cable Ships
The laying, maintenance and repair of Britain’s world-wide cable network is carried
out by a fleet of eight cable ships, each of which has an operational area in a different region,
and is responsible for as much as a 20,000-mile section of submarine cable.
Weather Ships
For the past five years British merchant ships have participated in the international
weather patrols by making voluntary observations in the course of normal voyages.
Among the 2,400 vessels taking part are 635 British deep-sea and coastal vessels. There are
also four British ocean weather ships helping to service ocean weather-stations in the
North Atlantic which carry out a full programme of meteorological work.
Shipping Organizations
Shipping companies have, through the years, devised a number of groupings and
organizations, which are concerned with regulating the activities and interests of the
industry, as well as with common problems.
There are a number of national organizations concerned with the various aspects of the
shipping industry and its activities, the most important of which are the following:
The Corporation of Lloyd’s
This body which was founded in the seventeenth century is a society of underwriters
whose main business is marine insurance (see also p. 109).
Lloyd’s Register of Shipping
Tins is an organization, distinct from its namesake, which surveys and classifies ships
with particular regard to their safety and operational efficiency. Lloyd’s Register will
accept responsibility for surveying and giving technical advice on vessels of all flags from
the initial stages of building, at regular intervals during their service, and after casualties.
A satisfactory Lloyd’s classification is a guarantee to an underwriter that he may accept the
risk of a vessel, and this forms a strong link between the Register and the Corporation of
Lloyd’s.
Corporation of Trinity House
The Corporation of Trinity House (see p. 53) is the authority responsible for all light¬
houses in England and Wales and the Channel Islands (the Commissioners of Northern
Lighthouses and Commissioners of Irish Lights being responsible for lighthouses in
Scotland and Ireland respectively) and for pilotage arrangements in a number of ports.
The Chamber of Shipping; The Liverpool Steamship Owners’ Association; The General
Council oj British Shipping
The representative bodies speaking for shipowners generally (excluding for the most
part owners of fishing vessels) are the Chamber of Shipping and the Liverpool Steamship
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
184
Owners’ Association. The General Council of British Shipping co-ordinates the views of
the shipping industry as a whole on all matters of major policy.
Employers’ Organizations
The Shipping Federation and the Employers’ Association of the Port of Liverpool are
the employers’ organizations concerned with labour relations and the regulation of em¬
ployment throughout the Merchant Navy—Merchant Navy being the term given to the
whole organization (ships, owners, officers and men) engaged in the sea transport of
goods and passengers. Together the Shipping Federation and the Employers’ Association
of the Port of Liverpool form the Merchant Navy Establishment Administration, which
makes arrangements for the employment of all officers and ratings not serving continu¬
ously with a particular company. The Shipping Federation also operates, under the title of
‘National Sea Training Schools’, various schools for training deck, engine-room and
catering department ratings.
Seafarers’ Organizations
Masters and officers are represented by the Mercantile Marine Service Association, the
Navigators’ and Engineer Officers’ Union, the Marine Engineers’ Association, the
Amalgamated Engineering Union and the Radio Officers’ Union, as the case may be. The
National Union of Seamen represents the interests of Merchant Navy ratings.
National Maritime Board
The National Maritime Board is composed of representatives of the shipowners’ and
seafarers’ organizations, and is responsible for all negotiations of wages and conditions of
service in the Merchant Navy, although, except by special arrangements, National Mari¬
time Board Agreements do not apply to vessels under 200 gross tons or to tugs, salvage
vessels, etc.
The Royal National Lifeboat Institution
Lifeboats in the United Kingdom are maintained by the Royal National Lifeboat
Institution, which depends entirely for its funds on voluntary subscriptions, and very
largely for its administration on voluntary workers.
Local Associations
There are also a number of local associations of shipowners, centred around the main
port areas. There are, for example, the Bristol Steamship Owners’ Association, the London
General Shipoivners’ Society, and the North of England Shipowners’ Association, whose names
are self-explanatory. Others are those representing companies engaged in a specialized
trade or type of cargo.
International Organization
British shipping companies operating liners have associated with each other and with
the companies of other countries operating on the same routes in a series of ‘conferences
designed to secure standardization and stability of rates, and to maintain frequency and
regularity of services. The essential principle of a conference is the establishment of a
common tariff of freight rates or passenger fares from each port of departure. Each con¬
ference meets from time to time to review and revise existing rates, or to compile new
ones. Some of the conferences may be connected by rate agreements, or may have joined
together to form wider groupings.
British tramp shipping, and indeed the tramp shipping of the world, is offered and en¬
gaged for charter hire in London’s Baltic Exchange where ship brokers and owners meet
and arrange contracts for the movement of all types of cargo between any ports in the
world.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
185
Relations with the Government
The Government Department chiefly concerned with merchant shipping is the Minis¬
try of Transport and Civil Aviation. In the sphere of safety, it is responsible for such mat¬
ters as seeing that the load-line, which shows the draught to which a ship may be safely
loaded, is correctly indicated; that every ship has adequate life-saving and fire-fighting
equipment; and that the necessary standard of safety has been reached in passenger ship
construction. It is responsible for the examinations for and the issue of certificates of com¬
petency to masters, navigating and engineer officers, deck ratings, and ships’ cooks, and
regulates such matters as crew accommodation on board ship, scales and quality of pro¬
visions, and the carriage of medical stores. It is responsible for running the Mercantile
Marine offices at United Kingdom ports at which crews are signed on and for keeping the
central registers of shipping and seamen. The Ministry (with other Government Depart¬
ments) is represented on the Merchant Navy Welfare Board and the Merchant Navy
Training Board (see p. 187). It also administers the Coastguard Service. Apart from these
administrative functions, the Ministry maintains a close and friendly liaison with the ship¬
ping industry on matters of policy and problems relating to imports and exports, and also
in relation to special passenger requirements.
Abroad, the Merchant Shipping Acts are administered by H.M. Consuls and by officers
of Commonwealth and Colonial Governments.
Ports, Docks and Harbours
There are over 300 ports in the United Kingdom. The bulk of the ocean-going traffic is
handled by the 12 largest of these, which are, in order of the shipping tonnage (ocean¬
going and coastal combined) which passed through them in 1952: London, Southampton,
Liverpool, Newcastle upon Tyne, Glasgow, Belfast, Hull, Swansea, Manchester, Bristol,
Cardiff and Middlesbrough. The rest deal mainly with coastwise, North Sea and cross-
Channel traffic.
Of these 300 ports, those previously owned by the railways are now under national
ownership and are administered by the British Transport Commission (see pp. 52 ancl
189). Important examples are Southampton (docks only), Hull, Swansea, Cardiff and
Middlesbrough (docks only).
Others are controlled by a public trust on which are represented users of the port (such
as shippers, importers and shipping companies) and other interested parties such as
Government Departments and local authorities. Examples are London (controlled by the
Port of London Authority1), Liverpool (Mersey Docks and Harbour Board), Belfast
(Belfast Harbour Commissioners) and Glasgow (Clyde Navigation Trust).
A few ports—Bristol is the most important example—are owned by the town or city
council and controlled entirely by a committee of the council.
Finally, there are about 100 ports which are privately owned. Manchester is the only
major port so owned—by the Manchester Ship Canal Company—and here the Man¬
chester City Council exercises considerable control by appointing 11 of the Company s
21 directors.
The powers and responsibilities of the port authorities are, in the main, set down in Acts
of Parliament which relate specially to the ports concerned.
There are about 150,000 people employed in the running of British ports. Just under
half of these are administrative, clerical and technical staff and pilots, lightermen, customs
officials and so on. Over half are the dock workers (formerly and still popularly called
‘dockers’) who do the physical work of handling cargo.
Ships do not arrive in ports or leave them with any regularity, with the result that there
is sometimes too much work for the dock workers available, sometimes too little. Dock
1For further information on the Port of London Authority, see p. 54.
N
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
186
labour was therefore largely casual labour until 1941, when war-time schemes were intro¬
duced to control the port registers of employers and workers. The war-time schemes were
superseded in 1947 by a permanent scheme administered by the National Dock Labour
Board (see p. 53). Workers on these registers now receive a guaranteed minimum wage
even when there is not enough work for all of them.
The Principal Ports
London. The Port of London, with 69 miles (m km.) of waterway and over 4,000
acres (1,619 ha.) of dock estate, is the second largest in the world, handling more tonnage
annually than any other except New York. In 1952 over 59 million tons of shipping were
handled by the Port of London. This figure and the following tonnage figures are compiled
on a double count, i.e. at both the arrival and departure of each vessel.
From the Port of London over 100 shipping companies operate to over 300 oversea
ports, and every month more than 700 ships on regular service leave for all parts of the
world. Goods of every imaginable kind, from meat to marble, from plywood to perfume,
pass through the docks. Imports are distributed all over the United Kingdom, though the
port supplies primarily Greater London and the Home Counties with a population of
some 111- million persons.
North-Western Area. Liverpool, which handled over 33 million tons of shipping in 1952,
serves the industrial North and is the largest exporting port in the country. Flour imports
have made it the second largest milling centre in the world, and tobacco is stored in what
is probably the world’s largest warehouse. Liverpool is also important for transatlantic
passenger traffic and short sea-routes and coastwise trading.
Manchester, with over million tons of shipping in 1952, is an inland city made into a
port by the construction of the Manchester Ship Canal. It is an exporting and importing
centre for the industrial Midlands, Lancashire and Yorkshire.
English Channel Area. Most of the Channel ports are primarily for passenger traffic with
the Continent. Southampton, however, with nearly 36 million tons of shipping in 1952,
is the chief port for ocean passenger traffic. It is used by 32 shipping companies which
operate world-wide services. Southampton has no industrial hinterland but owes its
importance to its double tides and easy access from the Channel and from London. A
considerable volume of oil is now handled for the refinery at Fawley.
North-Eastern Area. Newcastle upon Tyne, with over 16 million tons of shipping in
1952, serves the industrial North-East and is the most important coal-shipping centre and
largest ship-repairing port in the country.
Hull, with over 11 million tons of shipping, serves particularly the industrial centres of
Yorkshire and the Midlands, while Middlesbrough, with over 7 million tons, imports
iron ore for, and exports iron and steel from, the local iron and steel industries.
South-Western Area. The most important group of ports in this area is that which de¬
pends on the South Wales coalfield.
Swansea is the largest of this group with a net registered tonnage of over 11 million in
1952. As well as coal, Swansea exports the steel and tinplate manufactured in its immediate
neighbourhood, but its rapidly increasing importance derives largely from the oil which it
imports and exports for local refineries.
Cardiff, with coal as the chief export, had a shipping tonnage of over 8 million in 1952.
Bristol, with a net registered tonnage of over 8| million in 1952, serves the industrial
Midlands as well as the highly industrialized city of Bristol itself, and has also a large
coastal trade.
Scotland. Glasgow, the principal Scottish port, with over 13 million tons of shipping in
1952, serves as an entrepot centre for the industrial area dependent on the Lanarkshire
coalfields.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 187
Northern Ireland. Belfast, with nearly 12 million tons of shipping in 1952, is the principal
port of Northern Ireland and handles the main Irish Sea traffic.
The Merchant Navy
Strength
The number of masters, officers and men (excluding Asiatic seamen serving on articles
of agreement opened in Asia) making up the strength of the British Mercantile Marine in
December 1952 was 145,000. The number of Indian, Pakistani and Chinese seamen serving
regularly in British ships is of the order of 45,000.
Training
A recognized system of training is maintained by the Merchant Navy Training Board
on which are represented shipowners, seafarers’ organizations, the Ministry of Education,
the Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation and the nautical schools.
Before a new entrant can join a ship as a deck rating in the United Kingdom he must
undergo a course of pre-sea training at an approved sea-training establishment. After
twelve months’ service at sea and on attaining the age of 18 he can take the qualifying
examination for the rating of Able Seaman (AB), and if successful is granted a certificate
which enables him to serve as Efficient Deck Hand. If he passes the qualifying examination,
holds a Lifeboatman’s Certificate and has experience of steering a ship he becomes eligible
for a certificate as AB on completion of three years’ sea service. He will then be eligible for
promotion to the rating of Petty Officer, or after four years’ service, may take the examina¬
tions qualifying him to become a Navigating Officer.
There are residential and non-residential training establishments for potential navigating
officers, some of which rank as pubhc schools. Among the residential establishments are
HMS Conway,1 HMS Worcester, the Nautical College, Pangbourne, and the School of
Navigation at Southampton University. Potential navigating officers serve at sea as
apprentices or cadets for four years, though this period may be reduced if they have had
pre-sea training.
These schemes are for training officers and ratings who serve on deck. There are also
training courses for ships’ firemen. Engineer officers are generally required to have served
an apprenticeship in engineering workshops ashore, but an alternative scheme of training
has recently been introduced under which shipping companies themselves select appren¬
tices for a special course of training consisting of a two-year diploma course in a technical
college, followed by 18 months’ training at sea and finally 12 months’ training in an engi¬
neering workshop ashore. Radio officers are trained in wireless colleges.
Conditions of Employment and Welfare
Wages and conditions of employment are negotiated by the National Maritime Board
(see p. 184). Minimum wages and holidays with pay are guaranteed for both officers and
ratings. Moreover, the Merchant Navy Established Service Scheme, introduced by the
Board, has removed a great deal of the uncertainty formerly associated with a seafaring
life. Officers and men can now take two-year contracts, not only with individual shipping
companies but with the industry as a whole, and get special benefits, in addition to the
normal unemployment insurance, when they have to wait between jobs.
The Merchant Navy Welfare Board, on which are represented officers’ and seamen’s
unions and associations, shipowners, voluntary societies, the Ministries of Transport
and Civil Aviation, Labour and National Service, National Insurance, and the Colonial
Office, has been responsible since 1948 for the control and co-ordination of the welfare of
merchant seamen in this country and of British merchant seamen abroad.
1When HMS Conway went aground and was severely damaged in April 1953, training was con¬
tinued in temporary quarters ashore.
i88
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In the United Kingdom the Board runs 15 Port Welfare Committees and has regional
seamen’s welfare officers in London, Glasgow, Cardiff, Liverpool and Newcastle. It
manages directly a number of Merchant Navy houses and clubs, and many others are run
by voluntary societies. In oversea ports the voluntary societies run approximately 300
clubs for British merchant seamen.
INLAND TRANSPORT
All the main-line railways in Great Britain, the ports formerly owned by the railways,
all except one of the principal canals, and all long-distance road haulage undertakings were
nationalized by the Transport Act of 1947. Air services did not come within the scope of
the Act.
The Transport Act established a public corporation, the British Transport Commission,
with wide powers, to run the greater part of public transport in Great Britain. To operate
the system six executives were appointed1: (1) the Railway Executive, organized in six
regions; (2) the Road Haulage Executive, operating nationalized long-distance road trans¬
port in eight divisions; (3) the Road Passenger Executive, a planning and advisory body
formed to promote the co-ordination of passenger transport services; (4) the Hotels
Executive, to run the railway hotels and catering services; (5) the London Transport
Executive, to operate road and rail passenger transport in the London area; and (6) the
Docks and Inland Waterways Executive.
The British Act, with certain incidental exceptions, did not, however, extend to
Northern Ireland where the position is governed by the Transport Act (Northern Ire¬
land), 1948 (see p. 200).
With the change of Government in 1951, proposals were made for new legislation to
amend the Transport Act of 1947, and a new policy for the operation of public transport
was announced. It was proposed to introduce some measures of decentralization in the
administration of the railways, which, however, were to remain in public ownership, and
to return long-distance road haulage to private enterprise.
A Bill embodying the proposed amendments to the Transport Act, 1947, was submitted
to Parhament and received the Royal Assent on 6th May 1953. The new Act provided for
a reorganization of the operation of the railways under a scheme to be prepared by the
Commission and submitted to the Minister of Transport and Civil Aviation (see p. 42)
within twelve months. The Railway Executive was to be replaced by newly created area
authorities. Both the functions and the composition of the British Transport Commission
were modified by the Act and some of the Commission’s functions were to be delegated
to the area authorities. The approval of both Houses of Parhament was required before
the scheme could come into effect.
The Act also repealed the provisions of the Transport Act, 1947, relating to the com¬
pulsory acquisition by the British Transport Commission of road haulage undertakings,
and required it to dispose of its road haulage undertaking carried on by the Road Haulage
Executive. The Commission may, however, with the consent of the Minister of Transport
and Civil Aviation, retain a proportion of its Road Haulage Executive property, equiva¬
lent broadly to the interest the railways held in road haulage before nationalization, by
making it over to companies controlled by the Commission. The Minister has appointed a
six-member Disposal Board to supervise the disposal of the road haulage undertaking of
the Road Haulage Executive, and from 1st October 1953 the Executive’s former activities
are being carried on, pending disposal, by a board of management as an undertaking
entitled the British Road Services. This board will continue to manage such road haulage
interests as are retained by the British Transport Commission. The other Executives, with
the exception of the London Transport Executive, were also abohshed as from 1st
1The Road Passenger Executive was abolished in October 1952, and the other Executives, with
the exception of the London Transport Executive, were abohshed as from 1st October 1953.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
189
October 1953. The Docks and Inland Waterways Executive was replaced by a Board of
Management and the Hotels Executive by a Hotels and Catering Services Committee to
be known as British Hotels and Catering Services. So far as the railways are concerned,
interim arrangements pending their reorganization leave the regions unchanged but give
wider powers to the Chief Regional Officers who are now known as Chief Regional
Managers. Each of the latter is responsible for all railway activities—commercial operating
and technical—in his region, and reports directly to the Transport Commission.
The following is a summary of the inland transport position as it was at the time the
1953 Transport Act became law, but before any of its provisions had been implemented.
The British Transport Commission
The British Transport Commission consisted of a chairman, a deputy chairman, three
full-time and three part-time members1 appointed by the Minister of Transport and Civil
Aviation.
The entire railway system of the country passed into the control of the Commission
on 1st January 1948, together with the formerly railway-owned docks, waterways and
canals. From that date it also began to acquire, either through voluntary sale or com¬
pulsory acquisition, road haulage undertakings engaged predominantly in long-distance
traffic with the exception of traders carrying their own goods in their own vehicles. After
1st February 1950 private road hauliers could not transport goods outside a 25-mile radius
of their base without permits from the Road Haulage Executive. About one-fifth of the
country’s road passenger transport outside London came under the control of the Com¬
mission; part was inherited from the former railway companies and part newly acquired.
The Commission was empowered to prepare area schemes for the co-ordination of
passenger services (road and rail). The London Passenger Transport Board, controlling
all passenger services in the London area with the exception of the suburban services of the
main-line railways, was also vested in the Commission.
The Commission, though the largest single transport undertaking in the country, has
not possessed the complete transport monopoly that is often supposed. The whole of
short-distance road haulage was outside its direction, as were the greater part of road pas¬
senger transport services outside London, several waterways and the majority of the coun¬
try’s docks. The C-hcence road haulier (the manufacturer or trader carrying nothing but
his own goods) was also free to operate at any distance, and there were over 800,000 C-
licensed vehicles.
The work of the Commission, which in 1952 involved the employment of over 888,000
people and the gross receipt of over -£620 million, was delegated to the Executives (see
p. 188), each consisting of a chairman and a varying number of members, and each
responsible for the day-to-day management of a different part of the inland transport
system.
Consultative Committees
As in other nationaHzed industries, committees representing consumer interests were set
up. Their object is to protect users of the nationalized transport services and to give them
an opportunity of putting forward criticism and constructive suggestions for the improve¬
ment of the services. Members of these transport users’ consultative committees are ap¬
pointed by the Minister of Transport and Civil Aviation after consultation with the
interests concerned, to represent commerce, industry, labour and local authorities, with an
independent chairman and representatives of the British Transport Commission. There is
a Central Transport Consultative Committee and eleven area committees covering the
whole of Great Britain.
1The maximum number is increased by the 1953 Act to 14 members besides the chairman, all of
whom may be part-time members.
i po
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Railways
Britain, pioneer of the industrial revolution, was also the first country to develop the
railways which were essential for transporting goods to and from the industrial centres.
Nor were the benefits of this development confined to Britain. British locomotives were
exported to America and Russia as early as 1829 and 1836, and since then, British rolling-
stock and locomotives, retaining their pre-eminence, have been exported to every country
in the world.
In 1825 the Stockton and Darlington Railway was opened and for the first time goods
were drawn by a steam-engine on a public railway. Passengers were horse-drawn and no
doubt felt safer. In*i829 Stephenson’s Rocket won a prize of £500 and ‘filled the breasts
of thousands with lively fears for the safety of the individuals who were on it’ by reaching
a speed of 30 miles an hour. The fears soon died down and, after a short period during
which the country went ‘railway-mad’ and new railway companies were being formed
every day, Britain settled down to expanding its railway system steadily under the pressure
growth of the railway network but for
high standards of speed and of comfort for passengers. There were sleeping-cars by 1873,
dining-cars by 1879, and corridor trains by 1892. Expresses reached an average of 50 miles
(80 km.) an hour and by 1904 the City of Truro touched a speed of 102 miles (164 km.) an
hour. In 1938 the Mallard set up the world’s speed record for a steam locomotive, which it
still holds, by reaching a speed of 126 miles (203 km.) an hour.
During the nineteenth century and the early part of the present century the railways
had virtually a monopoly in inland transport. Within the railway system there was keen
competition, but the general trend was towards unification. By 1920, out of the 1,000
railway companies originally promoted, only 200 remained, and in that year the Railways
Act merged 120 companies into four main groups.
But immediately after the first world war, and while the railways were still recovering
from the effects of it, their security was challenged by the rapid development of road
transport. The Traffic Acts of 1930 and 1933, regulating commercial road transport,
afforded some protection, but the loss of traffic from rail to road continued. In an effort to
recover traffic, the railways in 1938 put forward their ‘Square Deal’ proposals, calling for
relief from all statutory regulation of charges, and freedom to decide for themselves the
rates for merchandise carried. The campaign was cut short by the outbreak of the second
world war when, as in the first world war, the Government took control of the railways
under an arrangement which guaranteed the companies and London Transport a fixed
sum of ^431 million a year. Nationalization followed at the end of 1947.
Operations and Facilities
Britain has more railways per square mile than any country in the world, except
Belgium, and British railways are now the busiest in the world. They run 40,000 passenger
and goods trains daily, carrying nearly three million passengers a day and about three-
quarters of a milhon tons of freight each weekday.
The Railway Executive
Responsibility for administering, maintaining and operating the British Railways was
delegated by the Transport Commission to the Railway Executive, which also managed
and operated the packet ports, such as Harwich, Folkestone and Holyhead (the points of
connection between the British railway system and the systems on the continent of
Europe and in Ireland), together with the connecting shipping services (see map pp. 192-3).
The Executive consisted of a chairman, four full-time and three part-time members, all
appointed by the Minister of Transport and Civil Aviation after consultation with the
British Transport Commission.
of competition between independent companies.
Competition was responsible not onlv for the
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
191
Each member of the Executive, apart from being jointly responsible for the smooth
running of the system, had a special departmental responsibility. The railways were
organized on a regional basis. There were six regions: London Midland, Western,
Southern, Eastern, North Eastern, and Scottish.
In each region there was a chief regional officer, responsible to the Executive but with
considerable independent authority. His own officers had their special functions, as had
the members of the central Executive, and each was responsible to his opposite number
in the Executive.
SUMMARY OF OPERATIONS OF BRITISH RAILWAYS AT END-1952
Total track miles (standard gauge)   51,703
Route miles (standard gauge, including 924 miles electric) 19,276
Bridges (of which the longest is Tay Bridge, 2J- miles) 63,104
Locomotives, total number .. .. .. .. 19,149
of which: steam, British Railways .. .. .. 18,859
electric, diesel, gas turbine and petrol,
British Railways  274
London Transport Railways .. 16
Carriages, total number   45,969
of which: electric motor vehicles .. .. .. 2,134
diesel railcars .. .. .. .. 36
seating capacity, steam .. .. .. .. 2,098,446
seating capacity, electric .. .. .. .. 350,241
Restaurant and buffet cars.. .. .. .. . . 700
seating .. .. .. .. • • 24,519
Sleeping cars .. .. .. .. .. - • 440
berths .. .. .. .. • • • • 8,437
Wagons, total number, including brake vans .. .. 1,120,118
Staff, total number .. .. .. .. .. . • 601,381
Receipts (year 1952), total.. .. .. .. .. ,0403,357,882
Expenditure (year 1952), total .. .. .. .. -0363,756,185
Total freight carried (year 1952) revenue earning, tons.. 284,916,000
Originating passenger journeys (year 1952) .. .. 988,997,000
Ordinary single fare in mid-1953 was ifd. a mile third class; first class is 50 per cent
above third class, and ordinary return fare is double the single fare. There is no second
class in Britain except on certain trains connecting with Continental services.
The Hotels Executive
Responsibility for railway hotels, refreshment rooms and restaurants and the service of
meals and refreshments on trains was taken over in 1948 by the Hotels Executive, which
consisted of a chairman and two full-time members.
Administration was handled by seven officers with general responsibilities for purchasing,
finance, etc.
In addition there were other officers responsible for management of the various types
of services; hotels, refreshment rooms and restaurant cars.
In 1952, the Executive was responsible for 42 hotels and 398 station refreshment rooms
and, in summer, 628 restaurant and buffet car regular weekday services on trains, which
were reduced to 463 during the winter. A total of about 11 million meals were served in
restaurant cars during the year. The total number of staff employed was 15,326.
ORKNEY IS.
193
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
194
Roads
Britain has more miles of metalled road, in proportion to its size, than any other
country in the world. For every square mile of territory there are over two miles of road,
making a total of 185,523 miles (298,570 km.) of public highway in 1952.
The network of British roads is distinguished not only by its extensiveness but also by
its haphazard nature. This characteristic has its roots in history. For their own purposes,
which were chiefly military, the Romans who occupied Britain built their great roads
straight. But after their departure these roads were neglected. For long-distance transport
there were alternative routes by sea, by the navigable rivers, and later by the canals, and
roads were built from town to town and village to village to serve local needs. The up¬
keep of roads was mainly the concern of the parish, but the Government intervened at
various times with a view to stimulating improvement. Its most effective intervention was
to institute turnpike trusts. The maintenance of a length of main road was placed in the
hands of a trust, made up of private individuals, empowered to levy tolls at the toll gates
erected at the limits of its jurisdiction. Early in the nineteenth century there were over
1,000 of these trusts administering some 22,000 miles of road. The last surviving trust
came to an end in 1875. The early nineteenth century was also notable for the work done
by Telford and McAdam in improving road construction. Then the development of
railways intervened and served to meet, for the time being, the growing demand for
better communications.
up a Road Board to assist in the provision of new and improved roads to meet the needs
of the increased traffic. The Board functioned until 1919, when its responsibilities were
taken over by the newly created Ministry of Transport.
For the administration of Government financial assistance, roads are divided into trunk
roads, Class I, II and III roads, and unclassified roads. Trunk roads are the principal arteries
of national communication and the cost of their maintenance and improvement is met
from the Road Fund, administered by the Minister of Transport and Civil Aviation, who
is the highway authority for these roads. Grants from the Road Fund are made towards
approved expenditure on classified roads—75 per cent on Class I roads, 60 per cent on
Class II roads and 50 per cent on Class III roads, though the responsibility for these roads
rests with certain local authorities, as does the responsibility and the whole cost of un¬
classified roads. On maps and signposts the trunk and Class I roads can mostly be identified
by the letter ‘A’ in front of the route number; similarly the route numbers of Class II
roads bear the prefix letter ‘B\ Of the total 185,523 miles of road, 8,248 are trunk, 19,563
are Class 1,17,691 are Class II, 48,678 are Class III, and 91,343 are unclassified.
Between the two wars the Ministry and local highway authorities started a large-scale
programme of road improvement. They built new bridges and new arterial roads and
by-passes, many of them with dual carriageways and cycle tracks. Old roads were
straightened and widened.
In 1939 the programme had to be suspended, but in 1946 the Minister of Transport
announced the start of a ten-year plan for highway improvement and development.
A Special Roads Act was passed in May 1949 authorizing the provision of roads re¬
served for special classes of traffic. Since then the country’s economic position has made
the expenditure of funds upon the construction of motorways impossible but the planning
of these roads is proceeding.
As well as having more metalled roads, in proportion to its size, than any other country,
Britain has greater density of traffic on the roads. At the end of 1952 there were nearly
25 motor vehicles for every mile of road.
It is not surprising, therefore, that there are many road accidents. In 1952, 4,705 people
The development of the internal combustion engine and the rapid growth in the number
motor cars created a new situation which influenced the Government in 1909 to set
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
195
were killed and 203,436 injured on British roads. In the first six months of 1953, road
casualties numbered 103,279 (as compared with 95,157 in the first six months of 1952); this
total included 2,274 persons killed (as compared with 2,090 killed in the first six months
of 1952).
To combat this, road safety committees have been set up in every town and county,
and vigorous local campaigns are being conducted with the aid of grants from the
Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation. Prominent in this work are the Royal Society
for the Prevention of Accidents, the police, and local education authorities. The system of
pedestrian crossings has been revised, the main features of the new system being a big re¬
duction in the number of crossings and a more conspicuous marking in the form of white
stripes, known as ‘zebra’ crossings, illuminated by flashing beacons. It is hoped that these
changes, combined with a simplification of the regulations, will result in the crossings
being more carefully respected by drivers and more widely used by pedestrians.
The Road Haulage Executive
Long-distance haulage of goods by road was nationalized by the Transport Act, 1947,
and was administered by the Road Haulage Executive (consisting of a chairman, four
full-time and two part-time members), which virtually completed acquisition of the long¬
distance road haulage undertakings in the country by the end of November 1951. In ad¬
dition, the Executive had taken over a number of undertakings by voluntary agreement,
and also the road haulage companies previously owned by the former railway companies.
The administration was highly decentralized and organized as follows. First, the
country was divided into eight geographical divisions and the operation of road haulage in
the division was the general responsibility of the divisional manager. Each division was
then divided into three to five districts, under a district manager. Districts were divided
into five to ten groups under a group manager who controlled about 125 vehicles. In each
group there were a varying number of depots.
In addition to the eight geographical divisions there was one functional ‘special traffics’
division which handled certain types of freight over the whole country.
At the end of 1952 the Road Haulage Executive had acquired 3,774 undertakings and
was employing 72,579 people and operating 39,320 motor vehicles and 654 horse-drawn
vehicles.
The Road Passenger Executive
The British Transport Commission had secured control of a number of road passenger
transport companies (by the purchase of the shares), operating some 14,000 vehicles, or
about one-fifth of the total number operated outside London. The main task of the Road
Passenger Executive, however, was concerned with the preparation of area schemes for
the co-ordination of passenger services (both road and rail). Three such schemes were pre¬
pared or proposed, but they were not proceeded with, and the Executive was abolished in
October 1952. (The powers of the Commission to prepare area schemes have been re¬
voked by the 1953 Act.)
London Transport
London’s transport system, in its modern sense, may be said to have begun when in
1829, four years after the opening of the Stockton and Darlington Railway, the first
omnibus—horse-drawn—appeared on the London streets. Trams—also horse-drawn—
appeared in 1861. In 1863 the first underground steam railway—the Metropolitan—was
built by digging a great trench for the line and roofing it over. In 1870 a better method
for building a railway inside a city was found when the Tower Subway was constructed.
196
Q
<
O
2
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
198
The line was laid in an entirely underground tunnel shaped hke a hollow tube and thus
became the world’s first tube railway. In 1890 the City and South London, the first
electric tube railway in the world, was opened, and it was followed soon after by the
Central London Railway, called the ‘twopenny tube’ because all journeys on it cost two
pence. Soon after this buses and trams ceased to be horse-drawn and used petrol and
electricity respectively for their motive power, and trams, buses and underground rail¬
ways rapidly developed into the vast network of London’s transport system.
In 1933 the whole system was taken over by the London Passenger Transport Board,
a public corporation which ran it for 14^ years until it was taken over by the London
Transport Executive.
The London Transport Executive
The London Transport Executive is responsible for the operation of passenger road and
rail services in the London area with the exception of the main-line railways, certain
suburban services which came under the Railway Executive, and taxicabs which are
all privately operated by companies or owner-drivers.1
The London Transport Executive consists of a chairman and five members, of whom
four are full-time and one part-time. The chairman and full-time members each have
special functional responsibilities apart from their general responsibility for the smooth
running of the London Transport system. It differs from the other Executives not only in
being concerned with two forms of transport—road and rail—but in having been able to
take over from its predecessor, the London Passenger Transport Board, a system which
had been operating as a whole for some years.
The operation of London’s transport is a vast undertaking. It serves an area of nearly
2,000 square miles (5,180 square km.), extending for an average distance of 25 miles
(40 km.) from Charing Cross in the centre of London. It covers, in whole or in part,
10 counties, the cities of London and Westminster, 27 other metropolitan boroughs,
2 county boroughs, 49 municipal boroughs, 59 urban and 29 rural districts. The total
population of the area approaches 10 million.
Prom north to south the railway stretches 18 miles, from east to west 32 miles, and from
north-west to east 49 miles. The total length of the railway over which London Transport
trains operate is 248 miles (399 km.), of which just over a third is underground, including
the longest tube tunnel in the world, 17J miles. There are 277 stations served by London
Transport.
Diesel buses travel over routes whose total length is 2,975 miles, coaches over 665 miles,
trolleybuses (which use electricity) 253 miles.
To carry traffic over all this area, the London Transport Executive in December 1952
owned 4,085 railway coaches, 8,213 buses and coaches, and 1,770 trolleybuses, making a
total of 14,068 passenger vehicles. The total staff employed at the end of 1952 was 97,132,
of whom 10,283 were women. The total number of passenger journeys in 1952 was
4,295,285,000, or over 11-7 million every day.
In its first report covering 1948 the British Transport Commission commented on the
astronomical number of journeys made on the London Transport system every year:
The growth in travel compared with before the war may justly be described as
phenomenal. In terms of daily travel, the average number of passenger journeys rose
between 1938-39 and 1948 by 2 million—from io| to I2i million. This. .. although
the population of the London T ransport area, which over the year averaged 9,620,000,
1In December 1952 there were 5,436 taxicabs and 9,134 taxicab drivers licensed in the Metropolitan
Police District, which covers the counties of London and Middlesex and parts of Kent, Surrey, Essex
and Hertfordshire. Taxicab fares are prescribed by the Home Secretary.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
199
was still below the pre-war figure of 9,888,000. In fact, rides per head of the popula¬
tion have increased by 23- 5 per cent to 479 in 1948.1
People not only travelled more frequently but also on the average for longer
distances, with the result that passenger miles, which take into account both the
numbers of passengers and the miles they travel, rose from 898 per head of population
in 1938-39 to 1,342 miles in 1948, an increase of 49-4 per cent.2
To meet this challenge to the efficiency of London Transport, plans have been put for¬
ward by the British Transport Commission for extensive developments in the London
railway system. These would cost approximately ^340 million and take 20-30 years to
complete. Among the recommendations are the construction of new tubes, the elec¬
trification of steam suburban railways and the substitution of buses for trams. A start on
this plan has already been made by the removal, completed in 1952, of all London trams,
and by some extensions to the underground railways.
Inland Waterways
Canals, by providing cheap and easy, if slow, transport for goods, played a great part in
the industrial revolution. But their great days lasted only about 70 years, from 1761 when
the Duke of Bridgewater built a canal to carry coal from his collieries to Manchester, until
the end of the 1830s when railway competition destroyed the canals’ monopoly. From
then on (except for the building of the Manchester Ship Canal) their history has, in
peace time, been one of declining importance. In 1909, 1921 and 1931 the Government
issued reports urging co-ordination of the canals in the form of a public trust, but no
trust was formed and (although by 1947 about a third had come under the ownership of
the railways) a large measure of co-operation was achieved only in 1948 when the
Transport Act came into force and the majority of the canals were nationalized.
In England and Wales the main inland waterways stretch from the estuary of the
Humber (in the north-east), Mersey (north-west), Thames (south-east) and Severn
(south-west) and converge on the industrial Midlands, which are thus served by a net¬
work of canals giving them direct access by water to some of the country’s principal
seaports (Hull, Liverpool, London and Bristol). There is also an important route which
runs between the Trent and the Mersey. Among the well-known names of Enghsh canals
are the Grand Union, the Aire and Calder, the Sheffield and South Yorkshire, the Leeds
and Liverpool, the Oxford and the Shropshire Union Canals, and the Manchester Ship
Canal, which is in a class by itself, less of an inland waterway than the entry to a great
port. In 1952 there were 1,752 miles (2,820 km.) of canals open to traffic.
The Manchester Ship Canal, opened in 1894, made Manchester, which is 35 miles
(56 km.) from the sea, into one of the greatest ports in the country. It cost ^17 million
to construct and can accommodate ocean-going ships of 12,000 tons. It has not been
taken over by the Transport Commission and is owned by a company over which the
City of Manchester Corporation has considerable control.
In Scotland, the Caledonian Canal, built by the Government and opened in 1822, pro¬
vides 60 miles of continuous waterway joining Inverness in the north-east to Fort William
in the west, and can take vessels up to 500 tons. Others are the Forth and Clyde Canal,
which bisects Scotland from east to west at its narrowest point, and the Crinan Canal in
Argyllshire.
The Docks and Inland Waterways Executive
The majority of the canals were taken over by the British Transport Commission and
1The number of rides per head of population in 1952 was 436.
2This figure has decreased yearly since 1948, and in 1952 was 1,202 miles, which still represented an
increase of 33*9 per cent over 1938-39.
200
BRITAIN! AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
have been operated and administered by the Docks and Inland Waterways Executive,
which consisted of a chairman and two full-time members.
For the purposes of operation the Executive divided the canal-system into four divisions,
apart from Scotland (the Scottish canals being administered separately): (i) North-
Eastern, based on the Humber estuary; (2) North-Western, based on the Mersey estuary;
(3) South-Eastern, based on the Thames estuary; (4) South-Western, based on the Severn
estuary.
The Executive decentralized administration as far as possible, and the divisional water¬
ways officer in each case was given wide powers in the management of local business.
At the end of 1952 the Executive was employing 4,795 staff in connection with its
inland waterways, and operated 1,243 carrying craft, which, with the craft of many
independent operators, carried 12,442,000 tons of traffic during the year.
The Executive also administered the small docks which used to belong to canal com¬
panies and the docks which used to belong to the railways and which were nationalized
by the Transport Act, 1947. The only exceptions were those which were mainly inter¬
change points between railways and railway-owned steamer services which were adminis¬
tered by the Railway Executive (see p. 190).
Altogether the Executive controlled over 40 major ex-railway-owned docks. Here again
they adopted a policy of decentralization and much responsibility was left to the docks
managers who worked under the Executive.
The general policy has been to carry out as much maintenance and improvement work as
possible, so as to ensure quick turn-round in the ports, within the limits of the capital
investment expenditure available. To this end, Port Advisory Committees representing
labour and shipping and trading interests have been set up in a number of ports and
attention is being paid to increased mechanical handling of cargo.
At the end of 1952 the Executive was employing 20,816 people on the docks under its
control. Over 68 million tons of import and export cargo were handled during 1952 at all
the British Transport Commission docks, including those operated by the Railway
Executive.
The Ulster Transport Authority
Public inland transport in Northern Ireland, with the exception of passenger transport
in the City of Belfast, a section of the railway system previously owned by the Great Nor¬
thern Railway Company (Ireland), and some small rail and road transport undertakings,
is owned and controlled by the Ulster Transport Authority established under the Transport
Act (Northern Ireland), 1948. The railway system formerly operated by the Great Nor¬
thern Railway Company (Ireland) has passed to a public body called the Great Northern
Railway Board, established on 1st September 1953 by the Northern Ireland and Republic
of Ireland Governments.
Before the 1948 Act was passed, all the railways in Northern Ireland were separately
owned and, from 1935, road transport (except for passenger transport in Belfast City and
certain types of specialized and ancillary freight haulage) was under the control of the
Northern Ireland Road Transport Board, a public undertaking formed to provide public
transport services by road and to co-ordinate these services with those of the railways.
Now the Ulster Transport Authority operates all the road services formerly provided by
the Northern Ireland Road Transport Board, together with the railway services provided
before 1949 by the Northern Counties Committee of the British Railways Executive and
by the Belfast and County Down Railway Company.
When the railway undertaking of the Northern Counties Committee was acquired by
the Ulster Transport Authority from the British Transport Commission in 1949 it was
agreed that each of the parties should co-operate with the other to foster and encourage
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
201
by all means in their power traffic and intercourse between Great Britain on the one hand
and Northern Ireland on the other and to . .. maintain the principles of through rates and
fares and facilities as between places in Great Britain and places in Northern Ireland’.
The Ulster Transport Authority is a less complex organization than the British Trans¬
port Commission and has no subsidiary Executives. The following figures for the year
ended September 1952 show the scope of its operations:
Railway track mileage
Road route mileage ..
Locomotives ..
Railway coaching vehicles
Railway freight vehicles
Omnibuses and coaches
Goods motor vehicles
Employees
Passengers carried during year
Merchandise carried during year
Livestock carried during year
Number of transport stations and depots
Hotels ..
301 miles, broad gauge
15 miles, narrow gauge
2,600 miles
92
466
2,644
1,054
1,193
9,623
107,376,774
1,940,180 tons
1,020,636 head
155
5
CIVIL AVIATION
The Ministry of Civil Aviation was set up, in 1945, to form and direct policy for the
general development of British civil aviation, to plan British air services in consultation
with the Corporations, and to look after the interests of private and charter flying by
British companies. The Ministry has delegated the supervision of design, development and
production of British civil aircraft to the Ministry of Supply, which is responsible for
the provision of all Service aircraft and carries an extensive programme of research and
development to meet civil and Service needs.
From November 1951 the two offices of Minister of Transport and Minister of Civil
Aviation were held by the same Minister, and in October 1953 the two Ministries were
amalgamated to form the Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation. The Ministry has
two Parliamentary Secretaries, one to deal with transport matters and one with civil
aviation.
The Corporations
The Civil Aviation Act, 1946, aimed at securing the development of air transport
services by Corporations operating under public control and subject to the general direc¬
tion of the Minister of Civil Aviation. The Act reserved to three State-owned Corpora¬
tions (British Overseas Airways Corporation, British European Airways and British
South American Airways) and their agents and associates the right to carry passengers and
goods for hire and reward upon scheduled journeys between any two places, at least one
of which is in the United Kingdom. Scheduled journeys were defined in the Act as a
series of journeys which constitute a systematic service and whose benefits are available
to members of the general public. Charter flying was not reserved to the Corporations.
The practice of using ‘chosen instruments’ to operate the civil air services under Govern¬
ment supervision was adopted in 1924 when a company called ‘Imperial Airways’ was
established using funds voted by Parliament for the development of Empire air com-
o
202
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
munications. In collaboration with the Royal Air Force, Imperial Airways developed and
operated the first long-distance air routes in the world, to Africa, Australia and Asia, and
inaugurated some of the earliest transatlantic services. Only minor attention was given to
the development of European air services. But in 1935 British Airways Limited, an amal¬
gamation of four independent companies, was formed and received Government support
as a supplementary ‘chosen instrument’ for this purpose. In 1939 Imperial Airways and
British Airways were amalgamated into BOAC (British Overseas Airways Corporation),
the first public corporation in the field of civil aviation. During the second world war, the
Corporation, under the direction of the Air Ministry, maintained and developed the
pattern of incer-Commonwealth and inter-Allied air communications in close association
with Transport Command of the Royal Air Force. At the end of the war two new
corporations were formed: British European Airways Corporation, which had formerly
been the European division of BOAC, was given the responsibility for operating the
European services and internal services within the United Kingdom; and BSAAC
(British South American Airways Corporation) took over the routes to South America
until, in 1949, it was merged into BOAC.
The Air Transport Advisory Council was constituted as an independent body to con¬
sider representations from the public about the adequacy of the Corporations’ air services
and their charges, and questions concerning air transport referred to it by the Minister. The
Council can make recommendations on diese matters to the Minister.
Three advisory councils for the purpose of securing the efficient discharge of the Cor¬
porations’ functions, with due regard to the circumstances and requirements of particular
areas, have been appointed by British European Airways, for Scotland, Wales and
Northern Ireland. These councils have the right of direct access to the Minister.
Initially the three Corporations enjoyed a virtual monopoly of United Kingdom
scheduled services, but in 1948 arrangements were introduced which enabled independent
companies to operate a few scheduled services, outside the Corporations’ spheres of
interest, under associate agreement with one of the Corporations.
The change in Government policy on civil air transport services and operators as an¬
nounced in 1952 expressed the Government’s intention not to impair the competitive
strength of the two Airways Corporations (BOAC and BEA) in operating the services
on their established external networks, but to give independent companies, through an
extension of the associate agreement scheme, more scope and opportunity for participation
in scheduled services without increasing the cost of air transport to the taxpayer.
The Boards of Directors of the two Corporations are appointed by and are responsible
to the Minister of Transport and Civil Aviation. They are required to carry out any direc¬
tion of a general character and related to matters of national interest issued to them by
the Minister. The Minister does not, however, interfere with day-to-day management,
and the Corporations are accorded the maximum freedom in conducting their internal
affairs consistent with Government policy and with the Minister’s responsibility to
Parhament. Their annual reports and statements of accounts are laid before Parliament
by die Minister.
The Corporations obtain the capital they need by the issue of stock or, pending this, by
raising temporary loans. Their borrowings are guaranteed by the Treasury. To assist the
Corporations in the task of developing and bringing up to date their services in the post¬
war period and to help them to run certain commercially unattractive services desirable in
the public interest, the Civil Aviation Act provided for grants to them from public funds
during the first ten years (until 1956). The maximum for such grants was fixed at £10
million for the year 1947-48 and ^8 million for subsequent years. The grants for each year
are determined by the Minister of Transport and Civil Aviation and the Treasury after
consideration of a programme of services and financial estimates submitted by the Cor-
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 203
porations. The combined results of the Corporations show deficits in recent financial
years, ended 31st March, as follows: ^io-6 million in 1949; £9-2 million in 1950;
£5-5 million in 1951; £1-1 million in 1952; and £2-3 milhon in 1953. At 31st March 1953
grants paid to BOAC and BEA since 1946 totalled ^36-8 million.
The Corporations’ fares and rates for the carriage of freight are fixed in common with
those of all other scheduled airlines (outside the Russian orbit) by international agreement
secured through the International Air Transport Association (IATA). The fares so agreed
are subject to the approval of the Governments concerned.
British Overseas Airways Corporation
British Overseas Airways Corporation (BOAC) operates routes eastwards from the
United Kingdom across Europe and the Mediterranean serving the Middle East, North,
West, Central, South and East Africa, the Persian Gulf, Pakistan, India, Ceylon, Burma,
Thailand, Malaya, Hong Kong, Japan, Indonesia and Australia. The routes to Central and
Soudi Africa are operated in partnership with Central African Airways and South African
Airways, and to Australia in partnership with Qantas Empire Airways. Westwards,
BOAC operates services to Canada and the United States, to the Caribbean and to South
America. In May 1952 it introduced the world’s first jet airliner passenger service with the
de Havilland Comet, between London and Johannesburg, South Africa, followed by
services between London and Colombo, Ceylon, in August, and between London and
Singapore in October. In April 1953 a fourth jet airliner service was introduced between
London and Japan (Tokyo), a 10,000-mile journey, with a flying time of 28^ hours (36
hours total journey time). Unduplicated BOAC route mileage is 84,875 (31st March
I953). over which it operates between 65 and 70 services a week, with an average stage
length of over 1,000 miles. BOAC plans to start a Comet II service to South America
early in 1954.
BOAC’s operationally effective fleet in August 1953 consisted of seven Comets (four
jet-engines), and the following piston-engined airliners: 9 Hermes, 22 Argonauts, 6 Yorks
(on freighter service), 12 Lockheed Constellations (United States) and 10 Boeing Strato-
cruisers (United States). Twelve Series II Comets and 26 Bristol 175s were on order, with
options on 10 Series III Comets and a further 10 Bristol 175s.
BOAC’s Comet, Argonaut, Hermes and York fleets are based on London airport, which is
the operating terminal for all BOAC services to and from the United Kingdom; the
Stratocruiser and Constellation fleets are based on Filton (Bristol).
BOAC’s issued capital, in 2^ per cent and 3 per cent stock guaranteed by the Treasury,
was Xj33‘2 million net at 31st March 1953. The Corporation’s wholly-owned subsidiaries
include Aden Airways Ltd., Bahamas Airways Ltd., and British West Indian Airways,
and its partly-owned subsidiaries, in which it has over 50 per cent interest, include Gulf
Aviation (Bahrein) Ltd. and International Aeradio Ltd.
BOAC is also associated with British Commonwealth Pacific Airlines (formed by the
Governments of Austraha, New Zealand and the United Kingdom1 to operate a Com¬
monwealth trans-Pacific service linking Austraha and New Zealand with the United
States and Canada), with Tasman Empire Airways (formed by the Governments of New
Zealand, Australia and the United Kingdom primarily to operate services across the
Tasman Sea)2, and with Cyprus Airways, East African Airways Corporation, West
^Holdings of the Company are: 50 per cent Australia, 30 per cent New Zealand, 20 per cent United
Kingdom.
2Holdings of the Company are: 50 per cent New Zealand, 30 per cent Australia, 20 per cent United
Kingdom.
204
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
African Airways Corporation, Egyptian Aircraft Engineering Company, Iraqi Airways,
and Malayan Airways.
For the first time in any financial year BOAC made in the year ended 31st March
1952 a clear overall surplus (£275,000) in the year’s operations, an improvement of over
£4-75 million on the results in 1951. Before charging fixed interest on Airways stock
(amounting to nearly £1 million) the profit amounted to £1-2 million.
In 1952-53 this profit fell to £103,875 and, after providing for interest, there was a
deficiency of £838,664. This was due mainly to rising costs, operating costs in pence per
capacity-ton-mile rising to 40-1 from 38-8 the previous year, and the break-even load
factor (the proportion of aircraft space it is necessary to sell in order to cover all costs)
rising from 65 to 66 per cent compared with load factors achieved of 65-7 and 64-5 per
cent. Revenue for 1952-53 was £36-1 milhon compared with £33-5 million in 1951-52:
the number of passengers increased from 250,173 to 290,629, freight revenue increased
from £2-7 milhon to £2-9 milhon, mail revenue fell from £8*7 milhon to £8-4 milhon,
and the volume of traffic in ton-miles increased from over 122 milhon to over 133 milhon.
The safety record of BOAC has been well mamtained; during the three years from
1st January 1950 to 31st December 1952 just over 2,000 milhon passenger-miles were
operated without a single accident involving serious injury to passengers. In the following
year, immediately after the Corporation had completed the first year of commercial jet
aircraft passenger service, a BOAC Comet, westbound from Singapore, crashed during a
storm in India, on 2nd May 1953, with a loss of 43 lives. The Corporation’s Comet services
had then flown more than 100 milhon passenger-miles and had carried 28,000 fare-paying
passengers without a previous fatal accident.
BOAC envisages the maintenance of its round-the-world routes, in close co-operation
with Commonwealth airlines, by operating high-speed first-class services with the de
Havilland Comet, and slower tourist services with the Bristol Britannia. The expansion of
tourist services which has been a feature of recent civil aviation development has been ex¬
tended to a number of BOAC’s services. In May 1952 BOAC was one of eleven airline
operators which, following an agreement reached through the IATA, introduced tourist
services at reduced fares over the North Atlantic routes, with Constellations, operating at
first four services a week, increased within a year to eleven a week. These tourist services
are now available to all points served by BOAC in North America, Africa, the Middle
East, India, Pakistan, Ceylon, to many points in the Caribbean and to Hong Kong and
Singapore, representing more than 60 per cent of all points served by standard services.
Headquarters of BOAC are at Airways House, Brentford, Middlesex. The London
terminal for passengers is at Airways Terminal, London, S.W.i.
British European Airways
British European Airways (BEA) is the seventh largest airline in the world in terms of
passengers carried, and has the largest route network in Europe. BEA carries the main
responsibility for providing internal services, which are to a certain extent supplemented
by the services of independent companies under associate agreement. BEA has one sub¬
sidiary—Gibraltar Airways, in which it has a 51 per cent holding—and is associated with
Aer Lingus and Cyprus Airways. It is also associated with Aerolinee Italiane Internazionali
(Alitalia) and the Malta Airlines.
During the year ended 31st March 1953 BEA operated a network of 16,398 unduplicated
route miles serving 26 airports in the United Kingdom and 37 airports in Europe and the
Mediterranean. Its services in the British Isles include ‘social’ air services, i.e. those
necessary to provide essential communications with remote parts such as the Western Isles
of Scotland, and to meet the heavy demands of holiday traffic to such centres as the Channel
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
205
Islands and the Isle of Man. Reduced tourist fares are available on some 97 per cent ol the
international services and on all domestic services. BEA is engaged in a helicopter develop¬
ment flying programme, based on Gatwick Airport, which has included scheduled pas¬
senger services first between Liverpool and Cardiff and then between London and
Birmingham. The latter has now been replaced by a daily return freight service between
the two places.
BEA’s services are based mainly on Northolt (10 miles from London in Middlesex) and
London airports. In August 1953 the operational fleet comprised 10 Viscounts, 20 Eliza¬
bethans, 5 Vikings and 20 Admirals (modified, or tourist Vikings), 52 Pionairs (including
Pionair and Leopard freighters), 1 Dart Dakota, 9 Islanders, 1 Bristol freighter (leased to
Silver City Airways), 5 helicopters (3 Bristol 171s, one of which belonged to the Ministry
of Supply, and 2 Bell 47Bs). There were on order 16 Viscount 701s and 12 Viscount
800s, and the Corporation had an option on a further 8 Viscount 800s.
A wider use is being made of the Viscount and Elizabethan airliners since the beginning
of the 1953/54 winter schedules on 4th October 1953 > when both types were introduced
on new Continental and domestic routes, with considerable reductions in journey times.
BEA is associated with two international companies concerned with the provision of
navigational aids and telecommunications services. It holds 42 per cent of the shares of
International Aeradio Limited, and has a small holding (3-5 per cent) of the shares of
Societe Internationale de Telecommunications Aeronautiques (SITA).
Issued capital to 31st March 1953, in 3 and 4i per cent stock guaranteed by the Treasury,
was jCi6 million.
In the year ended 31st March 1953 the net loss was ^i-4 million, a little higher than
the year before. This loss was due mainly to adverse events outside the Corporation s
control, e.g., the restriction in currency allowance for oversea travel, a fuel strike in the
United States which caused the cancellation of some services, higher fuel tax, and rising
wages and materials costs. So far as revenue and traffic were concerned, steady gains were
made. Compared with 1951-52, revenue increased to ^13million from ^io-8 million,
the number of passengers carried increased to 1,400,122 from i,I35>579> cost for capacity-
ton-mile was reduced from 5i‘8 pence to 5°'5 pence, and the break-even load factor fell
from 73 ‘2 per cent to 69-9 per cent.
An important factor in the economic working of BEA is its task as a short-haul operator.
The average fare is low—^7 7s. in 1952—53—and there is a great amount of individual
passenger handling to be done in carrying a heavy and markedly seasonal traffic over
relatively short distances. The average passenger journey in I952~53 was 2(56 statute miles.
In the summer of 1953, BEA was the first airline in the world to use propeller-turbine
airliners, with Viscount Discovery class turbo-prop aircraft, which it put into service on
seven major routes to continental Europe.
BEA operates an automatic airline booking system for its vast London booking require¬
ments which comprises a modern electrical unit, the Flightmaster, with an ultimate book¬
ing capacity of 6 million passengers a year.
Headquarters of BEA are at Ruislip, Middlesex. The London passenger station is the
Waterloo Air Terminal, opened in May 1953-
Independent Airline Companies
The agreements by which independent companies operate scheduled services as
‘associates’ of the Corporations are made on the recommendations of the Air Transport
Advisory Council (see page 202). In 1949 associate agreements had a maximum validity of
two years. This period was extended to five years in September I95°- Associate agreements
for new routes, applying to both freight and passenger services, are now normally granted
206
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
for seven-year periods with extension to ten years in special cases. This arrangement is de¬
signed to give independent companies sufficient long-term security to justify capital outlay
and expansion. When, in' I952> the Government decided to give greater opportunity to
private airlines, the Air Transport Advisory Council was strengthened in order to consider
applications for new scheduled services and to make recommendations concerning them
to the Minister. As at ist June 1953, 5° applications from independent operators for
associate agreements had been approved under the new policy, 26 had been conditionally
approved, 20 withdrawn, and 46 had been unsuccessful.
Charter operations are mainly the sphere of the independent companies. Although the
Corporations engage in them, they do not maintain aircraft specially for this work. There
are a number of British air charter companies which have established successful lines of
business since the war, carrying both freight and passengers. They also carry large numbers
of troops and their families to and from oversea stations diroughout the world for the
Service Departments. Much of the charter business is transacted through the Baltic
Exchange in the City of London in the same way as shipping business (see p. 184).
In 1946 a number of the independent air line operators formed a representative body,
the British Air Charter Association. In 1951 the name was changed to the British In¬
dependent Air Transport Association Ltd.
The fleet strength of the BIATA members at 31st December 1952 consisted of the
following aircraft: four-engined, 43; twin-engined, 87; single-engined, 26; total, 156.
Individual member companies are: Air Charter Ltd., Air Enterprises Ltd., Airways
Union Ltd., Birkett Air Services Ltd., Cambrian Air Services Ltd., Eagle Aviation Ltd.,
Hunting Air Transport Ltd., Jersey Airlines, Lexhams Flying Services Ltd., Morton Air
Services Ltd., Oldstead Aircraft, Olley Air Service Ltd., Scottish Aviation Ltd., Skyways
Ltd. & Lancashire Aircraft Corporation, Silver City Airways Ltd., Transair Ltd.
There are, in addition, a number of independent operators who are not members of
BIATA. The largest of these is Airwork Ltd., with a fleet of two four-engined and nine
twin-engined aircraft.
Traffic totals on the scheduled services operated by all independent operators as associates
of one of the Corporations in 1952 were as follows:
Passengers carried
Passenger-miles flown
Freight carried (short tons)
Freight ton-miles flown
94,065
25,157,813
15,172
858,790
Passengers travelling on car ferry services are not included in these passenger figures; the
freight figures include the weight of cars and passengers carried on these ferries.
Charter operations by the member operators of the BIATA in 1952 were:
Civil passengers carried .. ..   50,471
Troops carried .. .. .. .. .. .. 72,959
Passenger-miles flown for both   200,825,072
Freight carried (short tons) ..   21,503
Freight ton-miles flown   7,576,165
Troop-carrying by air has been carriecl out recently almost entirely by the independent
companies. RAF Transport Command has handled only a very small proportion.
Private Flying and Gliding
There are a number of private flying clubs and groups. At the end of 1952 there were 80
operational clubs in the United Kingdom which had in use 222 club and training aircraft
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
207
with current Certificates of Airworthiness. Those clubs that have an approved course are
given an Air Ministry contract to train selected ATC (Air Training Corps) cadets to
private pilot’s licence standard. In 1952, 500 scholarships were awarded by the Air Ministry
to cadets for training in the clubs.
A representative body was founded in 1926, the General Council of Associated Light
Aeroplane Clubs, and was reconstructed in 1946 as the Association of British Aero Clubs
and Centres.
There are 32 gliding clubs in the United Kingdom affiliated to the British Gliding
Association. About 26,000 gliding certificates of all grades are in force. In July 1952 the
world Gliding Championship was won by a British pilot flying a British machine when
this biennial event was held in Madrid with 60 pilots from 19 countries participating.
Technical and Administrative Services
Functions of the Ministry
The regulatory functions of the Ministry of Civil Aviation (now the Ministry of Trans¬
port and Civil Aviation) under the Civil Aviation Act, 1949. include such matters as the
registration and certification of civil aircraft and the licensing of civil crews, personnel,
etc. The Ministry issues Certificates of Airworthiness on the recommendation of the Air
Registration Board (see p. 56), which investigates civil aircraft for this purpose. Foreign
aircraft flying over the United Kingdom are similarly required to be registered and to
have a Certificate of Airworthiness issued by the State in which the aircraft is registered.
The continuing airworthmess of British aircraft engaged in public transport operations
is further ensured by requiring that they should be maintained in accordance with
schedules approved by the Board. Persons engaged in the maintenance of these aircraft
must be holders of appropriate licences or be approved for the purpose. Operating crews
of civil aircraft, other than private gliders, are equally required to hold licences. The sub¬
division of the licences is intended to grade crew members according to their qualifications
and to match their privileges to these qualifications.
A standing advisory body of experts, the Air Safety Board, is responsible under the
Minister for keeping under continuous review the safety needs in British civil aviation and
for recommending measures calculated to promote safety, in respect of both the operation
of British civil aircraft throughout the world and the provision of an efficient system of
ground facilities for all civil aircraft operating over the United Kingdom.
The Minister is authorized to establish, equip and maintain aerodromes and to make
provision for the licensing, inspection and safety aspects of other civil aerodromes.
Technical, financial and material assistance is provided by the United Kingdom for
equipping aerodromes in the British dependencies to international standards.
A series of bilateral air transport agreements for scheduled services is in force between
the Government of the United Kingdom and the Governments of most of the countries
to and through which British airline services operate. These agreements provide for the
reciprocal exchange of traffic rights and usually also provide for, inter alia, reciprocal
treatment in respect of customs duty on fuel and oil, etc., agreement on fares and for the
settlement of disputes. As the diplomatic channel is frequently used for consultation on
civil aviation matters a number of officers have been attached to missions in Common¬
wealth and foreign countries since the end of the war as Civil Air Advisers or Attaches to
assist the missions in dealing with work which requires speciahzed knowledge. There were
in 1953 six such appointments covering the following countries:
(1) United States and Mexico.
(2) France.
208
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
(3) Egypt, Ethiopia, Iraq, Jordan, the Lebanon, Persia, the Persian Gulf, Saudi Arabia,
Syria and Turkey.
(4) India and Pakistan.
(5) The Philippine Republic, Thailand, and the Associated States of Viet Nam, Cam¬
bodia and Laos.
(6) Australia.
In addition, the Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation has a part-time representative
covering Belgium, Greece, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain and
Switzerland.
^4ir Traffic Control
A highly developed system of air traffic control governs the routeing of aircraft over
the United Kingdom, and their approaches to and departures from its aerodromes. There
are control zones in which in bad weather all civil aircraft are under the orders of con¬
trollers. There is also a system of ‘airways’ for aircraft flying on the main trunk routes
over the United Kingdom. These airways are sky tunnels or corridors of specified widths
and heights in which aircraft are separated from each other both horizontally and verti¬
cally. The Ministry’s main air traffic control centre is at Uxbridge, in Middlesex, 15 miles
from London. There is a United Kingdom communications centre at Croydon, estab¬
lished in February 1953 as part of a world-wide network of circuits to permit the efficient
exchange of operational messages between air stations. This centre is designed to handle
a dense traffic of operational messages between airports and air traffic control centres.
The provision of meteorological information for civil as well as military aircraft is the
responsibility of the Meteorological Office at the Air Ministry. There are ‘met’ offices,
staffed by the Air Ministry, at civil aerodromes and air traffic control centres.
Air Navigation Aids
The installation of radar aids for landing and take-offs at major airports and for air
traffic control purposes is becoming of increasing importance, particularly with the new
jet airliners coming into use. A recent development is the Decca Navigator, which was
used first for shipping but is now being used increasingly by aircraft. A series of ground
stations has been set up from which signals are sent out to enable the aircraft pilot to trace
his route and fix his position.
BOAC and BEA have sponsored a non-profit-making company, International Aeradio
Limited, established in 1947, to promote the safety and regularity of international air
services by helping to provide navigational and landing aids in countries where local
governments are not able to supply them to the required standards.
The Air-Sea Search and Rescue Service operated by the Royal Navy and the Royal
Air Force is available to civil air operators within the United Kingdom area and along
the oversea routes wherever there are Royal Navy and RAF stations. The four British
ocean weather-ships stationed in the North Atlantic under arrangements promoted by the
International Civil Aviation Organization have navigational aids which are regularly used
both by civil and Service aircraft flying over the North Atlantic; the aircraft of RAF
Coastal Command carry out search duties for missing aircraft.
Aerodromes
There are some 100 civil aerodromes in the United Kingdom, and 34 of these are
directly administered by the Ministry. There are also 50 military aerodromes available
for civil use. There are 25 Customs airports.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
209
Of the Ministry’s vote for civil aviation purposes—-£14! million for 1953-54—just
over a third is attributed to construction, maintenance and equipment of aerodromes,
The main airports used by international schedules services are:
for European services: London, Northolt, Glasgow (Renfrew), Birmingham
(Elmdon), Liverpool (Speke), Manchester (Ringway);
for North Atlantic services: London, Prestwick;
for South Atlantic, Middle East, Africa and Far East services: London.
Substantial increases in aircraft and passenger movements at the principal airports have
continued through 1945 to 1952. In the latter year, all United Kingdom airports handled
just under 3 million passengers. Of this total, London Airport, formerly known as Heath¬
row, dealt with 861,000 and Northolt 773,000. Outside the London area provincial air¬
ports handled 1-2 million passengers; Prestwick handled the largest number, 168,000,
followed by Manchester (Ringway) 161,000, Glasgow 157,000, Belfast (Nutts Corner)
148,000, and Isle of Man (Ronaldsway) 127,000. In the Channel Islands, Jersey Airport
handled over 250,000, and Guernsey 116,000. The number of movements of aircraft
engaged on commercial transport operations in 1952 was 195,400, for all United Kingdom
airports.
Prestwick, in Scotland, is being developed as the second international airport in the
United Kingdom. Airport activity in the London region has been expanding at so rapid
a rate that even with the maximum development being carried out at London Airport it
will be unable to meet future demands, and the Government has put forward proposals
for an alternative airport at Gatwick, 25 miles from London.
London, Northolt, Prestwick and Belfast are equipped with GCA (Ground Controlled
Approach) landing aids. All United Kingdom airports used by international services are
being equipped with the basic bad weather landing aid, ILS (Instrument Landing System),
recommended by the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO). Several airports
have installed the new very-high-frequency all-directional radio range known as VOR,
recommended by ICAO, and used by some United States airline operators.
Public health provisions at all aerodromes are jointly the responsibility of the Minister
of Health and the Minister of Transport and Civil Aviation, or of a local authority to
which the Minister of Health has delegated the functions.
THE POST OFFICE
The Post Office with its staff of over 347,000 is a Government Department. It is also a
great State enterprise and the oldest of Britain’s nationalized undertakings. In 1649 a reso¬
lution in the House of Commons declared that ‘the office of Postmaster is and ought to be
in the sole power and disposal of Parliament’.
The ministerial head of the Post Office is the Postmaster-General, who, with the Assis¬
tant Postmaster-General, is responsible to Parhament for his Department. He is subject to
the overriding authority of Parliament and the Cabinet, and, on many questions, of the
Treasury. Under the Postmaster-General, the permanent head of the Post Office is the
Director-General supported by two Deputies and an Engineer-in-Chief. At the next level
there arc six Directors responsible respectively for Posts; Inland Telecommunications;
Oversea Telecommunications; External Telecommunications Executive; Establishments
and Organization; Personnel and Accommodation. These six divisions of work are
carried down into the regional organizations, each of which is under the control of a
Regional Director. Under the Regional Directors are Head Postmasters and Telephone
Managers. The Comptroller and Accountant-General is responsible for giving financial
advice and for the whole accounting system. The staff at headquarters and in the regions
210
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
is divided into two main groups: general civil service grades (administrative, executive
and clerical) and special grades recruited directly by the Post Office for its engineering
and operational activities.
The work of the Post Office falls into two main categories: (i) direct services—mail
services, telecommunications, remittance and savings bank business; (2) agency services
—broadcasting services and business undertaken on behalf of other Government Depart¬
ments.
Mail Services
The development of postal communications in Britain can be traced from the time when
horsemen carried dispatches to the Tudor Court up to modem airmail delivery. In 1657
under the protectorate of Cromwell an Act was passed which declared that ‘there shall be
one general post-office and one officer, styled the Postmaster-General of England and
Comptroller of the Post Office’. The eighteenth century saw a great expansion of the
postal services with the introduction of mail-coaches in 1784. Road surfaces were im¬
proved and the guards on mail-coaches were postal servants with full responsibilities. In
the first half of the nineteenth century the Post Office was quick to take advantage of
Britain’s vigorous period of engineering and railway development and the first dispatch
of mails by train was made in 1830 between Liverpool and Manchester.
The heavy charge made up to this time for the conveyance of letters was one of the
factors which inspired Rowland Hill in his great work of postal reform which led to the
establishment of the penny post. In 1840 a uniform inland rate of postage of one penny per
half-ounce payable in advance came into operation—prepayment to be made by means of
adhesive postage stamps. Since the business world found cheap postage a boon and since it
proved ultunately a great financial success, it was imitated in every civilized country in the
world. In 1918 the basic penny rate for inland letters in Britain was raised to i£d., in 1920
to 2d., and in 1940 to 2^d. where it now stands.
The inauguration of the penny post was followed by a rapid extension of the scope of
the postal services, beginning, in 1841, with the introduction of the registered post to en¬
sure additional safety for valuable mail. In 1854 Rowland Hill became the permanent head
of the Post Office, and it was during his term of office that the Post Office Savings Bank
was established in 1861 to meet the needs of the small investor. The money order system
which had operated as a private venture from 1792 to 1838 was supplemented in 1881 by
the issue of postal orders for fixed amounts. Letter-boxes had been instituted in London in
1855 to facilitate the increased postal traffic, and in 1883 the parcel post was introduced.
By the end of the nineteenth century a regular delivery of letters was assured to every
house in Britain.
The guiding principles of the postal services, speed, reliability and economy, have moti¬
vated all developments in the history of the Post Office. Improvements include the pro¬
vision of motor mail services linking rural districts, postal sorting carriages on the railways,
special mail trains on certain routes and the ingenious apparatus by which bags of mail are
delivered and collected by trains running at express speed. During the second world war
many of these facilities had to be curtailed and some were suspended, manpower shortage
created a serious problem and oversea mails were disrupted.
Since 1945 the Post Office has restored and developed pre-war services, and to the heavy
task of reconstruction has been added a marked increase in the volume of mail. In the 14
years from 1938-39 to 1952-53 the parcel post increased from 185 million items to 243
million, registered postal traffic from 62 million to 138 million and posted correspondence
from 8,240 million to 8,800 million. During 1952-53 some 150,000 items of correspond¬
ence were handled without charge in connection with the King George VI memorial
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
211
appeal, while free postage concession was granted for some 560,000 parcels handed in for
the relief of victims of the Lynmouth and East Coast floods.
Airmail Services
Railways and motors as a means of transport for mails are supplemented by steamers
and aeroplanes. The figures for the year ended March 1953 show that total oversea civilian
correspondence amounted to 370 million items and Forces’ mail to 56 million, and that
nearly 50 per cent of this traffic now travels by air. First class mail to all European countries
except Iceland and Poland is sent by air without payment of any special air fee. The Post
Office dispatches nearly 30 tons of letter mail a week to European destinations by this
‘all-up’ service in aircraft of the British European Airways Corporation, whose network
of services enables many of the letters posted in London for Europe to be delivered the
following day. The air parcel service to Europe, introduced on 2nd April 1949, was
operating to 251 destinations by the autumn of that year, and now about five tons of parcel
mail are dispatched weekly to Europe by air.
First class mail and second class mail (unsealed packets containing printed matter, news¬
papers, periodicals, samples and small consignments of merchandise) are dispatched by air
to countries outside Europe upon payment of special air mail rates of postage. Also avail¬
able to more than 80 countries outside Europe are air parcel services. Light weight air
letters, originally designed for Forces’ mail and made available in 1943 for civilian use, are
popular and some 40 million were posted in the year ended March 1953.
T elecommurdcations
Telegraphs
All private telegraph systems in Britain were transferred to the control of the Postmaster-
General in 1870. Teleprinter working for the transmission of inland telegrams was
introduced generally in 1928 and by mid-1953 the change-over from the present manual
switching system to a more extensive automatic system was substantially complete. This
will be one of the most up-to-date systems in the world and will give direct connection
between any of the 450 larger telegraph offices. The Post Office transmitted 36 million
inland and 22 million oversea telegrams in 1952-53, and the average time between hand¬
ing in an inland telegram and its receipt at the delivery office was 23 minutes compared
with 48 minutes in 1946.
Telephones
In the year ended 31st March 1953, over 500,000 new telephones were provided, bring¬
ing the total number of telephones to 5,927,000, of which 73 per cent were connected to
automatic exchanges. In August 1953 the six milhonth telephone was installed, and at that
date there were more than 6,000 telephone exchanges. Allowing for cessations, the actual
net increase in the number of telephones since the war has been about 2 million, although
during that period over 4 million new telephones were installed. This post-war installation
work has been achieved in spite of the priority given to the export of telecommunication
equipment. The level of telephone traffic continues high. In the year ended 31st March
1939 the total of trunk and toll calls was 112 million, while in the year ended 31st March
1953 die Post Office handled a total of 264 million; 66 million of these were at the cheap
night rate. To meet this increasing traffic, about 9,000 trunk circuits over 25 miles (40 km.)
in radial length have been provided since the end of the war, making a total of nearly
19,000 circuits. In the year ended 31st March 1953, 3,165 million local calls were handled,
an increase of 49 per cent compared with the year 1938-39. About 400 exchanges now
1 Spain and the Balearic Islands are considered as a single destination.
212
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
operate the automatic time service, first introduced in 1936, by which callers in a number
of cities are able to obtain the correct time automatically by dialling the 3-lettcr code
TIM or a figure code which connects to the speaking clock. The 999 emergency dialling
service is available on over 2,000 of the 4,300 automatic exchanges now in service. Callers
using this service are given immediate connection to the police, ambulance or fire brigade,
and in certain coastal districts to lifeboat and coastguard stations.
Oversea Telecommunications
All the oversea radio-telephone services from the United Kingdom are handled by the
Post Office, which now operates direct services to 31 countries as well as to ships at sea.
Direct radio services are further extended by land-line or further radio-telephone links
and, in all, service is available to more than 90 countries through the International Radio
Telephone Exchange. Outgoing calls have increased from 17,658 in 1938-39 to some
84,000 in 1952-53. The Anglo-Continental telephone circuits are also used for the trans¬
mission of pictures for newspapers and for the relaying of broadcast programmes. There
are now nearly 400 circuits to 42 European towns and each day about 6,000 calls are made
to the continent of Europe.
Cable and Wireless Services
In 1850 the first undersea telegraph cable between Britain and Europe was laid; and on
1st April 1950 the Post Office took over nearly all the staff and services of Cable and Wire¬
less Limited in Britain. In 1945 a Commonwealth Communications Council was held to
consider the future of the services which in 1929 had been unified under the United King¬
dom company later known as Cable and Wireless Limited. As a result of that conference
it was decided that there should be public ownership of the oversea telecommunications
of all the Commonwealth Governments. Although integrated within the Post Office
service, the majority of the staff of Cable and Wireless Limited continues to operate at
Electra House, London, the largest telegraph office in the world. By means of 11 cables
and 59 telegraph circuits direct service is provided with all self-governing members of the
British Commonwealth, and with many Colonies, with the United States and South
America, with the Mediterranean countries and, indirectly, with all the other countries in
the world.
In the year ended 31st March 1953, the Post Office handled 21,829,000 oversea tele¬
grams.
The Post Office Counter: Agency and Direct Services
Largely as a result of the extension of social legislation and the widening scope of the
social services, the volume of work measured on a time basis at post office counters has
increased considerably compared with the total for 1938-39. In the 14 years to 1952-53
the cash turnover trebled from just over ^1,000 million to over ^3,740 million.
At the post office counter the citizen can draw his pension and his family allowance,
bank his savings, buy a licence for his gun, dog or wireless set, renew his car licence, and
buy stamps for National Insurance (see p. 230) or for National Savings certificates (see
p. 105). In many of these and similar transactions, in the collection of revenue, in the dis¬
bursement of allowances and the distribution of notices and posters, the Post Office acts
as an agent for other Government Departments and for the BBC. Of the 51 million postal
drafts paid out by the Post Office in 1952-53, 38 million were in payment of sickness
benefits under the National Insurance Scheme; at the end of July 1953 current broadcast
receiving licences in the United Kingdom issued by the Post Office totalled 13,010,856, of
which 2,479,454 were for television sets (see also p. 282).
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
213
Counter sales include also an increasing volume of direct Post Office business: during
the year ended 31st March 1953 about 566 million postal orders were issued by post
offices, an increase of 53 million on the previous year’s record figure.
For over ninety years the Post Office Savings Bank (see pp. 105-6) has supported the
financial stability of Britain and the well-being of its citizens. Approximately one out of
every two persons in Britain has a savings account or other holding with the Post Office,
and active savings bank accounts at the end of 1952 numbered over 22 milhon.
IX. LABOUR AND MANAGEMENT
MANPOWER
The total working population of the United Kingdom at the end of June 1953 was
about 24 million, some 47 per cent of the total population, and included about 70 per cent
of persons of normal working age (15-59 for women, 15-64 for men). In fact, about
95 per cent of British men of working age are today in or seeking gainful work. The
remaining 5 per cent consist mainly of those continuing their education, of the severely
disabled and of a few persons of private means. The proportion of women of working age
in or seeking gainful work is much lower, about 45 per cent, as many housewives have
no wish to take employment outside the home, or if they have, are prevented by house¬
hold duties from doing so. Besides those of normal working age, there are about a
million older men and women still at work. The great majority of the working popula¬
tion work for a wage or salary, but about 1 f million are employers or self-employed.
The total working population is now higher than before the war, but probably lower
than during the middle of hostilities when housewives, including mothers of young
children, manned war factories at great personal inconvenience, while men served in the
armed forces. From the end of the war until mid-1947 the size of the working population
declined as women left industry. At the same time the expansion of the population of
working age, a feature of the British economy for two centuries, slowed down, largely
as a result of the low birth rates of the 1930s, and in the case of women it actually halted.
Further, the raising of the school-leaving age in 1947 removed the 14 age group from the
working population. However, after remaining fairly steady from mid-1948 to mid-1949,
the total working population rose from mid-1949 to the end of 1951, if allowance is made
for seasonal variations. Among the reasons for this rise were the continued increase in the
number of men in the working age groups and the return of a number of women to part-
time or whole-time work. The working population at the end of 1952 was slightly
smaller than at the end of 1951, but rose by more than the normal seasonal variation in the
first half of 1953.
The broad changes in the manpower position in Great Britain between mid-1948 and
the end of June 1953 are shown in Table 26.
Deployment of Labour
Over 40 per cent of those in civil employment are employed in mining and manu¬
facturing and only about 5 per cent in agriculture and fishing. Over half of those in
manufacturing are in the metals, engineering, vehicles and chemicals groups of industries,
whose total labour force has nearly doubled in the last 20 years.
Most industries employ women as well as men, but there are jobs, such as underground
work in coal mines, which are forbidden to women. The industrial groups in which
women are chiefly employed are in the manufacture of textiles, clothing, and food,
drink and tobacco, and in the distributive trades and professional and miscellaneous
services.
An analysis of the total number in civil employment by broad industrial groups is given
in Table 27.
In June 1953 the unemployed constituted 1-4 per cent of insured employees in Great
Britain. Unemployment was mainly short-term. The total number of persons unem¬
ployed for more than six months in Great Britain was about 0-3 per cent of the number of
insured employees. About one-third of these long-term unemployed were men and
214
LABOUR AND MANAGEMENT
215
TABLE 26
General Manpower Position (Great Britain)
(Thousands)
End
June 1948
End
June 1952
End
June 1953
Total Working Population:*
Men
Women ..
Total ..
15,657
7,123
22,780
15,864
7,430
23,294
15,862
7,463
23,325
HM Forces (including Women’s Services):
Men
Women ..
Total ..
807
39
846
848
24
872
841
24
865
Ex-Service men and women on release
leave who have not yet taken up
employment
Registered unemployed:
Wholly unemployed ..
Temporarily stopped ..
Number in civil employment:
Men  
Women ..
Total ..
92
273
9
14,549
7,020
21,569
295
120
14,836
7,283
22,119
265
17
14,841
7,349
22,190
Source: Ministry of Labour and National Service
*The total working population represents the estimated total number of persons aged 15 and over
who work for pay or gain, or register themselves as available for such work. The total comprises
the Forces, men and women on release leave not yet in employment, all persons—employers and
workers on their own account as well as employees—in civil employment (including persons tem¬
porarily laid off but still on the employers’ pay-rolls) and wholly unemployed persons registered for
employment. The figures on the ‘ temporarily stopped ’ line have been excluded from the computa¬
tion of the total working population, as they are already included in civil employment. Part-time
workers are counted as full units.
women over 40 years of age in certain areas where unemployment had been especially
severe between 1921 and 1939 (see p. 9i)-
Unemployment in all areas has been very greatly reduced since the pre-war years both
because of changes in the general economic situation and because of specific measures
taken by the Government to promote a balanced distribution of industry in order to pre¬
vent the recurrence of severe unemployment in the areas previously most seriously affected
(see p. 130).
216
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
TABLE 27
Analysis of Civil Employment (Great Britain)
Industry or Service
End
June 1948
End
(Thousands)
End
June 1952 June 1953
Basic Industries
Coalmining (total manpower)
Other mining and quarrying ..
Gas, electricity and water
Transport and communications
Agriculture and fishing
Total, basic industries
Manufacturing Industries
Chemical and allied trades
Metals, engineering and vehicles
Textiles ..
Clothing
Food, drink and tobacco
Other manufactures
Total, manufacturing industries
Building and contracting
Distributive trades-
Professional, financial and miscellaneous
services ..
Public administration:
National Government Service
Local Government Service
794
82
321
1,787
1,178
4,162
441
3,944
931
649
750
1,422
8,137
1,450
2,484
3,954
682
700
793
82
372
1,759
1,112
4,118
487
4,234
901
660
862
1,482
8,626
1,435
2,616
3,988
606
730
794
82
373
1,726
1,092
4,067
489
4,187
979*
701
872
1,495
8,723
1,448
2,641
3,991
595
725
Total in civil employment
21,569
22,119 22,190
Source: Ministry of Labour and National Service
* Cotton 283,000, wool 219,000, other textiles 477,000.
GOVERNMENT EMPLOYMENT AND TRAINING SERVICES
The provision of employment services has been one of the principal functions of the
Ministry of Labour and National Service since its inception in 1916. Their scope has grad¬
ually been extended to include the provision of vocational guidance, and, in suitable cases,
of vocational training. The Employment and Training Act, 1948, provided a permanent
legislative basis for these wider services. The main services are provided through the
country-wide network of some 1,200 local Employment and Branch Employment Offices.
A small number of special offices deal wholly or mainly with particular types of workers,
e.g., dockers and persons employed in the catering trades. Local Employment Com-
LABOUR AND MANAGEMENT
217
mittees, composed of representatives of employers, workers and other local interests, are
attached to most Employment Exchanges as advisory bodies to secure for the Department
the full benefit of local knowledge and the close co-operation of employers and work¬
people. In addition, an Appointments Service, intended to meet the needs of men and
women who are qualified, or who are likely to qualify, for professional, administrative,
managerial, senior executive and higher technical and scientific posts at home and over¬
seas, is operated by the following offices in Great Britain staffed by officials of the Ministry
of Labour and National Service:
1. The Teclmical and Scientific Register, kept centrally in London, which deals with
professionally qualified scientists, engineers, architects and surveyors.
2. Regional Nursing Appointments Offices (11) and Nursing Appointments Offices
(140), which deal with recruitment for training and employment in nursing, mid¬
wifery, radiography, physiotherapy, occupational therapy and medical laboratory
technical work.
3. Appointments Offices (3) which deal with all other persons qualified for profes¬
sional and higher technical posts; senior executives; ex-regular officers of the armed
forces; and young men suitable for training for management in industry and
commerce.
In normal times there is no compulsion on any job-seeker or on any employer requiring
labour to use these Government services. Since 25th February 1952, however, a Statutory
Order, the Notification of Vacancies Order, 1952, has obliged employers to recruit most
types of ordinary labour through local offices of the Ministry of Labour and National
Service or through employment agencies registered with the Ministry. The main object
of this Order, which is flexible in its application and permits many personal and occupa¬
tional exceptions, is to give employment officers every chance to persuade job-seekers to
undertake work of national importance, e.g., in defence or in the basic industries. This
Order does not give the Ministry any power to direct labour.
General Services for Adults
Local offices and offices of the Appointments Service accept on their registers both
employed and unemployed persons seeking employment. Their primary function is to
introduce suitable persons seeking employment to employers requiring employees, thus
providing an efficient service to employers and job-seekers and meeting the needs of the
national economy.
The appointments offices also operate a scheme for financing short business courses for
suitable ex-regular Service men and women, and provide a Careers Advice Service for
suitably qualified men and women of 18 and over on the choice of a career. This service
is particularly valuable to young graduates and other suitable young men and women who
have just finished their National Service:
A special responsibility of the local offices is recruitment under the Vocational Training
Schemes. Two of these schemes—that for the disabled and that for men and women who
need this kind of help if they are to obtain suitable employment after a voluntary period
of service in the regular armed forces—are directed to the resettlement of the individual
and cover a comprehensive range of skilled trades from agriculture to watch and clock
repair, from radio servicing to clerical work. Unemployed men and women have also
been recruited for this wide range of trades in some circumstances. The third Vocational
Training Scheme is directed to the filling of urgent vacancies in industries which arc
important to the national economy and which at the same time suffer from shortages of
skilled labour. Any suitable man or woman without an employable skill is recruited under
this scheme, which includes 20 to 30 skilled courses including agriculture, engineering and
draughtsmanship.
p
218
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Training under all these schemes is given mainly at Government Training Centres, of
which there are 16 in dift'erent parts of the country, and for some trades in technical
colleges or in an employer’s establishment. Courses last normally for six months. Main¬
tenance allowances are paid during training, and men and women with dependants
receive higher rates. These maintenance allowances are higher than the rate for unemploy¬
ment benefit. During the period from the beginning of the post-war training scheme on
2nd July 1945 to 22nd June 1953 the number of trainees placed in employment was
109,203.
Training schemes for particular groups of crafts have been drawn up in consultation
with representatives of employers and workers, who have agreed that trainees should be
accepted in industry for work which makes full use of the knowledge acquired during
the course. In trades where it is usual for the employee to provide his own tools he is
given these free on taking up a job in his training trade. The job itself is found whenever
possible by the Employment Exchange (local office).
Other Services
The Ministry of Labour and National Service is also responsible for two specialized
employment services: the Youth Employment Service and the Disablement Resettle¬
ment Service.
Youth Employment Service
The purpose of the Youth Employment Service is to help young people leaving school
and young workers under 18 to get a good start in their working life.
The service is under the general direction of the Central Youth Employment Executive,
staffed by officers of the Ministry of Labour and National Service, the Ministry of Educa¬
tion and the Scottish Education Department. This joint executive is appointed by the
Minister of Labour and National Service, who is responsible to Parliament for the Youth
Employment Service as a whole. The Minister has appointed a National Youth Employ¬
ment Council and separate Advisory Committees for Scotland and Wales to advise him
on questions relating to the service.
Locally the service is operated in most areas through Youth Employment Offices
established by Local Education Authorities (in Scotland by Education Authorities) in
accordance with the schemes submitted by them to the Minister of Labour and National
Service and approved by him. In those areas where such schemes are not in operation the
service is operated by the local office of the Ministry of Labour and National Service.
The main functions of the service are to collect and disseminate careers information,
provide talks in schools, give vocational guidance, help to find suitable employment and
keep contact with young workers to assist them in settling down. Local Youth Employ¬
ment Committees, made up of teachers, employers, workers and other appropriate
interests, assist the service in an advisory capacity.
Disablement Resettlement Service
The Disabled Persons (Employment) Act, 1944, on which all the Ministry’s work for
disabled persons is based, declares its purpose to be ‘to make further and better provision
for enabling persons handicapped by disablement to secure employment or work on their
own account’, and the Disablement Resettlement Service is designed to help disabled
persons to get and keep suitable work. The service is available to all persons over school¬
leaving age who are substantially handicapped as a result of injury, disease or congenital
deformity.
The Ministry of Labour and National Service is responsible for the administration of
the service. At each of its 1,200 local offices a Disablement Resettlement Officer, working
under the direction of the Manager and in co-operation with other officers, has the
LABOUR AND MANAGEMENT
219
special duty of advising and assisting disabled persons in obtaining suitable employment.
This officer is in touch with all hospitals in his area and visits any patient who wishes to
discuss the question of his future employment. His work involves close co-operation with
doctors, local authorities and voluntary welfare agencies.
There is also a Disablement Resettlement Officer with similar functions at each of the
three appointments offices.
The help given by the service falls under four main headings:
1. Vocational Guidance. This is given at local offices by Disablement Resettlement
Officers in consultation as necessary with the local Disablement Advisory Committees or
Medical Interviewing Committees, and also by vocational psychologists in the Industrial
Rehabilitation Units (see paragraph 3).
2. Placing in Ordinary Competitive Employment. On the basis of a disabled person’s
qualifications and aptitudes and with medical guidance, the Disablement Resettlement
Officer endeavours to find work most suitable for the individual, either directly or after a
course of industrial rehabilitation or vocational training. To a limited extent this is
facilitated by the main provision of the Disabled Persons Employment Act, 1944, namely,
that all employers of more than 20 persons are bound by law to employ a quota (at
present 3 per cent for almost all industries) of registered disabled persons. Registration is
voluntary. The number of disabled persons registered was 851,690 at 20th July 1953 and of
these 44,411 were considered to be capable of ordinary employment but were unem¬
ployed. This figure is estimated as about 5-6 per cent of the total number of registered
disabled persons capable of ordinary competitive employment.
3. Industrial Rehabilitation and Vocational Training. Industrial rehabilitation is provided
at residential and non-residential units run by the Ministry of Labour and National Service
where physical and mental toning-up is given and, for those who need it, vocational
guidance as to the best kind of employment to take up.
As indicated on page 217-8 there are vocational training facilities for the disabled at
Government Training Centres, educational institutions and employers’ establishments.
For the more seriously disabled, however, there are special residential training colleges
run by voluntary organizations with the financial assistance and technical help of the
Ministry of Labour and National Service. There are also arrangements for the training of
special categories of disabled persons such as the blind.
4. Sheltered Employment. Remploy Ltd. (see p. 53), a non-profit-making company set
up and financed by the Ministry of Labour and National Service, operated 90 factories
employing over 6,175 severely disabled persons on 23rd June 1953.
Facilities for the employment of blind persons are provided by local authorities directly
or through voluntary bodies, with the financial assistance of the Ministry of Labour and
National Service. At the end of June 1953 there were 69 workshops for the blind in which
there were 4,262 blind persons in training or employment. In addition, where necessary,
the Ministry helped to finance the provision of training or employment for about 915
severely disabled sighted persons in 39 workshops provided by 31 voluntary undertakings.
TERMS OF EMPLOYMENT AND WORKING CONDITIONS
Today, minimum standards have been established by statute or collective agreement for
both the terms and conditions of employment and the working conditions of the sub¬
stantial majority of British workers. The fixing of terms and conditions of employment,
however, involves quite different principles, methods and machinery from the determina¬
tion of working conditions. Terms and conditions of employment of the majority of
220
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
workers are determined by collective agreements between employers’ associations and
trade unions, and the fixing by statute of minimum wages and terms of employment is
confined to those trades or industries where the organization of employers or workers or
both is inadequate to negotiate collective agreements and ensure their observance.
Minimum standards for working conditions on the other hand are laid down by statute,
e.g., the Factories Acts, 1937 and 1948, and it is the duty of Government Inspectors to
enforce the statutory regulations. These Acts of Parliament and statutory regulations pre¬
scribe minimum standards of safety, health and welfare for most classes of workers, and
regulate hours of work for women and young persons. In a few exceptional cases addi¬
tional health, safety or welfare requirements have been the subject of collective agreement.
Many employers provide working conditions superior to those prescribed by statute
or agreement. Certain Government Departments and various voluntary bodies advise and
assist in maintaining these standards.
Labour Relations
The structure of labour relations in Britain is established mainly on a voluntary basis,
and rests on the organization of employers and workers into employers’ associations and
trade unions. These organizations1 discuss and negotiate terms and conditions of employ¬
ment and other matters affecting the workpeople at their work. In some cases these nego¬
tiations are conducted simply by ad hoc meetings, which are held when necessary; in other
cases voluntary joint machinery has been established on a permanent basis. Normally these
arrangements suffice to settle all questions which are raised, but provision is often made for
matters not so settled to be referred for settlement to independent arbitration. In certain
trades where the voluntary organization of employers and workers is not adequate for the
effective regulation of the workers’ remuneration, provision has also been made by die
State for this to be done by machinery set up under the Wages Councils Acts, 1945 to
1948, the Catering Wages Act, 1943, the Agricultural Wages Act, 1948, and the Agricul¬
tural Wages (Scotland) Act, 1949.
Employers Organizations
Many employers in Great Britain are members of employers’ associations, some of
which have their origins in the nineteenth century. They are generally organized on
an ‘industry basis’—some being purely local in character and dealing with a section of
an industry only, while others have a national scope and concern themselves with the
whole of an industry. In some cases the local associations are organized into district or
national federations.
The central organ of employers’ associations is the British Employers’ Confederation, to
which the majority of employers’ associations and federations in the principal industries
are affiliated. It deals with matters affecting the interests of organized employers in their
relations with their workpeople, and is recognized by the Government as the principal
channel of consultation between Government Departments and representatives of
organized employers as a whole on all such matters.
Trade Unions
A large number of workers in industry, in agriculture and in public services such as
transport are organized into trade unions. These have grown up gradually and indepen¬
dently over a great many years, and consequently their form and organization vary con¬
siderably. Organization started more than two hundred years ago among the skilled
craftsmen and spread later to the general labouring and unskilled classes. More recently
1The few monopolist employers—the central Government and the public corporations operating
the nationalized industries—negotiate with the trade unions representing their different types of
employees.
LABOUR AND MANAGEMENT
221
there has been a growth of organization among clerical, supervisory, technical and
administrative workers.
At the end of 1951 the total membership of British trade unions was 9,480,000. There
were 704 separate trade unions, but 67 per cent of all trade unionists were in 17 big unions.
Some of the unions cover a single craft or group of crafts, although their members may
be employed in a variety of industries; others cover the workpeople in a particular
industry or range of industries. In the case of the large general workers’ unions the range
of industries covered is very wide. Each union is an autonomous body with its own organi¬
zation, the basis of which is the local branch or lodge. The branch elects officers and
committees and deals with all matters which can be dealt with locally.1 Matters of wider
interest are dealt with by the union’s district or national bodies, which decide the policy
of the union and may engage in joint discussions with the employers’ associations in the
industries in which its members are employed.
The central organ of the trade union movement is the Trades Union Congress and the
great majority of trade unionists belong to unions affiliated to it. An annual congress of
delegates from affiliated unions settles its general policy. The General Council elected
annually by the Congress conducts its business between congresses.
The Trades Union Congress is recognized by the Government as the principal channel
of consultation between the Government Departments and representatives of organized
workers over the country as a whole on matters affecting their interests. There is a
separate Scottish Trades Union Congress.
Voluntary Joint Negotiating Machinery
At National Level. While in some cases all matters affecting terms and conditions of em¬
ployment are discussed on an ad hoc basis between the employers’ organizations and the
trade unions concerned, in other industries there are standard procedures for dealing with
such matters by joint discussion at a national level. In many industries there are, for this
purpose, bodies composed of representatives of both sides of the industry with, in some
cases, an independent chairman. Some are known as Joint Industrial Councils, of which
there are about 130.2 Their functions vary considerably, some being merely wage-negotia¬
ting bodies, while others deal with a wide range of subjects affecting the interests of the
industry concerned. Provision is usually made in the constitution of such bodies that where
it is not found possible to reach agreed terms of settlement in a particular dispute, the
matter should be referred to some form of arbitration, including the methods provided
under the Conciliation Act, 1896, or the Industrial Courts Act, 1919 (see p. 222).
At District and Factory Level. Similar arrangements exist at district and factory level in
many industries, where matters are discussed either between the appropriate representa¬
tives of the two sides on an ad hoc basis, or through regular machinery provided by District
Joint Industrial Councils or similar bodies and Works Councils. Such bodies discuss how
agreements reached at a national level may be applied to their district or factory, but as a
rule have no power to alter the terms of such national agreements. They also discuss new
problems which may arise, and if no solution can be found at factory or district level the
matter may be referred to the national body.
Statutory Wage-Regulating Machinery
In certain industries in which, owing to the lack of organization among employers and
workers, voluntary negotiating arrangements do not exist for the effective settlement of
terms and conditions of employment or are inadequate to secure their observance by
1Branches of various trade unions in a locality often voluntarily affiliate to a local trades council.
2The corresponding bodies in national and local Government service are known as Whitley
Councils (see pp. 49 and 61), named after Mr. J. H. Whitley, former Speaker of the House of Commons
and chairman of a committee which investigated industrial unrest in 1916 to 1919.
222
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
voluntary methods throughout the industry, statutory bodies known as Wages Councils,
Catering Wages Boards and Agricultural Wages Boards have been set up. These are com¬
posed of equal numbers of representatives of employers and workers in the respective
industries, with the addition of certain independent members. Wages Councils and Cater¬
ing Wages Boards are empowered to submit proposals for the fixing of minimum re¬
muneration and holidays with pay to the Minister of Labour and National Service, who
is then required by the Acts concerned to make Orders giving statutory force to such pro¬
posals, subject only to his right to return them to the Board or Council for further
consideration.
Orders relative to employment in agriculture are made by the appropriate Agricultural
Wages Board (England and Wales or Scotland) and are effective only in the County
Agricultural Wages Committee area in respect of which such Orders have been made.
State Provision for Conciliation, Arbitration and Investigation
Under authority derived from the Conciliation Act, 1896, and the Industrial Courts
Act, 1919, the Minister of Labour and National Service has certain powers to assist
industry to settle disputes which it is not found possible to resolve through an industry’s
own machinery and procedure. These powers are all intended to supplement and not to
supersede the industry’s own machinery.
To assist concihation in industry a staff of conciliation officers forms part of the Ministry
of Labour and National Service. Their duties are to keep in touch with the course of
relations between employers and workers at national, district, and, in some cases, factory
level, and to assist them, if requested, to settle their problems by joint discussion and
negotiation.
Disputes which cannot be settled in this way may, at the request of both parties, be
referred to voluntary arbitration, either by a single arbitrator, or an ad hoc Board of Arbi¬
tration, or by the Industrial Court, a permanent tribunal established under the Industrial
Courts Act. At present, provision is also made by an order under emergency legislation
for disputes and ‘issues’1 about wages, hours, etc., to be reported to the Minister in certain
circumstances by one of the parties, and to be referred, if all other means of settlement
have been exhausted, to an Industrial Disputes Tribunal, whose award is legally binding.
This tribunal consists of a chairman and two other independent members appointed by
the Minister of Labour and National Service together with one member representing em¬
ployers and one representing workpeople. These representatives are drawn from panels
appointed by the Minister after consultation with the British Employers’ Confederation
and the Trades Union Congress respectively.
If a dispute occurs, or is expected, which is not susceptible of settlement by any of the
above methods, the Minister may also appoint a Court of Inquiry or Committee of Inves¬
tigation. These are primarily means of informing public opinion of the facts of a dispute:
the report of a Court of Inquiry has to be laid before Parliament. Although the recom¬
mendations contained in the reports of such bodies are not binding on the parties, they
usually provide the basis of a settlement of the difference.
Liaison between the Government and Industry
As will be seen from the foregoing paragraphs, the Government is in contact with
representatives of employers and workers at all levels on matters affecting their common
interests. At local and district level the concihation officers of the Ministry of Labour and
National Service keep in touch with the representatives of both sides of industry, while at
national level officers of the Department attend the meetings of many Joint Industrial
1A dispute concerns the terms of employment or conditions of labour of workmen. An issue con¬
cerns the duty of an employer to observe the terms of an agreement or other ‘recognized terms and
conditions’ in his trade or industry.
LABOUR AND MANAGEMENT
223
Councils as liaison officers. Standing arrangements also exist for consultation between the
Government and the British Employers’ Confederation and Trades Union Congress
through machinery provided by the National Joint Advisory Council on which both bodies
are represented under the chairmanship of the Minister of Labour and National Service.
Joint Consultation in Industry at Factory Level
In addition to the arrangements already described, the purpose of which is mainly but
not exclusively for discussion and settlement of terms and conditions of employment,
there are, in many industries, national agreements which provide for the establishment, in
firms of sufficient size, of machinery for joint consultation between management and
workers on problems of common interest. In some industries the constitution and functions
of Joint Advisory Consultative Committees or, in some cases, of Joint Production Com¬
mittees are laid down in the agreement. In other industries where no national agreement
on the subject has been reached the practice of joint consultation in the factory is becoming
increasingly widespread.
The range of subjects which Joint Committees can fruitfully discuss is wide and includes
hours of work (within the framework of agreements), safety, efficiency of production,
absenteeism, labour turnover, training, education, recreation and employees’ services
generally. The constitution and functions of these committees vary widely from one indus¬
try to another. It is the practice, however, to exclude from their scope all questions relating
to wages and conditions of employment, and other matters covered by negotiation
between organizations of employers and workers. It is the policy of the Government to
foster the development of voluntary joint consultation throughout industry, not only
because of its effect on production but also as a most important means of maintaining good
relationships between management and employees.
At individual factory level, Personnel Management Advisers of the Ministry of Labour
and National Service are often approached by firms seeking advice on the establishment of
Joint Committees or on ways in which their activities can be made more effective.
Working Conditions: the Legislative Background
Protective legislation in mines, factories and industrial work-places generally is detailed
and comprehensive and its enforcement strict, and a certain amount of protective legisla¬
tion exists in non-industrial occupations.
Local authorities have power to regulate the provision of suitable sanitary conveniences
in houses and at places of work and to treat work-places which are dirty or dangerously ill-
ventilated or overcrowded as nuisances whose abatement can be enforced. They have also
wide powers to regulate hours and conditions of employment of children in their areas
within the limits laid down by national legislation. The general effect of the national legis¬
lation is to forbid the employment of children under 13, to forbid the employment of
children between the ages of 13 and 15 during school hours on school days, or between
8 p.m. and 6 a.m. on any day, or for more than two hours on school days or Sundays.
The Shops Act, 1950, empowers local authorities to ensure that all shops in their area
have proper ventilation, temperature, lighting, sanitary and washing facilities, and that
they observe the requirements of the Act with regard to closing hours, meal intervals and
holidays.
Certain industrial premises (factories, shipyards, docks, etc.) come under the Factories
Acts, 1937 and 1948, which are administered by the Ministry of Labour and National
Service and enforced by the Factory Inspectorate, which is part of the Ministry.
The Acts lay down general requirements with regard to safety, such as the fencing and
proper maintenance of machinery, lifting appliances and steam boilers and other pressure
vessels; sound construction and proper maintenance of floors, passages and stairs and safe
means of access to working-places; and the prevention of escape of dangerous fumes and
dust into the workroom. They also lay down general requirements with regard to health
224
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and welfare, e.g., with regard to cleanliness, the provision of sanitary accommodation,
cubic space per worker, temperature, ventilation, lighting, washing facilities, accommoda¬
tion for outdoor clothing, drinking water and provision of seats.
Any person intending to use premises as a factory has to notify the Inspector of Factories
of his intention not less than one month before he begins to occupy them. All young per¬
sons under 18 years of age must be medically examined by doctors appointed by the Chief
Inspector of Factories on entry to employment in factories, docks, or at building opera¬
tions, and must be re-examined annually. The hours permissible to be worked by women
and young persons between the ages of 16 and 18 are limited to 48 in a week and 9 in a
day, although some overtime is allowed (up to six hours a week for not more than 100
hours a year). Young persons under 16 are limited to 44 hours a week. Adequate intervals
for meals must be arranged for women and young persons and the employment of women
and girls by night is, in general, prohibited.
These general requirements for safety, health and welfare may be supplemented or
modified by regulations dealing with special risks or conditions in particular industries,
processes, establishments or machines.
In mines and quarries there are elaborate safety codes dealing with underground
ventilation, support of underground workings, windings and haulage, alternative exits,
explosive risks, rescue squads and first aid, competency examinations for managers,
surveyors and inspectors, and the detailed conduct of operations. The employment of
women and children underground has been forbidden since 1842.
These codes are laid down in the Mines and Quarries Acts, for the administration of
which the Ministry of Fuel and Power is generally responsible, while the Mines and
Quarries Inspectorate, which is part of that Ministry, is directly responsible for their
enforcement.
Working Conditions in Practice
Earnings
Standard minimum time rates for British manual workers vary mainly between 2s. 6d.
and 3s. 6d. per hour for men, and between is. pd. and 2s. 6d. for women. These basic time
rates are not, however, an accurate guide to average earnings. Higher time rates are some¬
times paid, and piece rates, shift rates and overtime rates raise the level of average earnings.
The Ministry of Labour and National Service conducts a six-monthly survey of earnings
and hours of work in some of the principal British industries. The survey for April 1953
covered about six and a half million workers and showed the average hourly earnings in
all the industries covered to be as follows:
Men 21 years and over ..
Youths and boys under 21 years
Women 18 years and over
Girls under 18 years
All workers
Average weekly earnings were:
Men
Youths
Women ..
Girls
All workers
3s. 10-7d.
Is. 8-9d.
2s. 4-6d.
Is. 5-6d.
3s. 4-9d.
185s. lid.
77s. 7d.
100s. 3d.
62s. 6d.
157s. 7d.
The principal industries not covered by this survey were agriculture, where the average
weekly earnings for regular adult male workers were 133s. 2d. in the year April 1952 to
March 1953; coalmining, where, according to information collected by the National Coal
LABOUR AND MANAGEMENT
225
Board, the average weekly cash earnings for men were 246s. id. plus 11s. pd. in kind, in
April 1953; railway services, in which average weekly earnings in April 1952 of men
in the wages grades were 165s. 4d. (men’s wage rates have since been increased by 7s. per
week up to September 1953); and dock labour, in which average weekly earnings of dock
workers employed by the National Dock Labour Board for April to June 1953 were
209s. 3d.
Hours of Work
While, as already stated, the hours of work of women and young persons between the
ages of 16 and 18 are limited by law to 48 a week and those of young persons under 16
to 44 a week, normal hours of work for all ages and sexes are usually shorter. Agreed
weekly hours mainly vary between 42 and 46, averaging between 44 and 45, and may be
worked either as a five- or a five-and-a-half-day week according to the industry and the
rule of the particular establishment. Hours actually worked are somewhat longer owing
to overtime working. The survey conducted by the Ministry of Labour and National
Service in April 1953 into earnings and hours showed that average weekly hours actually
worked were as follows:
Men  47-8 hours
Youths and boys.. .. .. .. .. . ■ • • 44-5 „
Women .. .. .. .. .. .. .. • • 42-0 „
Girls .. .. .. .. .. . • • • • • 42*7 „
All workers .. .. .. .. .. .. •• 46-2 „
Holidays with Pay
In addition to six statutory public holidays nearly all employees have at least one week’s
holiday with pay each year, and the majority have at least two weeks.
Safety
Safety depends in practice at least as much on the education of the worker as upon safety
regulations. The Accident Prevention Movement, a voluntary educational campaign, is
strongly supported by the Factory, and the Mines and Quarries, Inspectorates. Inspectors
inquire into safety problems, including the safety aspects of machine design and specifi¬
cation, circulate expert advice by personal exhortation, lectures and literature, and en¬
courage the appointment of Safety Officers and the formation of Accident Prevention
Committees. A Safety, Health and Welfare Museum in London is maintained by the
Ministry of Labour and National Service.
In road, rail and air transport most of the work is outside the jurisdiction of the Factory
Inspectorate, but elaborate safety codes are laid down by the various transport authorities.
The Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents helps the Accident Prevention Move¬
ment by providing posters and pamphlets and by organizing training courses for safety
officers.
Fatal industrial accidents have tended to diminish during the twentieth century in spite
of the increase in the number of persons employed. Such accidents rose somewhat in fac¬
tories during the early years of the second world war. Since then, however, there has been
a further decline. Fatal industrial accidents in 1952 number 1,617; of these 472 were in
mines and quarries, 804 in establishments under the Factories Acts, 196 in railway service,
and 145 on ships registered in the United Kingdom.
Health and Welfare
Many employers achieve health and welfare standards higher than those prescribed by
law. An increasing number of firms in Britain provide a whole-time or part-time doctor,
an industrial nurse, and a canteen with hot meals, pay part or all of the cost of clubs and
226
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
sports grounds, and operate retirement and sickness insurance schemes supplementing
National Insurance benefits. Some have their own rehabilitation centres or support con¬
valescent homes.
Health and welfare standards vary from one factory to another. Between a third and a
half of the factory workers of the country are employed by small firms employing less
than 250 workers, and many of these find it hard to spare the management time and the
funds needed to improve employee services.
The amenities provided by large factories depend partly on the employees’ needs and
desires. The requirements of a factory where the work is safe and easy, and many em¬
ployees are women or young persons, are different from those of engineering or steel
works, where work is arduous, dirty and dangerous, and undertaken mainly by men.
Progressive firms are careful to find out what their employees want, and welfare policy
is often decided in consultation with the workers, whether through regular consultative
machinery or by other means.
In the coalmining industry, the National Coal Board has begun to strengthen the
medical services which existed before nationalization. Chief Divisional and Area Medical
Officers have been appointed, and doctors are being appointed to the larger collieries and
to groups of collieries. Medical centres with proper accommodation and the services of
doctors and registered nurses are being set up at the pithead.
A number of official and voluntary bodies help to supply the research, advice and assist¬
ance necessary for developing higher standards of industrial health and welfare. These
bodies include, besides the Factory and the Mines and Quarries Inspectorates, such
Government agencies as the Medical Research Council (see p. 267-8) (with its subsidiary,
the Industrial Health Research Board), the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research (including the National Physical Laboratory) (see p. 267), and the Government
Chemist; the Departments of Industrial Health and Social Medicine of the Universities;
such voluntary bodies as the Central Council for Health Education, and the Industrial
Welfare Society; and the research and personnel departments of various large industrial
concerns. Co-ordination is provided by a number of general and special committees.
Personnel Management
Growing realization of the important part played by social and psychological factors in
industrial relations has recently led to more widespread interest in all aspects of personnel
management and to the establishment of more personnel departments. Between 1939 and
1944 the number of whole-time personnel managers and welfare officers increased from
about 1,500 to 6,000, and this increase seems to have continued since, though perhaps
more slowly. While the form of organization of personnel departments varies, the
personnel officer is generally responsible for advising all levels of management on the
development of good industrial relations. This officer also has particular duties with regard
to recruitment, selection, education and training, transfer of labour, the application of
wage agreements, the promotion of joint consultation and the supervision of working
conditions and employee services.
In 1945 the Ministry of Labour and National Service established a Personnel Manage¬
ment Advisory Service which has done much to promote good personnel management
and to assist firms by discussing problems of personnel policy. The service is staffed by a
team of skilled and experienced Personnel Management Advisers.
X. SOCIAL WELFARE
STATE AND VOLUNTARY SERVICES
In Britain the State is now directly responsible, through either central or local govern¬
ment authorities, for a range of services covering subsistence for the needy, education and
health services for all, housing, employment or maintenance, the care of the aged and
the handicapped, and the nutrition of mothers and children, besides sickness and industrial
injury benefits, widows’ and retirement pensions and children’s allowances. Public authori¬
ties in Great Britain are spending some -£2,000 million a year on social services; and
Exchequer expenditure on social services amounts to over a quarter of total central
Government expenditure.
Voluntary organizations were the pioneers of nearly all of the social services. They
provided schools, hospitals, clinics, dispensaries, and social and recreational clubs before
these were provided by the State. They made themselves responsible for the welfare of
the very young and the very old, the homeless and the handicapped, before it was
generally accepted that the whole community had a responsibility towards these people.
Where the services and the facilities they provided were good, they have been encouraged
to continue. The State now supplements these voluntary services and provides financial
assistance, sees that essential services are brought within the reach of every citizen, and
ensures that the necessary standards are maintained.
Many voluntary social services still surround and supplement the State services. The
two types are not competitive but complementary and merge into each other. The State
services often work through voluntary agencies specially adapted to serve individual or
special needs. For example, the welfare work of the National Assistance Board is supple¬
mented by the work of many voluntary social service societies with whose workers the
Board’s officers co-operate; while State institutional provision for the chronic sick and
aged is supplemented by voluntary homes of various types for the care of the sick and
elderly, most of whom receive State pensions or benefit, or are directly maintained by
public authorities.
Voluntary Bodies
The number of voluntary charitable societies and institutions in Britain runs into
thousands. Some of them are large and some are small and local in character. Some have
general aims, and others, such as the National Institute for the Blind, have been established
for a particular purpose. The societies co-operate with each other and with local authori¬
ties engaged on the same work.
Foremost among societies providing general social service are the National Council of
Social Service and the Family Welfare Association. The National Council of Social Service
was established in 1919 to create a closer link between the machinery of government and
the voluntary activities of the ordinary citizen. The Family Welfare Association, formerly
the Charity Organization Society, founded in 1869, works on personal lines to help any
individual or family in need or difficulty. It has a number of District Committees in
London, and, affiliated to it, about 60 family casework agencies in the provinces.
There is a Central Council for the Care of Cripples, and the major societies caring for
homeless children, such as Doctor Barnardo’s Homes and the Church of England Chil¬
dren’s Society, are represented on the National Council of Associated Children’s Homes.
Other examples of co-ordination in a specialized field are the National Association for
227
228
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Mental Health, the Women’s Group on Public Welfare and the National Marriage
Guidance Council.
Societies working on a national scale whose social work is definitely religious in
inspiration include the Salvation Army, the Church Army, the Church of England
Children’s Society, the Church of England Moral Welfare Council, the Young Men’s
Christian Association, the Young Women’s Christian Association, die Society of St.
Vincent de Paul, the Crusade of Rescue, the Jewish Board of Guardians and the Catholic
Marriage Advisory Council.
War-time organizations such as die Women’s Voluntary Services and the Citizens’
Advice Bureaux (there are still about 480 of these bureaux) are finding scope, with official
support, for their activities in post-war Britain. The Citizens’ Advice Bureaux act as inter¬
preters between the Government Departments and the ordinary citizen, and though the
inquiries are somewhat fewer now than during the war more skill and time are often
needed for their solution. WVS activities are many and various. They include welfare
work for children, the aged and the sick, and for certain foreign workers.
The old-established British Red Cross Society not only aids the sick and wounded in
time of war but works in peace time for ‘the improvement of health, the prevention of
disease, and the mitigation of suffering’. It is, in particular, developing its welfare services
for civilian disabled, invalid and crippled children and the aged. The members of the
St. John Ambulance Brigade and, in Scotland, the St. Andrew’s Ambulance Association
hkewise render voluntary auxiliary medical services and undertake welfare work for the
sick and the infirm.
Old People s Welfare
Voluntary bodies also take a large share in the work for old people that has been steadily
expanding since the war brought into prominence the problems of old people’s welfare
that social and population changes had already begun to accentuate.
Hostels for bombed-out or evacuated old people have been followed by permanent
homes where old people can live together in happiness and comfort however small their
means. Voluntary homes of this kind now number over 700. More than 2,500 social clubs
for elderly people have been started in recent years in all parts of Britain. The regular
visiting of lonely old people and the delivery of cooked meals to their homes (‘meals-on-
wheels’) are other welfare services that are being developed by voluntary effort with State
support.
Local Old People’s Welfare Committees are formed by those concerned in this work,
and are aided by the National Old People’s Welfare Committee, an associated group of
die National Council of Social Service, widely representative of voluntary and statutory
bodies having direct contact with old people. A National Corporation for the Care of Old
People was established in 1947 by the Nuffield Foundation and the Lord Mayor’s Air Raid
Distress Fund to stimulate and to give financial support to schemes for the welfare of the
aged, to establish and demand desirable standards for old people’s homes, to maintain an
expert technical advisory service, and to encourage and to undertake research and experi¬
ment for the welfare of old people.
The Social Worker
While the voluntary worker giving full- or part-time service has done pioneer work in
many of Britain’s social services and continues to play an essential part in probably every
service, social services of all kinds increasingly depend for their operation primarily on the
professional social worker, that is, the full-time salaried worker trained in the principles
and technique of social service. Training for many forms of social work consists of a basic
university diploma or certificate course in social science followed by a specialized training
for a particular service. The latter is usually organized by the profession concerned.
SOCIAL WELFARE
229
Voluntary organizations have been pioneers in the employment and training of social
workers, but it is a significant fact that central Government Departments and local
authorities are employing trained social workers in greater numbers and in more services.
Such workers include regional and local welfare officers, children’s care organizers,
children’s officers for work under the Children Act, 1948, family case workers, neighbour¬
hood workers, youth leaders, almoners, mental health workers, psychiatric social workers,
tuberculosis care workers, housing managers, personnel managers, probation officers, and
moral welfare workers; in fact, representatives of all branches of social work.
NATIONAL INSURANCE AND ASSISTANCE
National Insurance, together with Industrial Injuries Insurance, Family Allowances and
National Assistance constitute a system of social security in the United Kingdom which
ensures that in no circumstances need anyone fall below a minimum standard of life. The
Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance administers the first three of these measures as
well as administering pensions and welfare services for war pensioners and their depen¬
dants (see p. 40).
The Poor Relief Act of 1601 can be regarded as the starting-point of public provision
for social security in England and Wales. From the beginning of the present century, and
particularly after the Royal Commission on the Poor Laws and Relief of Distress had
reported in 1909, there was a strong movement against the form and spirit of the poor
law, which was finally superseded by the National Assistance Act, 1948. At the same time
there was a development of compulsory insurance administered on a national basis. In
1912 came the National Health Insurance scheme and with it the introduction of the con¬
tributory principle on which all later measures have been based. In return for a small
weekly contribution it provided a small cash payment and medical treatment without
charge during sickness. It applied only to a limited number of die lower-paid workers. In
1912 also began a limited scheme of unemployment insurance, which was extended in
1920 to cover the great majority of employed persons, a very necessary provision in view
of the large-scale unemployment of the inter-war years. In 1926 contributory pensions for
old people, widows and orphans were introduced.
By the beginning of the second world war the social services in Britain were among
the best in the world, but they lacked co-ordination by the very fact of their piecemeal
development, and they were not universal. A comprehensive, co-ordinated and unified
plan for social security was needed.
Under the stimulus of war, when plans for post-war reconstruction were being
formulated. Lord (then Sir William) Beveridge was invited by the National Government
to investigate the country’s existing social insurance system. In 1942 the Beveridge Report
was published and recommended the creation of a comprehensive and unified system of
social insurance. The report aroused intense interest and was accepted in general by the
Government as the basis on which the future social security structure should be built.
Family Allowances Acts, 1945 and 1952
The Family Allowances scheme was the first part of the new system to be introduced.
It started on 6th August 1946 and provided an allowance of 5s. a week for every child in
the family, after the elder or eldest, below school-leaving age, now usually 15 years. The
rate was raised to 8s. a week in September I952> under the Family Allowances and
National Insurance Act, 1952. The allowance may be paid up to 31st July following the
16th birthday where the child continues in full-time education or becomes an apprentice.
Family allowances are paid from the Exchequer and their object is to benefit die family as
a whole.
At the beginning of 1953 some 4,800,000 family allowances were being paid to more
than diree million families in Great Britain. In Northern Ireland over 100,000 families
were receiving between them more than 210,000 allowances.
230 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
National Insurance Acts, 1946 to 1953
The National Insurance Act, 1946, came into full operation on the 5th July 1948. It has
been amended by the National Insurance Acts, 1949 and 1951, the Family Allowances and
National Insurance Act, 1952, and the National Insurance Act, 1953. The Acts apply, in
general, to everyone over school-leaving age living in Great Britain. There are similar
schemes in Northern Ireland and the Isle of Man.
Contributors are divided into three classes:
Class 1—Employed persons. Those who work for an employer under a contract of
service or are paid apprentices—about 2i£ million.
Class 2—Self-employed persons. Those in business on their own account and others who
are working for gain but do not work under the control of an employer—about
i£ million.
Class 3—Non-employed persons. All insured persons who are not in Class 1 or 2—about
half a million.
This general classification is subject to certain modifications, made by regulations, to
meet special circumstances. Married women engaged only in their own household duties
are, in general, provided for by their husbands’ insurance and cannot become insured in
their own right unless they were insured under the old scheme at the 5th July 1948, or
have since taken up paid work. Students undergoing full-time education and unpaid
apprentices need not pay contributions. Up to the age of 18, contributions are credited to
them. Over that age they may, if they wish, pay as non-employed persons (Class 3). Self-
employed and non-employed persons whose income is not more than ^104 a year can
claim exception from liability to pay contributions under the scheme.
Contributions
The main weekly rates of contribution from October 1952 are shown in Table 28.
TABLE 28
These contributions, which the Exchequer supplements from general taxation, are paid
on a single contribution card by National Insurance stamps bought from a post office. It
is the employer’s responsibility in the first place to see that the Class 1 contributions are
paid, but he can deduct the employee’s share from his or her wages. The self-employed
and non-employed must stamp their own cards. Contributions are usually credited for
weeks of unemployment, sickness or injury, or if widow’s benefit is being paid.
SOCIAL WELFARE
231
Benefits
The scheme provides sickness, unemployment, maternity and widow’s benefit,
guardian’s allowance, retirement pension and death grant. Industrial injuries benefits are
paid under the National Insurance (Industrial Injuries) Acts, 1946 to 1953 (see p. 232).
Persons in Class 1 are covered for all benefits; those in Class 2 for benefits other than
unemployment and industrial injuries benefits; and those in Class 3 for benefits other than
sickness, unemployment and industrial injuries benefits, and maternity allowance.
For most of the benefits there are two contribution conditions. First, before any benefit
can be paid, a minimum number of contributions must actually have been paid since entry
into insurance; secondly, the full rate of benefit cannot be paid unless a certain number of
contributions have been paid or credited over a specified period.
For guardian’s allowance and industrial injuries benefits there are no contribution
conditions.
Sickness Benefit. The standard weekly rate for a man or woman over 18 (except a
married woman) is 32s. 6d., with an increase of 21s. 6d. for an adult dependant and 10s. 6d.
a week for the first or only child under school-leaving age, with 2s. 6d., in addition to any
family allowance payable, for each subsequent child. The weekly rate for a married
woman is 22s., but she is paid at the 32s. 6d. rate if she is maintaining an invalid husband or
is separated from her husband and cannot get financial support from him.
Unless 156 Class 1 or 2 contributions have been paid at some time, sickness benefit can
be drawn only for a year, but in general it continues for as long as sickness lasts once 156
contributions have been paid.
Unemployment Benefit. The rates of unemployment benefit are the same as for sickness
benefit except that the standard rate for insured married women is 26s. instead of 22s.
Unemployment benefit is paid in the first place for 180 working days, but it may be
continued for up to a maximum of 19 months in all if the insured person has a good record
of contributions paid as against unemployment benefit drawn in recent years.
Maternity Benefit. The National Insurance Act, 1953, amended the provisions of the 1946
Act for maternity benefits. A maternity grant of £9 is now payable for all confinements,
and where more than one child is born at any confinement additional grants may be pay¬
able. A home confinement grant of ^3 is payable where the mother is not confined in free
accommodation under the National Health Service or in accommodation otherwise paid
for out of public funds. A maternity allowance of 32s. 6d. a week, beginning with the
eleventh week before the expected week of confinement, payable for 18 weeks, is avail¬
able for working women who satisfy the contribution conditions. These are that during
the year ending 13 weeks before the expected week of her confinement, the claimant must
have paid 26 contributions as an employed or self-employed person and, for the full rate
of the allowance, have a total of at least 50 contributions paid or credited. The maternity
allowance provided under the 1946 Act of 36s. weekly for 13 weeks is retained for a
limited transitional period by the 1953 Act; for this allowance, a married woman need not
have paid contributions, although she must show that she is ordinarily at work.
Widow’s Benefit. There are three kinds of widow’s benefit, paid only on the deceased
husband’s insurance. A Widow’s Allowance of 42s. 6d. a week plus 10s. 6d. a week for the
first or only child under school-leaving age and 2s. 6d. a week for second and subsequent
children (in addition to family allowances) is paid for 13 weeks. A Widowed Mother’s
Allowance of 43 s. a week is paid following widow’s allowance to a widow who has a
child within the meaning of the Family Allowances Act; she also receives 2s. 6d. a week, in
addition to any family allowance, for each child after the first. A Widow’s Pension ot
32s. 6d. a week is paid to a widow (a) who is 50 or over at the time of the husband’s death
and has been married ten years, or (b) who is 40 or over when her widowed mother’s
allowance ends provided ten years have elapsed since the marriage, or (c) who, when her
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
232
widow’s allowance or widowed mother’s allowance ends, is incapable of self-support
because of infirmity and is likely to remain so for a long time.
Guardians Allowance. A Guardian’s Allowance of 15s. a week may be paid to a person
having care of a child whose parents (or step-parents) have died and one of whom was
insured under the National Insurance Act. This continues while the child remains in the
guardian’s family and is a child within the meaning of the Family Allowances Act.
Retirement Pension. Retirement pensions are paid to men at the age of 65, and to women
at the age of 60, provided they have retired from regular employment. From the age of
70 (men) and 65 (women), however, the pension is payable whether or not the claimant
has retired. The standard rate is 32s. 6d. a week. A married woman ordinarily qualifies for
pension on her husband’s insurance at the standard rate of 21s. 6d. a week. If after retire¬
ment a pensioner below the age of 70 (65 for a woman) has any earnings, then, for every
is. earned over £2 a week, is. is deducted from the pension.
Men and women are encouraged not to retire at minimum pension age and are able to
earn a larger retirement pension by continuing in their jobs. For every six months they
stay at work between the ages of 65 and 70 (men) or 60 and 65 (women) their pension is
increased by is. 6d. a week (before July 1951 the increment was is. a week). The incre¬
ment on his wife’s pension due to a man’s contribution is is. a week during his lifetime; if
his wife survives him her pension is re-calculated at the is. 6d. rate. A man who reached 65
after July 1951 and continues at work for a further five years can therefore receive a
pension of 45s. on attaining the age of 70. If he has a wife who has reached 65 the com¬
bined pensions can be 75s.; if the wife survives her husband her pension can be 45s.
A retirement pensioner may be entitled to an increase of 21s. 6d. a week for his wife
while she is under 60 and also to an increase of 10s. 6d. for the first child under school¬
leaving age and 2s. 6d. for each succeeding child, in addition to any family allowance
payable.
Death Grant. A Death Grant of up to £20 is paid towards the funeral expenses of an
adult, and a smaller sum on the death of a child. Grants are not paid for persons already
over pension age on 5th July 1948, or for children born before 5th July 1948 if they die
before they are ten years old. Reduced grants are paid on the deaths of people who on jdi
July 1948 were over 55 (men) or over 50 (women).
National Insurance (Industrial Injuries) Acts, 1946 to 1953
The Industrial Injuries Insurance scheme, which replaced the Workmen’s Compensation
scheme in July 1948, provides benefits for personal injuries caused by accidents arising out
of, and in the course of, employment, and for prescribed diseases due to the nature of
employment. It covers practically everyone in Class 1 of the National Insurance scheme
and certain others. Benefits were increased in July 1952 under the Family Allowances and
National Insurance Act, 1952.
Benefits
Injury Benefit. Injury Benefit for an adult is 55s. a week plus 21s. 6d. for an adult depen¬
dant and 1 os. 6d. for the first or only child under school-leaving age and 2s. 6d. for each other
eligible child, in addition to any family allowance payable. It is paid when the insured
person is incapable of work as a result of an industrial accident or disease, and payment
can continue for a maximum of 26 weeks from the date of the accident or development of
the prescribed disease.
Disablement Benefit. Disablement Benefit may be paid when injury benefit stops and
the amount depends on the extent of the disablement, as assessed by a medical board. It
varies from 55s. for 100 per cent disablement to ns. a week for 20 per cent disablement.
For disablement of less than 20 per cent a gratuity is paid, ranging up to ^185.
SOCIAL WELFARE
233
In the following circumstances Disablement Benefit may be increased:
1. It will be made up to the 100 per cent rate during in-patient treatment in a hospital
for the relevant injury or disease, and increases for dependants will be paid.
2. If benefit is being received at the 100 per cent rate and someone is needed to look
after the insured person, a constant attendance allowance not exceeding 25s. a week
(50s. in certain cases) may be paid.
3. If the insured person is permanendy unfit for work an unemployability supplement
of 32s. 6d. a week may be paid, with allowances for dependants.
4. If the insured person is unfit to return to his former job, or work of a similar
standard, benefit may be increased (subject to a maximum of 55s.) by a special
hardship allowance of up to 20s. a week.
Death Benefit. If the accident or disease results in the insured person’s death, Death
Benefit is paid to the dependants. The amount varies according to the degree of relation¬
ship and the extent of maintenance during lifetime.
A widow receives a pension of 42s. 6d. a week for the first 13 weeks. Thereafter she gets
a pension of 37s. a week if she is over 50 or permanently incapable of self-support or has
the care of a child of the dead man. In other cases the pension is 20s. a week. In addition,
an allowance of 10s. 6d. can be paid for the first or only child, and 2s. 6d. for each other
child under school-leaving age.
Certain other dependants, such as parents, are entitled to pensions, allowances or
gratuities. The amounts vary with the closeness of the relationship and the extent to which
they were maintained by the deceased during his lifetime.
Adjudication
Claims to benefit under the National Insurance and National Insurance (Industrial
Injuries) Acts are decided by independent statutory authorities appointed under the Acts.
Reciprocity
The national insurance, industrial injuries and family allowances schemes of Great
Britain and those of Northern Ireland and the Isle of Man operate as a single system.
Reciprocal agreements on family allowances are in operation with Guernsey and New
Zealand. An agreement with Australia to cover sickness and unemployment benefits,
widow’s and retirement pensions and family allowances was signed in June 1953 and is
expected to come into operation early in 1954. An agreement with the Republic of
Ireland covers sickness, unemployment and maternity benefits and the insurance of sea¬
men. There are also agreements covering various aspects of social security in force with
France (since November 1949) and with Italy (since June 1953), while an agreement with
Switzerland was signed in February 1953 and will come into operation after it has been
ratified. Similar agreements with other Commonwealth and European countries are
under negotiation.
A multilateral agreement on social security, signed by the five Brussels Treaty Powers,
was ratified by the United Kingdom in May 1950, and came into operation a year later for
limited purposes. It will come into full operation when die complete network of bilateral
agreements between the five participating countries has been completed.
National Assistance and Care of Children
The National Assistance Act, 1948, also came into operation on 5th July 1948. It
provides a unified State service of financial assistance for those in need, replacing the
various ‘needs’ services provided in the past by the State and local authorities. As the
residual service, National Assistance meets the financial needs of all those people who are
unable to maintain themselves and who fall outside the scope of the other social security
0
234
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
services, and supplements the insurance benefits when they are insufficient. The National
Assistance Board is responsible for administering these weekly cash grants.
It has various other duties, including the administration of non-contributory pensions
under the Old Age Pensions Act, 1936; the administration of hostels provided under the
Polish Resettlement Act, 1947, for Poles in Britain who are not yet absorbed into the
normal life of the community; and the assessment under the Legal Aid and Advice Act,
1949, and Legal Aid and Solicitors (Scotland) Act, 1949, of the disposable income and
disposable capital of persons seeking aid under the Acts.1
The Board is responsible for influencing ‘persons without a setded way of living’
(formerly known as ‘casuals’) to lead a more settled life, and provides temporary accom¬
modation for such persons, usually through the agency of local authorities.
The provision under the National Assistance Act of residential accommodation for the
aged, infirm and others, and of special welfare services for the blind, the deaf, the crippled
and other handicapped persons is not the responsibility of the National Assistance Board
but of county and county borough councils, and, in Scotland, of councils of large burghs.
The Children Act, 1948, provides that all local authorities shall have special children’s
committees to be responsible for the care of all children deprived of a normal home life,
and in other ways makes improved provision for their care.
In Northern Ireland financial assistance is given under die provisions of the National
Assistance Act (Nordiern Ireland), 1948, to persons in need and there is also a system of
non-contributory pensions similar to that in operation in Great Britain. Under the
Welfare Services Act (Northern Ireland), 1949, local authorities, in their capacity as
welfare audiorities, provide residential accommodation for the aged, infirm and other
persons who are in need of care and attention. The welfare authorities also provide special
services for the blind, deaf and other handicapped persons and are responsible under the
Children’s Act (Northern Ireland), 1950, for the care of all children deprived of normal
home life.
HEALTH
The concern of the State with public health is chiefly a development of the last 100 years.
The second half of the nineteenth century saw the growth of the environmental health
services, such as provision of pure water, sewerage, disposal of refuse, cleaning of streets,
building byelaws and other measures designed to promote healthy living conditions in
Britain. Public provision for the care of the sick, apart from smallpox and other infectious-
disease hospitals, followed later, and the main development of the personal health services,
as distinct from the environmental, took place in the twentieth century. The medical
benefit introduced under die National Insurance Act of 1911 was the first step in the
provision of a State-aided general practitioner service outside the Poor Law. There was
progressive development in the hospital services provided by local authorities, and the
period before the first world war is notable for the development of maternity and child
welfare and of measures for the prevention and treatment of tuberculosis.
Since the first world war there has been progress in many directions: medical research,
discovery of important new drugs, blood transfusion, control and treatment of venereal
disease, and research into diet.
The second world war served to emphasize the importance of a sound diet and as a
result the Welfare Foods Service for expectant mothers was introduced (see p. 240) and
the School Meals Service (see p. 244) and industrial canteens were expanded. War also
stimulated developments in industrial health services (see pp. 225-6) and in the re¬
habilitation of the disabled (see pp. 218-9).
1For further information on legal aid, see p. 69.
SOCIAL WELFARE
235
The National Health Service
The latest stage in this progress was reached in 1948 with the establishment of the
National Health Service. The relevant Acts, the National Health Service Act, 1946, the
National Health Service (Scotland) Act, 1947, and the Health Services Act (Northern
Ireland), 1948, came into force simultaneously on 5thjuly 1948.
The National Health Service Act, 1946, aims ‘to promote the establishment in England
and Wales of a comprehensive health service designed to secure improvement in the
physical and mental health of the people of England and Wales and the prevention,
diagnosis and treatment of illness, and for that purpose to provide or secure the effective
provision of services’. The National Health Service (Amendment) Act, 1949, the National
Health Service Act, 1951, and the National Health Service Act, 1952, make some modi¬
fications in the scheme for Great Britain and provide for charges to be made for certain
parts of the Service, which is otherwise, with very few exceptions, free of charge, and
which is available to all.
Health Service Administration in Great Britain
In England and Wales the Minister of Health has assumed direct responsibility for (1)
the provision on a national basis of all hospital and specialist services, (2) the former mental
health functions of the Board of Control and local authorities, except for the quasi¬
judicial functions of the Board designed to safeguard the liberty of the patient, (3) the
conduct of research work into any matters relating to the prevention, diagnosis or treat¬
ment of illness or mental defect, (4) a public health laboratory service, and (5) a blood
transfusion service. He has indirect responsibility for the establishment and maintenance of
general practitioner services and all other services. He is advised by the Central Health
Services Council and by standing advisory committees on various aspects of the Service.
The hospital and specialist services are administered through Regional Hospital Boards
and Hospital Management Committees or, in the case of teaching hospitals, by Boards of
Governors. The hospitals themselves have been grouped into administrative units; these
consist sometimes of several formerly independent hospitals, and sometimes of one. There
are nearly 400 such groups under the control of hospital management committees, which
are in turn under die control of 14 regional hospital boards. The regions are arranged so
diat the hospital and speciahst services can conveniently be associated with a university
having a school of medicine.
The members of the hospital management committees are appointed by the regional
hospital board. The committees, by dieir constitution, reflect the communities concerned,
for they usually include not only medical practitioners but members of local authorities,
trade unionists and others. The regional hospital boards are appointed by the Minister and
are similarly constituted. The term of office is three years, one-third of the board or com¬
mittee retiring each year but being eligible for reappointment. The boards of governors of
teaching hospitals are appointed by die Minister, a proportion of the members being
nominated by the teaching faculty of the university, the regional hospital board and the
medical staff. All appointments to hospital management committees, regional hospital
boards and boards of governors are honorary.
Medical and dental schools are not under the control of die Minister. It is the Minister’s
responsibility to provide clinical faciHties for the training of medical students. The univer¬
sities are responsible for the provision of teaching.
The administration of the General Medical Services (see p. 237) is in the hands of 138
Executive Councils, each covering die area of a county or county borough. (In a few
cases two areas are combined under one council.) Each council has an Ophthalmic Services
Committee responsible for administering the Supplementary Ophthalmic Service. Coun¬
cils of counties and county boroughs are the 146 local health authorities in charge of local
health services (sec p. 238).
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
236
In Scotland die Secretary of State for Scotland is the responsible Minister; 31 county
councils and 24 town councils of large burghs are the local health authorities; hospital and
specialist services are administered by five Regional Hospital Boards appointed by die
Secretary of State, assisted by 85 Boards of Management (the equivalent of hospital
management committees in England); and there are 25 Executive Councils, each serving
the area of one or more local health authorities. The Scottish Health Services Council and
its Standing Advisory Committees advise the Secretary of State and keep closely in
touch with the Central Health Services Council on common issues.
The Northern Ireland Health Service is described separately on page 241.
Health Service Finance
The health services are financed mostly from the Exchequer, but also pardy from local
rates and partly from a contribution made from die National Insurance Fund. The rights
and habilities attached to hospitals taken over by the Service, including their premises,
property and assets, were transferred to the Minister of Health in England and Wales, and
in Scotland to the Secretary of State.
Under the terms of the amending Act of 1949, the Minister was empowered to intro¬
duce a charge for prescriptions, and under the National Health Service Act, 1951, charges
were made as from 21st May 1951 for dentures and spectacles supplied through die
Service. Further charges were introduced in June 1952 under the Acts of 1949 and 1952.
These include a charge of is. on each prescription form, and charges for elastic hosiery
supphed in the family doctor service or hospital out-patients’ department, for certain
appliances supplied to out-patients, and for treatment (not examination only) in the
Dental Service. Certain exemptions or refunds are made and anyone may apply to the
National Assistance Board for help in meeting any of these charges. Under the 1946 Act
a certain number of beds may be put aside for hospital patients wishing for privacy,
provided that this accommodation is not needed on medical grounds for non-paying
patients. Charges for these ‘amenity’ beds are fixed under Regulations. Provision is also
made at certain hospitals for patients who wish to occupy private patients’ accommodation
on payment of the whole cost of this accommodation and treatment. Such patients may
make private arrangements for treatment by a doctor of their own choice.
Hospital medical staffs are either full-time and salaried or part-time; part-time medical
officers are usually paid on a sessional basis and are free to accept private patients.
General medical practitioners in public service are remunerated mainly by capitation
fees according to the number of persons on their lists. In some cases doctors may receive
an Initial Practices allowance which is limited to a three-year period: £600 in the first
year; -£450 in the second; and £200 in the third. There is a right of appeal if the Executive
Council refuses its consent. (In England and Wales the appeal is to the Minister.)
Dentists providing treatment in their own surgeries are paid on a prescribed scale of
fees according to the items of treatment they have carried out. Pharmacists dispensing on
their own premises are paid on the basis of the prescriptions they dispense. Doctors and
ophthalmic opticians taking part in the Supplementary Ophthalmic Service are paid on
the basis of the number of sight tests made; opticians who dispense glasses are paid
according to the number of pairs of glasses supphed.
Hospital andl Specialist Services
The hospital and specialist services include the provision of consultants, hospitals of
all kinds (including maternity accommodation), tuberculosis sanatoria, mental hospitals
and institutions for the mentally defective, infectious-disease units, convalescent homes,
rehabilitation centres, and all forms of specialized treatment.
At the end of 1952 there were in the Service in England and Wales 2,688 hospitals
(mcluding teaching hospitals) with 468,255 available beds and a nursing and midwifery
SOCIAL WELFARE
237
staff of 140,964 full-time and 26,642 part-time nurses. A small number of hospitals remain
outside the Service for special reasons. Most of these are run by religious orders. In Scot¬
land there were 412 hospitals with 64,920 beds.
Teaching Hospitals. There are in all about 140 hospitals in Great Britain with medical
teaching facilities. The 26 London teaching hospitals are in fact groups of hospitals, and
include 65 hospitals and 30 convalescent homes, branches, annexes or treatment centres.
The 10 teaching hospitals in Wales and in the provinces cover 55 hospitals and 12 other
establishments. The teaching hospitals in Scotland come under the control of the Regional
Hospital Boards, but special Medical Education Committees consider matters relating to
medical teaching.
Rehabilitation. Rehabilitation departments are established at the main hospital centres.
The work is carried out under the guidance of the appropriate medical specialist by physio¬
therapists, remedial gymnasts, occupational therapists and social workers, working as a
team. The aim is to prevent undue disability and to restore fitness after all forms of sick¬
ness and injury. Experience has shown that efficient medical rehabilitation reduces the stay
in hospital, the incidence of permanent disability and the period of incapacity for full
work. The departments work in close association with the Disablement Resettlement
Service of the Ministry of Labour and National Service (see p. 218). Rehabilitation
methods have been applied with advantage in the management of the chronic sick and
have enabled many patients to be discharged from hospital and to resume an independent
life in their own homes.
Blood Transfusion. The National Blood Transfusion Service is administered by the
regional hospital boards under the National Health Service. Each of the 12 regions is
centred on a university town, where an organization is maintained for collecting blood
within the region. The blood is kept in the Regional Blood Bank, or issued to Area Blood
Banks which are maintained at general hospitals in each county. Each of the principal
hospitals holds a supply of blood sufficient not only for its own needs but also for the
smaller hospitals, nursing homes and general practitioners in its district. In Scotland, the
Scottish National Blood Transfusion Association organizes die service on behalf of the
Secretary of State. The blood is provided free by voluntary donors recruited from the
public.
Medico-Social Work. There are about 1,000 trained almoners working in Britain; the
majority work in hospitals, others in local health authority services or elsewhere. The
almoner co-operates with the medical staff in the investigation and treatment of disease by
elucidating and adjusting social and economic factors which contribute to a patient’s
disability or impede his restoration to health. Psychiatric social workers are specially
trained for work in the mental health and education services. They are an invaluable com¬
plement to doctors not only in mental and mental deficiency hospitals but in the local
health and educational services, in assessing the environmental factors in mental ab¬
normalities and in helping to adjust patients to their environment, or to change the circum¬
stances of their lives.
The General Medical Services
The General Practitioner Services cover the medical attention given to individuals by
doctors and dentists of their own choice, from among those enrolled in the Service.
Doctors and dentists may work either at the new Health Centres (when these have been
estabhshed) or at their own surgeries.
Doctors previously in practice were entitled to join the Service at its start in the place
where they were practising. Those now wishing to start practice have to apply through
their Executive Councils to the central Medical Practices Committee, so that a better
distribution of doctors throughout the country may be facilitated. The permitted maxi-
238
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
mum number of patients’ names to be on one principal’s list has been reduced from 4,0©©
to 3,500. The average number in England and Wales is about 2,400.
Between 18,000 and 19,000 general medical practitioners (principals and assistants) out
of a total of about 21,000 in England and Wales, and over 2,400, or almost all, general
practitioners in Scotland, are in the Service.
Of about 10,000 dentists in England and Wales available for general practice, about
9,500 are in the Service, and of about 1,250 dentists in Scotland practically all are in the
Scottish Service.
About 960 ophthalmic medical practitioners and about 7,000 ophthalmic and dis¬
pensing opticians in England and Wales and 72 ophthalmic medical practitioners and
933 ophthalmic and dispensing opticians in Scotland are engaged in the Supplementary
Ophthalmic Service. This service provides for the testing of sight and provision of glasses.
Cases requiring treatment are dealt with through the hospital eye service.
Almost all chemists (15,000 in England and Wales and 1,750 in Scotland) are taking
part in the Service.
Local Health Services
The Local Health Services administered by the county and county borough councils
(in Scotland, county and large burgh councils) include those for maternity and child
welfare (but not hospitals and maternity homes), domiciliary midwifery, health visiting,
vaccination and immunization, home nursing, the after-care of the sick, the provision of
domestic help in time of sickness or confinement, etc., the ambulance service (in Scotland,
the responsibility of the Secretary of State), and the establishment and maintenance of
local health centres (in Scotland, the responsibility of the Secretary of State).
Welfare Centres. Maternity and child welfare centres have been estabhshed for many
years. In England and Wales there are about 5,000 child welfare, 1,800 ante-natal and 270
post-natal clinics. In Scotland there are 400 child welfare, 90 ante-natal and 80 post¬
natal clinics. These are part of the advisory and preventive services of the local health
authority and they provide regular supervision by nurses and doctors for expectant and
nursing mothers and young children. Special clinics for test feeding and remedial exercises
may also be arranged at a number of centres and a feature of the service is the education
of the modiers by means of talks, demonstrations and special classes, particularly in
modiercraft. Some centres are also the distribution points for the national dried milk and
vitamin preparations provided for expectant mothers and young children under the
Welfare Foods Service (see p. 240). In England and Wales about two out of three babies
attend the centres.
Maternal Care. According to the advice given by the doctor or midwife and her own
preference, the expectant mother may arrange to have her baby at home, or in hospital
if sufficient hospital beds are available over and above those required for priority cases,
i.e. those for whom domiciliary confinement is inadvisable for medical or obstetric
reasons or because of adverse home conditions. For a home confinement every mother has
available to her the services of either a general practitioner obstetrician or her own family
doctor if he is willing to undertake her maternity care, besides those of a trained midwife
employed in the domicihary service of the local health authority. The doctor carries out
certain ante-natal and post-natal examinations, attends at the confinement if he thinks it
necessary and gives any other medical care required. Routine supervision and advice is
provided by the midwife, who visits regularly before the confinement for the purpose of
examination and to give the mother advice and help generally. In addition, the expectant
mother may attend the ante-natal clinic for instruction in the preparation for motherhood
and in some cases for interim ante-natal supervision. The midwife delivers the patient
(unless the doctor considers it necessary to be present) and continues in attendance for the
SOCIAL WELFARE
239
first 14 days after the birth. Midwives work in close touch with the welfare centres in the
©are of the mother both before and after the birth of the child.
Health Visiting. Health visitors, who are qualified nurses with special additional training,
give expert advice to mothers in dieir own homes on such matters as breast feeding, the
general care of the baby, and the nurture of children up to five years old. They are also
responsible for giving advice on the care of the sick and the measures necessary to prevent
the spread of infection.
Vaccination and Immunization. Arrangements are made with doctors for a service pro¬
viding free vaccination against smallpox, and immunization against diphtheria. Parents
cannot be compelled to make use of this service but they are given every encouragement
to do so; and the success of the diphtheria immunization campaign is a very hopeful sign.
In 1952 there were only 31 deaths from diphtheria in England and Wales as against 2,641
in 1941; in Scotland, only 8 deaths as against 518 in 1941.
Other Maternity and Child Welfare Services. Many local health authorities make special
arrangements for premature babies remaining in their own homes, by lending equipment
and appointing experienced nursing staff to supervise their care.
There are nearly 1,000 day nurseries for children under five in Great Britain, provided
by local health authorities or voluntary associations working with them. The National
Health Service Act, 1952, gave local authorities power to make charges for the use of day
nurseries. Private or factory nurseries must be registered with the local health authorities;
this regulation applies also to persons who mind for payment more than two children, not
all of the same family.
Local authorities co-operate with voluntary denominational and other bodies caring
for unmarried mothers and their babies, or make direct provision for their special needs
through welfare workers, homes, hostels and nurseries, and by finding suitable foster-
mothers.
Home Nursing. The employment of nurses for attending persons who require nursing
in their own homes is the responsibility of the local health authorities. Although many
authorities employ nurses directly for this purpose, others have entered into arrangements
with voluntary organizations to provide a service on their behalf.
Domestic Help. Local health authorities have the power to make arrangements for pro¬
viding domestic help in households where it is needed owing to illness, confinement, or to
the presence of children, old people or mental defectives. This is not one of the free
services and authorities are authorized to recover from those assisted such charges as the
authorities consider reasonable having regard to the person’s means.
Ambulance Services. Free conveyance between home and hospital or clinic is provided
where necessary either directly by local health authorities or by arrangement with volun¬
tary organizations. The Hospital Car Service (organized by the British Red Cross Society,
die St.John Ambulance Brigade, and the Women’s Voluntary Services) provides trans¬
port in many areas for patients who do not require an ambulance; such patients are con¬
veyed in private cars whose owners volunteer to give this service, and the authorities make
a mileage payment to the volunteers to cover their expenses. In Scotland, ambulances are
run by the Scottish Ambulance Service (St. Andrew’s Ambulance Association and the
Scottish Branch of the British Red Cross Society) on behalf of the Secretary of State.
Mental Health. Persons of unsound mind who are in need of care and treatment which
cannot be provided in their homes may be admitted to mental hospitals as voluntary,
temporary or certified patients. If such persons, or their relatives, are unable or unwilling
to make the necessary arrangements for admission to a mental hospital, it is the duty of a
duly authorized officer of the local health authority to do so.
Local health authorities have a duty to ascertain mental defectives in the community,
to supervise them and to provide suitable training or occupation. This is done by pro-
240
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
viding occupation centres where the defectives attend daily, as at school, or by home
teaching. If supervision affords insufficient protection it is the duty of officers of the local
health authority to take the initial steps to place such defectives under guardianship within
the community or to arrange for their admission to a mental deficiency hospital.
Control of Infectious Disease. Control of infectious disease is based on four main principles:
notification, isolation, supervision of contacts, and immunization. The investigation of
outbreaks of infectious disease is the concern of local Medical Officers of Health and of
the Public Health Laboratory Service associated with the Medical Research Council
(see pp. 267-8).
There are arrangements to deal with certain conditions and diseases which require
speciahzed treatment both to alleviate the sufferings of the patients and to protect the
community as a whole, such as the provision of sanatoria and chest clinics for the specialist
treatment of tuberculosis, or the provision of treatment centres for venereal disease. Con¬
siderable attention is also paid to the prevention of tuberculosis, and of infectious diseases
generally. The public is offered free examination by mass miniature radiography for the
early detection of chest disease. At the end of 1952, 63 units were operating in England
and Wales.
Health Centres. Local health authorities are also responsible for the provision of health
centres—buildings in which facilities may be made available for all or any of tire main
health services, other than hospital beds. A few health centres have already been estab¬
lished, but only a small number can be built until more resources are available for capital
construction. In Scotland die provision of health centres is the direct responsibility of the
Secretary of State.
The Medical, Dental and Auxiliary Professions
Only persons whose names are on the medical register can practise as doctors under the
National Health Service. Apart from medical practitioners, only persons whose names are
on the dentists’ register can practise dentistry in Britain. The minimum qualification for
registration as a doctor requires five to seven years’ training in medical school and hospital
plus one year as an intern; for a dentist, four or more years at a dental school are required.
The minimum period of hospital training required to qualify for registration as a
general trained nurse is diree years. Training is available also in sick children’s, mental,
and mental deficiency nursing. The assistant nurse undergoes an essentially practical train¬
ing for one year, followed by a year’s work under supervision before enrolment.
Only registered pharmacists may describe themselves as such, and qualifications re¬
quiring four to five years’ vocational training are necessary for registration.
Odier medical auxiharies include almoners, chiropodists, dietitians, medical laboratory
technicians, occupational therapists, psychiatric social workers, physiotherapists, radio¬
graphers and speech therapists. For all these professions a good general education is
required followed by a professional training. The length and nature of the training varies
according to the profession.
Welfare Foods Service
The Welfare Foods Service, administered by the Ministry of Food, helps to satisfy the
special nutritional needs of the ‘vulnerable groups’ of the population—expectant and
nursing mothers and young children—by providing milk and vitamin supplements at a
low cost or free of charge. The service began in the early days of the second world war,
with the National Milk Scheme which was started in 1940. In 1946 the extended scheme
was put on a permanent basis as the Welfare Foods Service and associated with die Family
Allowances scheme (see p. 229).
The foods, which are provided at subsidized prices, are: milk, 1 pint a day at i£d. a pint
for expectant mothers, children under five, and children between five and sixteen who
are physically or mentally disabled and are unable to attend school where they would
SOCIAL WELFARE
241
receive milk; National Dried Milk for children under two years as an alternative to liquid
milk and at an equivalent price; orange juice, at 5d. a six-fluid-ounce bottle, and cod liver
oil, free of charge, for expectant mothers and children under five; vitamin A and D
tablets, free of charge for expectant mothers as an alternative to cod liver oil, and also
for mothers for 30 weeks after confinement. Milk and orange juice are supplied free to
expectant modiers and to children under school age if the families cannot afford to pay.
A free additional allowance of two-thirds of a pint of milk a day is given to children under
five in non-residential nurseries. Older children receive milk in school (see p. 244).
Voluntary Aid for the Sick and Handicapped
A number of voluntary organizations provide services of various kinds for sick and
handicapped persons in co-operation with, or supplementary to, the provision made by
central and local authorities. A number of convalescent homes, for instance, of a type
which is outside the scope of the hospital service are administered by such bodies. Invalid
children and others needing care in their own homes are visited and supervised by volun¬
tary organizations. Special organizations also serve the welfare of the blind, the deaf and
other special classes. Though the need for material aid from private sources becomes less as
public provision extends, many special forms of help to meet individual needs that would
not otherwise be met are given by voluntary agencies. Their most valuable service is pro¬
bably to provide personal service and the continued personal interest that can contribute
so much to the welfare of the sick and infirm. These voluntary agencies usually depend
largely on the work, part-time or full-time, of unpaid volunteers.
Health Services in Northern Ireland
In Northern Ireland the historical development of the health services has taken broadly
the same course as in other parts of the United Kingdom and the Health Service established
under the Health Services Act (Northern Ireland), 1948, corresponds fairly closely to the
medical care system established under the National Health Service in Great Britain. The
essential principle is that the same range of service shall be available to citizens in Northern
Ireland as in England, Wales and Scotland. The Service in Northern Ireland is financed
as in the rest of the United Kingdom.
hi hospital administration the role of the central Government is not quite so immediate
or direct as in Great Britain and hospital property, for example, is vested not in the
Minister but in a public board, the Northern Ireland Hospitals Authority. The Hospitals
Authority has under its control 63 hospitals with about 14,000 beds.
The Tuberculosis Service is on a separate footing from the main Hospital Service,
having been established a little earher to deal urgently with a serious tuberculosis problem.
The Northern Ireland Tuberculosis Authority, which was constituted for the prevention
of tuberculosis and the care of tuberculous patients by the Public Health (Tuberculosis)
Act (Northern Ireland), 1946, has under its control eight hospitals.
Vaccination against smallpox is compulsory in Northern Ireland but otherwise the
range of preventive and domicihary services is similar to that existing in Great Britain.
EDUCATION
There are over seven million children and young people in full-time attendance at
schools or universities in die United Kingdom. Over 90 per cent of school children attend
publicly provided or aided schools. In England and Wales, the main development of
publicly provided primary education dates from 1870, and diat of secondary education
from the beginning of this century. The universities are independent, self-governing
institutions but they derive an increasing proportion (now over two-thirds) of their
funds from public sources. Many schools and colleges continue to benefit from the endow¬
ments provided by benefactors in past centuries.
242
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
School attendance is compulsory between the ages of 5 and 15 in Great Britain (tem¬
porarily 14 in Northern Ireland). In England and Wales over 6,000,000 children, including
about 198,500 under and 212,000 over compulsory school age, are attending publicly
maintained schools, besides 97,000 others (1,500 under and 26,000 over school age) who
are at schools receiving direct grants from the Ministry of Education. There are also about
half a million children (some 51,000 of them over 15) at independent schools. In Scotland,
794,000 children are attending publicly maintained or aided schools and about 21,000
are at independent schools. In Northern Ireland, 235,000 children (including 6,000 under
and 19,000 over compulsory school age) are attending pubhely maintained or aided
schools; independent schools are few.
The National System
The national system provides education in three stages; primary, secondary, and (for
those who have left school) further education. Local authorities are responsible for en¬
suring that adequate facilities are available in their areas throughout these stages.
The relation of the central authority (the Ministry of Education in England and Wales,
the Scottish Education Department, and the Ministry of Education for Northern Ireland)
to local education authorities is based on consultation and co-operation by direct contact
widi the Minister and the Department and through Her Majesty’s Inspectors who act as
liaison officers.
The Scottish educational system has a long history independent of that of education in
England, but the same general policy is now being implemented throughout the United
Kingdom, with some national variations in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.
Responsibility for educational services in Nordiern Ireland lies with the Government
of Nordiern Ireland acting through the Ministry of Education for Northern Ireland.
Schools
In England it is usual for boys and girls to be taught together in primary schools, but
more often than not they attend separate secondary schools. Mixed schools are more
common in Wales; and in Scotland all but a few city schools take both boys and girls.
Of the publicly provided or aided schools, county schools are provided by the local
education authorities; voluntary schools are those which have been provided by a
voluntary body (usually of a religious denomination) but are wholly or partly maintained
by the local authorities; direct grant schools are independent of the local authorities but
receive a grant-in-aid from the Ministry of Education.
Primary Schools
A child’s primary education continues until about the age of 11 in England, Wales and
Northern Ireland and 12 in Scotland. There are some nursery schools and classes for chil¬
dren between 2 and 5 years old. In England and Wales there are infant schools, or depart¬
ments, for all children between 5 and 7 and junior schools for those aged 7 to 11. In
Scotland diere are primary departments for children between 5 and 12 years old.
Secondary Schools
England, Wales and Northern Ireland. Public provision of secondary education is being
greatly extended with the aim of providing for all children an education suited to their
particular abilities. The grammar school takes children who hope to reach a university and
others with an academic bias. Most grammar schools are now either maintained or aided
from public funds although many are of ancient foundation. Secondary modern schools
(intermediate schools in Northern Ireland) are the largest group and give a more general
education with a practical bias, closely related to the interests and environment of their
pupils; the secondary technical schools (technical intermediate schools in Northern Ireland)
are the smallest group and offer an education largely related to one or other of the main
branches of industry, including commerce, or agriculture. These different types of educa-
SOCIAL WELFARE
243
tk>n may be provided in separate schools or combined in one school. Some authorises are
experimenting with the large comprehensive school providing all types of secondary
education.
Most grammar school pupils remain until they are 16 years old, some till they are 17.18
or 19. Most secondary modern school pupils at present leave at the age of 15.
The examination system for secondary schools in England and Wales has recently been
revised and in 1951 an examination, conducted at three levels, for a General Certificate of
Education replaced the former School and Higher School Certificate examinations. Most
candidates should be at least 16 years old on 1st September of the year of their examina¬
tion. In Northern Ireland the Junior Certificate Examination is taken at about the age of 15
and the Senior Certificate Examination at about 17.
Scotland. Scottish secondary schools fall into two main categories, those providing
courses extending normally to three years, generally called junior secondary schools, and
those providing courses of five or six years, known as senior secondary schools. In each
type of school die courses are intended to provide a general education, but they are differ¬
entiated in character to suit the varying needs and abilities of the pupils, and include
literary, commercial, boys’ technical, domestic and rural courses. While some schools are
purely junior secondary and some purely senior secondary, there are also a number of
schools of the ‘comprehensive’ type in which all kinds of courses, both junior secondary
and senior secondary, are provided. Many schools also provide modified courses for pupils
of Hmitcd ability for whom the normal courses are too exacting.
The courses, extending to five or six years, normally provided in senior secondary
schools lead to presentation for the Scottish Leaving Certificate which is awarded and
issued by the Scottish Education Department.
Independent and Public Schools
All independent schools, ‘public’ or private, are subject to official inspection. The
majority of these schools are for boys or for girls only, except in classes for small children.
There are, however, a few schools which are co-educational.
The public school is a characteristic English institution which has made a notable con¬
tribution to English education. Many public schools date from the sixteenth century,
some are older (e.g., Winchester, 1382, and Eton, 1440). The public school is controlled
by its Board of Governors, although it may nowadays receive aid from public funds,
usually by way of direct grant from the Ministry of Education. Public schools have em¬
phasized the importance of character-building, and in these schools were developed the
prefect system, whereby day-to-day discipline is largely controlled by the pupils them¬
selves, and the house system, whereby a school is divided into groups of about 50 each
under the care of a housemaster. A public school is often, although not necessarily, a
boarding school. The usual age of entry for boys is 13 and the leaving age about 18. There
are some girls’ public schools modelled to a certain extent on the public schools for boys.
Private schools are independent schools owned by individuals or groups of individuals.
They comprise a variety of day and boarding schools, but are usually comparatively small.
They include preparatory schools, usually boarding schools, for boys aged about 8 to 13
who are intending to enter public schools.
Teachers
Teachers are servants of the local education authorities or of the governing bodies or
managers of their schools.
In 1952 there was one full-time teacher to 27 pupils in publicly maintained schools in
England and Wales; the figure was 24-4 for Scotland and 29 for Northern Ireland. The
high birth-rate at the end of the second world war is the chief of several factors in the
present need for more teachers.
There are some 130 teachers’ training colleges in England and Wales giving a training
244
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
usually lasting two years to students aged 18 or over, and 23 university training depart¬
ments providing a one-year course for graduates. In Scotland there are four general train¬
ing centres, two denominational training colleges and a college for women teachers of
physical education. Courses are normally of one year’s duration for graduates or the equi¬
valent, and of three years for non-graduates. Northern Ireland has two teacher training
colleges and one university training department. The basic course in the training colleges
lasts three years.
The Education Departments, the universities, local education authorities and other
bodies provide a variety of short courses for practising teachers. Teachers from schools in
the United Kingdom go to a number of oversea countries each year under interchange
schemes or schemes for temporary oversea posts.
Broadcasting and Visual Aids
School broadcasting does not attempt to cover the whole school curriculum, or to
replace the teacher, but to add something to what the teacher can give. The School
Broadcasting Department of the British Broadcasting Corporation sends out over 50
transmissions a week which reach more than 25,000 schools in the United Kingdom, over
60 per cent of the possible total.
Visual aids to education—films, film strips, wall charts, pictures, and models—are
being increasingly used in Britain’s schools.
Religion in Schools
All children in county or voluntary schools, that is, all schools wholly or partly financed
by local authorities, receive religious instruction and take part in a daily corporate act of
worship unless their parents object. In the voluntary school there is opportunity for de¬
nominational religious instruction and in the county school religious instruction of an
undenominational character is given. In county schools in Northern Ireland clergy have
a right of access to give denominational instruction to children of their persuasion for a
limited period each week. In Scotland, subject to safeguards for the individual conscience,
matters relating to religious instruction are in the hands of the school managers.
Health and Welfare of School Children
Special educational treatment, either in special schools or otherwise, is provided for
children between 5 and 16 who require it on account of any physical or mental handicap,
including maladjustment. There are over 700 special schools in the United Kingdom,
including hospital schools, day and boarding schools, and boarding homes for handicapped
children attending ordinary schools.
The School Health Service provides regular medical examination and certain free treat¬
ment for all children attending schools maintained by local education authorities. Treat¬
ment provision includes dental clinics and child guidance centres. (There are also child
guidance clinics in the National Health Service.) In Northern Ireland the School Health
Service is operated by the health authorities as part of the National Health Service.
Milk (one-third of a pint a day) is given free to all children in schools who wish to
have it, and the School Meals Service provides a daily dinner at a subsidized price (re¬
mitted where there is need) to nearly half the pupils in schools maintained by local educa¬
tion authorities. Free transport is provided for children attending these schools who live
more than a reasonable walking distance from their schools (two miles for those under
eight years and three miles for those over eight years).
Universities
In 1952 there were about 86,000 university students in the United Kingdom. Their
number increased by over two-thirds in the years 1939-1949. Nearly three out of four
students are being aided from public funds or from scholastic endowments (see p. 246).
SOCIAL WELFARE
245
The Education Departments have no jurisdiction over die universities, and their rela¬
tions with them are concerned mainly with the training of teachers, the provision of
adult education, and the award of scholarships from public funds. The universities,
though self-governing institutions, receive aid from the State in die form of direct grants
from the Treasury made on the advice of die University Grants Committee, a committee
of individuals, most of whom have academic affiliations, appointed by the Chancellor
of the Exchequer.
There are 14 degree-giving, self-governing universities in England and Wales: Oxford,
Cambridge, London, Birmingham, Bristol, Durham, Leeds, Liverpool, Manchester, Not¬
tingham, Reading, Sheffield, Southampton and Wales; and four university colleges of
lesser status. Oxford and Cambridge, each with a number of colleges, are very old founda¬
tions and are residential. Most of die other universities, diree of which—London, Durham
and Wales—also comprise groups of largely autonomous colleges, are mainly non-
residential. The tutorial system of individual tuition, a traditional and valued feature of
Oxford and Cambridge universities, is now being developed in the other universities and
colleges of Britain.
There are four Scottish universities, all dating from the fifteenth or sixteenth centuries:
St. Andrews, Glasgow, Aberdeen and Edinburgh. Northern Ireland has the Queen’s Uni¬
versity of Belfast and the Magee University College, Londonderry (associated with the
Universities of Dublin and Belfast).
Degree courses generally extend over three or four years, though in medicine five or
six years are required. All the universities provide for post-graduate work and research.
Further Education
Outside the universities there is a great variety of further education, full-time and part-
time, for men and women, and for boys and girls who have left school. Local education
authorities are required to secure such provision, either directly or by aiding voluntary
bodies and institutions. Vocational and non-vocational courses at all levels and in all sub¬
jects are available in technical, commercial and art colleges,1 in evening institutes and in
adult education classes. Increasing numbers of young persons are being released by their
employers during working hours for part-time education, both vocational and general.
Technical education is related closely both to the needs of the individual industry and
of the individual student. There has been a particularly notable post-war increase in art
education. A steady programme of development in technical education is being carried
out so far as resources permit.
Evening classes for adults are organized by the universities, local education authorities
and voluntary bodies, chiefly the Workers’ Educational Association, and aided by Govern¬
ment grants. There are six grant-aided residential colleges which provide one-year courses
for adult students, and since the end of die war more than 20 residential colleges have been
established where adult students can take short courses lasting from a few days to a few
weeks.
Technological Education
Technological education is provided, in close co-operation with industry, in both the
universities and the technical colleges of Britain. In the technical colleges most of the
students are taking part-time national courses while serving an industrial apprenticeship.
There has been a great expansion of facilities for technological education since the second
world war, and the Government is promoting a further expansion by increased grants for
selected technical colleges and courses and the planned expansion of at least one institution
of university rank (see p. 263).
'For further information on art colleges see p. 276,
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
246
Educational Building
The requirements of the Education Acts, war damage, population movements and the
higher birth-rate have combined to call fordi an exceptionally large programme of educa¬
tional building. In England and Wales the value of all such work approved between 1945
and the end of May 1953 amounted to -£312-7 million. This included some 2,571 new
schools and about £26-1 million worth of major building for technical education. In
Scotland, work to the value of £24 million was approved between 1945 and the end of
1952, during which period about 3,400 rooms were built.
The Exchequer grant-in-aid for universities in Great Britain for the year 1953-54 in¬
cluded £6-5 milhon for capital developments.
In Northern Ireland, expenditure on school building and improvements between the
coming into force of the 1947 Act and 1953 is expected to approach £9 million.
Finance
The bulk of expenditure on education in the United Kingdom comes from public funds:
of this public expenditure about 60 per cent comes from taxes and about 40 per cent from
local rates. It is estimated for 1953-54 that total Exchequer expenditure from taxes, which
is increasing, will be about £262 million for Great Britain, and that local education
authorities will spend from rates £147 million on education. Northern Ireland Exchequer
expenditure on education is estimated at over £7! milhon for 1953-54.
The proportion of university income provided by the Exchequer is increasing and in
1951-52 had reached two-thirds for Great Britain. Another four per cent was contributed
by local authorities, 15 per cent by fees, and the balance by endowments and other sources.
In England and Wales no fees are charged to parents of children attending schools main¬
tained by local education authorities and books and equipment are supplied free. Local
education authorities pay for free places in direct-grant schools and, to a lesser extent, for
free and assisted places in independent schools. A number of schools are able to offer some
scholarships from endowments. In Scotland, education authorities may charge fees in
certain schools provided that this does not prejudice the provision of free education for
all who desire it. In Northern Ireland no fees are charged to parents of children attending
any county or voluntary primary, intermediate or special school and qualified pupils
attending both county and voluntary grammar schools receive scholarships from the local
education authorities which cover the whole or most of the fees charged by the school.
Grants and Scholarships
England and Wales. Grammar schools receiving grants direct from the Ministry of
Education still charge fees but they are required to offer each year, to pupils who have at
any time previously attended a grant-aided primary school, free places to die extent of not
less than 25 per cent of the previous year’s admission to the upper school, and a furdier 25
per cent must be placed at the disposal of the local education authorities if they require
them. Day pupils not holding free places are entitled to claim a remission of fees in accord¬
ance with an approved income scale, and the Ministry pays die governors of the school
the amount of the fees so remitted.
Over the past five years the number of scholarships and awards for university students
has been gready increased with the aim of ensuring diat no able candidate shall be debarred
from a university education for lack of means. The Ministry of Education offered 1,850
State scholarships to young students in 1952 for university honours degree courses, besides
120 technical State scholarships and 30 mature scholarships for students over 25 from adult
education classes. In 1952 local education authorities in England and Wales awarded
over 9,000 university scholarships with maintenance grants. Numerous exhibitions and
scholarships are also awarded from endowments by universities and colleges and private
SOCIAL WELFARE
247
benefactions. The Ministry supplements university open scholarships and exhibitions as
may be necessary.
Scotland. In Scotland the power of awarding bursaries and scholarships is confined in the
main to the education authorities, who in exercising this power are required to comply
with regulations made by the Secretary of State. There are no State scholarships, but the
Secretary of State supplements scholarships at English universities won in open competi¬
tion by Scottish students.
Northern Ireland. University scholarships in Northern Ireland are awarded either by the
local education authorities or from endowment funds. The Ministry of Education awards
State exhibitions. Supplementary awards are made by the local education authorities and
not, as in England and Wales, by the Ministry.
The Youth Service
The object of the Youth Service in Britain is to provide for the leisure-time activities of
young people and to offer them opportunities—complementary to those of home, formal
education and work—for discovering and developing their personal resources of body
and spirit, so that they may be better equipped to be responsible members of a free and
civilized society. There is no regimentation of young people; they are free to join any of
the youth organizations, or none, and the facilities for recreation, educational pursuits and
social contacts offered are sufficiently varied to appeal to every type of boy and girl.
Responsibility for the Youth Service is shared by die Education Departments, local
education authorities and numerous voluntary organizations. There is no attempt to
impose a system of uniformity or to create anything in the nature of a national youth
movement. The voluntary organizations, though strengthened financially by State
support, retain their independence of action. The practice of democratic self-government
has an established place in most youth organizations and service to the community is
encouraged. The major voluntary youth organizations have memberships totalling over
two million young people under 21 years of age.
Finance is provided by voluntary subscriptions, by contributions from the rates, by
grants from the great charitable trusts (such as the King George V Jubilee Trust), and by
direct grants from the Education Departments. It is estimated that in the year I953_54
the Ministry of Education will give £220,000 in direct grants to voluntary youth organi¬
zations in England and Wales, while local education authorities will probably spend
several times this amount on the Youth Service. In Scotland, in 1951-52 £92,200 was
paid in direct grants and ^159,500 by education authorities for youth and community
services. The Ministry of Education for Northern Ireland estimates that its expenditure
on youth work in 1953-54 whl exceed .£90,000 and local education authorities expect to
spend more than £3 3,000.
Before 1939 youth groups were developed mainly by voluntary orgamzations. The
oldest of these were formed during the nineteenth century and most of them, for example,
the Young Mens Christian Association, the Young Women’s Christian Association, the Boys
Brigade and the Church Lads’ Brigade, were religious in origin and purpose. Later organiza¬
tions, such as the Boy Scouts’ and Girl Guides’ Associations, which, as movements, have no
definite affiliation with a religious body although local groups are often attached to a
church or chapel, also recognize the importance of spiritual values in the formation of
character and seek to inculcate high ideals of personal conduct and of service to odiers.
Local education audiorities have been indirectly concerned in die Youth Service since
1918, and in 1939 the then Board of Education decided to take direct responsibility for
youth welfare. The Board urged local education audiorities to stimulate the provision of
leisure activities for young people, both by co-operating with voluntary agencies and by
establishing Youth Centres and other recreational facihties of their own.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
248
The status of the Youth Service as an essential part of the educational system, thus
recognized in 1939, was confirmed by the Education Act of 1944, and the Education
(Scotland) Act of 1945; and, today, all local education authorities are required to ensure
that adequate facilities for the recreational and social needs of young people exist in their
areas. In areas where voluntary youth organizations are well established, local education
authorities are expected to co-operate with them, and where existing services are inade¬
quate, to make provision themselves (usually in the form of Youth Centres which offer
varied activities to large groups of young people). Most local education authorities now
employ full-time paid youth organizers and have appointed local youth committees or
councils, on which official and voluntary bodies are represented.
Besides the voluntary organizations, most of which are members or associates of the
Standing Conference of National Voluntary Youth Organizations,1 there are the pre-
Service organizations and the youth organizations of the political parties. In addition,
there are a number of bodies which, though not specifically youth organizations, cater
for the welfare of young people by providing them with opportunities for physical train¬
ing, holidays, camping and travel.
Some Youth Organizations
The following examples are selected to illustrate the variety and wide scope of the
services and activities provided by voluntary organizations in Britain concerned with the
welfare of young people in their leisure hours.
The Boy Scouts' Association and the Girl Guides’ Association, which were founded by
Lord Baden-Powell in 1908 and 1910 respectively, are based on the principle of the
development of character and good citizenship in boys and girls by training them in habits
of observation, self-reliance, self-discipline, loyalty and thoughtfulness for others, and by
promoting physical fitness and a knowledge of useful crafts. Both associations have world¬
wide affiliations, and are undenominational and non-political in character.
In 1953 the active membership of the Boy Scouts’ Association in the United Kingdom
reached a record total, including Sea Scouts, of 488,197.
Total membership of the Girl Guides’ Association in the United Kingdom at the end of
1952 was 464,318.
The Boys’ Brigade, which was founded in 1883, is essentially aProtestant religious organi¬
zation. Every company must be affiliated to a church, and regular attendance at church is a
vital principle. Companies have regular drill parades, there are club rooms for games and
other pastimes, and organized camping during the summer months is a feature of the
movement.
The Church Lads’ Brigade, which is a similar organization, is attached to the Anglican
Church. Companies are formed in parishes under the direct control of the incumbent.
The National Association of Boys’ Clubs and the National Association of Mixed Clubs and
Girls’ Clubs, which are non-sectarian, provide educative recreational facilities for young
people designed to develop their mental, physical and spiritual well-being. Discussion
groups, handicrafts, drama, music and many other activities are encouraged.
Pre-Service Organizations, which comprise the Sea Cadet Corps, the Army Cadet Force
Association and the Air Training Corps (see pp. 83, 86 and 88), have special connections
with the respective Service Departments and receive financial grants from them. The
training of boys for entry into the armed forces, provided by these organizations, is linked
with training to promote their social, educational and physical development.
1The Standing Conference of National Voluntary Youth Organizations was founded in 1936 as a
consultative body that takes action only in the name of its constituent members and with their con¬
sent. Its member organizations have a common aim in the development of character through educa¬
tional and recreational interests, and the promotion of the physical, mental and spiritual training of
their members.
SOCIAL WELFARE
249
Similarly, the Girls’ Training Corps, the Girls’ Nautical Training Corps and the Women’s
Junior Air Corps prepare girls for entry into the Women’s Services.
The National Federation of Young Farmers’ Clubs (sec p. 152) instructs its members in
agricultural subjects and rural crafts, and each club has the support of an advisory com¬
mittee on which local farmers are represented.
The Outward Bound Trust, which maintains a mountain school at Eskdale, in Cumber¬
land, and sea schools at Aberdovey, in North Wales, and at Moray, in Scotland, provides
four-week character-building courses for boys from all walks of life but mainly for
young employees in industrial firms sent at their employers’ expense. The boys live as a
community and are given the opportunity to assess and develop their qualities of courage,
endurance, initiative and self-discipline in learning the techniques of sailing or of rock-
climbing, in camping expeditions and through various physical tests. Similar, but
modified, courses for girls are held from time to time, chiefly at Bisham Abbey, in
Berkshire.
The Youth Hostels Association, which was founded in 1930, seeks to promote a greater
knowledge of, and love for, the countryside. It caters for young people of hmited means by
providing hostels where they can stay for one or two shillings a night when on walking or
cycling tours or canoe trips. The movement has a membership of over 200,000, and main¬
tains 300 hostels in England and Wales. There is a membership in Scotland of some 40,000
with 90 hostels, and of almost 5,000 in Northern Ireland where there are 23 hostels. The
Association is linked closely widi similar organizations in other countries, and, through its
International Travel Bureau, encourages and facilitates the exchange of visits.
Political Party Youth Groups, which are junior branches of the political parties in the
United Kingdom, are maintained by each of the leading parties to spread party doctrine
among young people, and to obtain party recruits. Members are encouraged to form
debating societies and to engage in other social activities, and they are trained to take an
active part in party politics.
Youth Sections. There are several other adult voluntary organizations having a particular
function which maintain youth sections; for example, the British Red Cross Society and the
St.John Ambulance Brigade train their young members in first aid and home-nursing.
The Central Council of Physical Recreation, on which the leading voluntary youth
organizations are represented, is grant-aided by the Ministry of Education and by the
corresponding Departments in Scotland and Nordiern Ireland. It was founded in 1935 to
improve the physical and mental health of the community through physical recreation.
The Central Council arranges training courses, provides instructors in games and athletics,
plans and judges athletic competitions and organizes demonstrations of sport and physical
training. It also arranges training holidays for young people in its three National
Recreation Centres.
The National Playing Fields Association is another central organization which provides
amenities for the Youth Service. It was founded in 1925 to secure adequate playing fields
and playgrounds for young people, either directly or in co-operation with local authori¬
ties and youth associations.
HOUSING AND PLANNING
The problems of housing and of planning the use of land in Britain have their origins
mainly in the sevenfold expansion of the population in the last two and a half centuries
and its concentration in industrial urban areas (see pp. 6 and 10). This gave rise to over¬
crowding in the older houses in the centres of cities and to the unplanned spread of outer
suburbs. Overcrowding persisted in spite of a high rate of building in the nineteen-thirties
and was aggravated by the second world war which left behind increased needs and new
R
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
250
opportunities for planning and housing. New building had virtually ceased for six years,
while the United Kingdom population had risen by nearly i£ million; meanwhile,
approximately one house in every three had been destroyed or damaged by enemy action.
From 1919 to 1951 responsibility for housing rested with the Minister of Health (for
England and Wales) and with the Secretary of State for Scotland. In 1943 a Ministry of
Town and Country Planning was set up to formulate and supervise the execution of a
national policy for the use and development of land in England and Wales; similar powers
were vested in the Secretary of State for Scotland. In January 1951 the housing and local
government functions of the Ministry of Health were combined with those of town and
country planning in the new Ministry of Local Government and Planning. In October
1951 this ministry became the Ministry of Housing and Local Government.
Ministerial Responsibility for Housing and Planning
The Ministry of Housing and Local Government is responsible for formulating housing
policy, for housing standards, for general supervision of the housmg programme and for
the administration of general planning policy. In planning, the Ministry is responsible for
implementing general policy regarding the use and development of land throughout
England and Wales, and for the direction and guidance of local planning authorities, the
New Towns Development Corporations and the National Parks Commission in the carry¬
ing out of their planning functions.
The Ministry of Works acts as production authority for certain building materials and
equipment; it is also responsible for general building efficiency, for relations with the build¬
ing industry and for the operation of the licensing system, partly through local authorities.
The Ministry of Labour and National Service regulates the supply of labour to the build¬
ing industry and its ancillary trades; and the Building Apprenticeship and Training Council
keeps under review the industry s long-term labour needs and the measures necessary to
maintain the skilled labour force. The Ministry of Agriculture is responsible for advising
on the agricultural value of land proposed for housing or other development. The Ministry
of Materials is the distribution authority for timber, and the Board of Trade is responsible
for regulating the distribution of industrial development (see p. 130). An Inter-Depart¬
mental Committee on Services’ Land Requirements meets to harmonize service and
civilian needs and proposals for land use.
In Scotland local housing and planning authorities are supervised by the Department of
Health, and a statutory body, the Scottish Special Housing Association, assists local
authorities in their housing programmes. It is financed entirely from Government funds
and is under the general direction of the Secretary of State for Scotland.
In Northern Ireland the Ministry of Health and Local Government is responsible for
housing and planning. The Northern Ireland Housing Trust was set up in 1945 ^ a public
authority to build and manage houses for workers.
Housing
The one per cent sample of the 1951 Census of Great Britain showed the number of
occupied structurally separate dwellings in Great Britain as 13,312,000, the number of
private households as 14,481,000 (of which 2,079,000 were in shared dwellings), and the
excess of households over dwellings as 1,169,000 (see pp. 11-12). The average number of
persons per room was 0-76.
National Housing Policy
In January 1952 the Government decided that there should be no fixed limit to the
housing programme. House production would be expanded over the next three years as
rapidly as the resources of materials and labour that could be made available would allow.
Local authorities’ programmes might be increased at any time if they could show that
more houses could be built in their districts with local resources.
SOCIAL WELFARE
251
The three main objectives would be: the maintenance of an adequate supply of houses
available for letting to families in need of houses; a greater discretion to individual local
authorities to meet the varied needs of different districts; and the encouragement of house
ownership for those who wished to acquire their own homes.
While the main emphasis is on new construction, every other possible method of re¬
housing is employed, including repair and reconditioning of damaged or dilapidated
property, conversion, and the use of requisitioned properties and adapted Service camps.
The urgent need for additional dwellings has necessarily delayed resumption of the
attack on obsolete and slum houses which, immediately before the second world war, were
being replaced at the rate of over 60,000 a year. In September 1952 the Minister of Housing
and Local Government called on local authorities to turn their attention to this problem
as soon as possible, and a start is being made. (See also Appendix.)
Housing Powers and Duties of Local Authorities
While responsibility for housing poh'cy and for the general execution of the housing
programme rests with the Minister of Housing and Local Government (the Secretary of
State in Scotland), local authorities have executive responsibility for housing in their areas
(including building by Housing Associations and Self-Help Groups building in their spare
time for the benefit of members). Local authorities are also responsible to the Ministry of
Works for the local operation of the licensing system for private building. In England
and Wales these authorities are the councils of county boroughs, boroughs, urban districts
and rural districts, the London County Council and the Common Council of the City of
London. In Scotland all town and county councils are housing authorities.
These authorities must ensure as far as possible that housing conditions in their areas are
satisfactory. To this end they must draw up and submit plans for the provision of new
houses in their districts, and ensure that other dwellings in their areas comply with certain
standards of fitness, design, construction, equipment, etc. They may themselves provide
houses for letting by new building or by the conversion of existing buildings. The Minister
has given a general consent to the sale on certain conditions of their houses to occupying
tenants or to persons in need of a house for themselves.
Private Building
Private house-building without subsidy or grant can be carried on only under a building
licence issued by the local authority as agent for the Ministry of Works, and is normally
restricted to houses having a superficial floor area of not more than 1,500 square feet
(139-3 square metres). The licence is subject till December 1953 to a condition fixing the
maximum selling price and rental, as determined by the local authority and varying
according to size and type of house, local building costs, etc. To maintain continuity of
building on sites owned by builders, and so increase efficiency, local authorities are being
encouraged to issue blocks of licences for the erection of a suitable number of houses.
A licence from the local authority is required for all building work in excess of ^500 in
any year on an existing house. This limit is to be raised to ^1,000 in January 1954.
Use of Resources
Apart from softwood, most materials and components are found from home pro¬
duction. As softwood has to be imported, mostly from dollar countries, its use is strictly
controlled.1 A general control over the use of materials is otherwise exercised by the
scrutiny of plans and specifications and by the licensing system.
Early in 1952 the Minister of Housing and Local Government set up eleven Regional
Housing Production Boards to advise upon and assist the progress of local housing pro¬
grammes and the overcoming of shortages.
1Control of the use of softwood was discontinued in November 1953-
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
252
Much research has been and is being done on design, construction and equipment.
Components have been standardized and new methods and materials have been evolved
to ease the strain on skilled workers and traditional materials.
To help to meet the immediate post-war need, the Government provided over 157,000
temporary factory-built houses for erection on sites provided by local authorities. Within
four years from April 1945 the programme had been completed at a cost of ^216 million
for the houses and their erection.
A number of non-traditional forms of construction for permanent houses were also
developed with practical encouragement from the Government during the experimental
period. Some types were steel-framed, some of pre-cast concrete, some concrete poured
in situ, and some timber-framed. A number of proved new systems have been able to com¬
pete successfully with traditional house-building methods, and are making an increasing
contribution to the housing programme.
Standards of Accommodation
Despite shortages, local authorities are now building better houses than before the
second world war.
The central Departments have issued manuals of guidance for local authorities setting
standards of space, structure, design and equipment for different types of houses.
Housing Costs and Subsidies
The cost of building for a local authority the average three-bedroom traditional house
(with a superficial area of 1,050 square feet, 97-8 square metres) was about ^1,450 for
houses completed in October 1951, with another £240 for land, roads and services and
professional fees. Since 1951 new designs have been introduced to achieve economies in
space and to keep down the cost per house.
To enable local authorities, notwithstanding the high cost of building, to let their houses
at reasonable rents, subsidies are provided under the Housing (Financial and Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act, 1946, and the Housing Act, 1952. Housing subsidies have existed since
1919, but they are now on a more generous scale than ever before. The standard rate is
£26 14s. per house per year for 60 years from the Exchequer and 18s. from the local
authority. ;
Special rates of subsidy are provided for special types of housing, including houses for
agricultural workers, houses in poor areas, and flats and houses on expensive sites, also
where expensive works are necessary in order to minimize the risk of subsidence due to
mining operations. All subsidy rates are reviewed annually.
The Housing Act, 1949, provides Exchequer assistance for the improvement of existing
housing or adaptation of buildings for housing, by public authorities or private owners.
Grants can be made by local authorities, with Exchequer assistance, to persons converting
or improving existing buildings for housing at a cost of between ^150 and ^800 per
dwelling. The grants, to which certain conditions are attached, may amount to as much as
half thc^cost. A subsidy for residential hostels built by local authorities or by certain other
bodies is also granted under the Act.
Subsidies are similarly provided in Scotland, though the amounts are generally higher
owing to the different rating system.
House Purchase Schemes
Loans to enable persons to buy their houses by a system of instalment purchase extend¬
ing over several years are provided by some local authorities as well as by building
societies, certain insurance companies and other financial institutions. The total amount
advanced by building societies in 1952 for mortgage purchases was £268 million.
SOCIAL WELFARE
253
Control of Rents and Prices
The great majority of the privately owned houses in Great Britain which are let are sub¬
ject to rent control. Houses owned by local authorities are, in general, free from control.
The first Rent Restrictions Act was passed in 1915. The Acts nowinforce, either wholly
or in part, are the Rent and Mortgage Interest Restrictions Acts, 1920 to 1939. and the
Landlord and Tenant (Rent Control) Act, 1949. These Rent Restrictions Acts, which
apply, with few exceptions, to all unfurnished dwellings below a certain rateable value,
achieve their purpose of preventing undue rises in rent, liable to result from housing short¬
ages, by limiting the rent a landlord may legally recover from a tenant, while at the same
time giving the tenant in most circumstances security of tenure. The Acts also make
illegal most premiums for the grant of a tenancy of rent-controlled premises. Landlords
restricted in this way are themselves protected against undue increases in rates of mortgage
interest and against the calling in of mortgages so long as they pay the restricted interest
due. This protection applies to anyone buying a controlled house on mortgage. The stan¬
dard rent (i.e. the maximum the landlord can recover) is fixed by reference to the rent
payable on a certain date (for ‘old control’ houses 3rd August 1914; for ‘new control’
houses 1st September 1939). The standard rent of a house let for the first time since 1st
September 1939 is the rent at which it was first let except where the standard rent has been
reduced by a rent tribunal. (For proposed new legislation see Appendix.)
The rents paid for furnished accommodation in England and Wales are controlled by
the Furnished Houses (Rent Control) Act, 1946. The Act provides for the control of rents
of houses or parts of houses let furnished or with services, without limitation by rent or
rateable value. Local rent tribunals appointed for the purpose determine the rents of
furnished lettings in cases referred to them by either party or by the local authority, and
the standard rent of houses let for the first time since 1st September 1939 on the application
of either party. Similar legislation for controlling rents of furnished lettings was passed
for Scotland in L943.
Post-war Housing Progress
By 30th June 1953, i| million new houses, permanent and temporary, had been built
in Great Britain since early 1945, and about 314,000 more were under construction. The
total number of families rehoused in this period (by new buildings, repair of uninhabitable
houses and conversion) was 1,654,019. Of the 1,401,575 permanent houses built, 263,081
were of non-traditional types. One in seven of the 164,279 permanent houses completed
in Scotland have been built by the Scottish Special Housing Association.
The Northern Ireland Housing Trust was responsible for 10,911 of the 41,015 houses
built in Northern Ireland between January 1945 and the end ofjune 1953-
Town and Country Planning
The land of Britain is one of the most densely populated areas in the world and it is
therefore of vital importance in the public interest that competing claims to its use should
be settled in such a way that the necessary balance between them is maintained.
From 1909 onwards the idea of the planned use of land was given a degree of expression
in successive Acts of Parliamgit, but because the pattern of development over much of the
country had already hardened into large unplanned urban concentrations as a result of the
industrialization processes of the previous century, the powers granted to planning
authorities by the early Acts were inadequate for the task in hand.
The twenty years between the two world wars were also decades of expansion in in¬
dustry, engineering and housebuilding; the population was still increasing; and there was a
general movement towards better standards of living which required more space for
individual members of the community. At the beginning of the nineteen-thirties a major
effort was made to consolidate and strengthen planning law and to extend the planning
254
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
powers of central and local authorities to the point at which they could exercise effective
control. Despite this effort, which culminated in the Town and Country Planning Act,
1932, inter-war planning legislation had only a limited effect, and at the time of the out¬
break of the second world war, many of the outstanding problems of land use remained
unsolved.
Renewed efforts were made to deal with these problems during the course of the war.
Between 1939 and 1943 three expert committees were appointed to study and report upon
(a) the unregulated growth and spread of industry, (b) the hampering of planning by
difficulties of compensation and betterment, and (c) the encroachment of urban develop¬
ment upon the countryside. After the war, two other committees studied the question of
New Towns and National Parks, respectively.
Almost all the principal planning recommmendations of these five committees have
now been incorporated in Acts of ParUament, as follows: the Distribution of Industry Act,
1945, the New Towns Act, 1946, the Town and Country Planning Act, I947> die Town
and Country Planning (Scotland) Act, I947> and the National Parks and Access to the
Countryside Act, 1949.
The Town and Country Planning Acts, 1947
The Town and Country Planning Act, 1947, and the Town and Country Planning
(Scotland) Act, 1947, are comprehensive and radical measures which provide a framework
or pattern of land use for the whole of the United Kingdom (except Northern Ireland to
which the Acts do not apply). Their main purposes are:
1. To co-ordinate planning throughout the country by means of development plans
against which day-to-day development can be considered.
2. To bring all development, with certain exceptions, under control by making it
subject to the permission of a local planning authority or of central Government.
3. To deal with certain specific problems of amenity, e.g., the preservation of trees
and woodlands and of buildings of special architectural and historic interest.
4. To extend both the powers of public authorities to acquire and develop land for
planning purposes and the scope and scale of grants from central funds to local
authorities towards carrying out the acquisition and redevelopment of land.
The Acts also dealt with compensation and development charges,1 but the experience of
four years revealed serious practical difficulties in the working of the financial provisions
relating to these matters. Some changes were therefore made by the Town and Country
Planning Act, 1953, and more far-reaching amendments are proposed.
Development Plans
Under the terms of the 1947 Acts, local planning authorities in England and Wales and in
Scotland are required to prepare and submit to the Minister of Housing and Local
Government and the Secretary of State for Scotland, respectively, development plans
covering the whole of their areas, based on a careful survey of physical and other resources.
The local authorities for the purpose are: in England and Wales, the county councils, the
county borough councils, or, where necessary, joint planning boards; and in Scotland, the
county councils, the large burghs or joint planning committees. Smaller units of local
government may assist in the work in areas of interest to them, and provision is made for
public inquiry before any plan receives mimsterial approval, so that persons whose land is
affected may have an opportunity to state their case.
1 Charges payable under the 1947 Acts in certain cases where the grant of planning permission
to develop land increased the value of the land. Development charges were abolished by the Town
and Country Planning Act, 1953.
SOCIAL WELFARE
255
By the end of March 1953, 130 local planning authorities in England and Wales had
submitted completed plans to the Minister of Housing and Local Government. In Scot¬
land, 17 authorities had submitted plans to the Secretary of State for Scotland.
Planning Control
The powers of control over development granted to planning authorities by the Acts
enable them to prevent building over good agricultural land or over land containing
valuable mineral deposits, to restrain the outward sprawl of the great towns, to improve
living conditions and industrial efficiency, and to preserve the countryside and coastline
from further disfigurement and destruction.
Planning Progress
Few results of large-scale replanning can as yet be recorded, since the labour force, raw
materials and financial reserves required are not available in sufficient strength or quantity.
Nevertheless by the end of March 1953 many of the essential preliminary measures had
been taken, e.g., 63 declaratory orders1 covering 4,714 acres (1,908 ha.) in England and
Wales had been obtained from the Minister of Housing and Local Government, while in
Scotland one order covering approximately 70 acres (28 ha.) had been obtained from the
Secretary of State for Scotland. Moreover special provision had been made for the recon¬
struction of the centres of the more badly war-damaged cities. Rebuilding valued at about
^10-5 milhon had been completed, further work of reconstruction costing ^8 million
had been started in provincial cities, and ^10 milhon had been made available for this
purpose in the City of London.
The Distribution of Industry
The Distribution of Industry Act, 1945, makes provision for a proper balance of industry
throughout the country. Under the terms of the Act, the Board of Trade, as the responsible
Department, has wide powers to promote industrial development in what are called De¬
velopment Areas, i.e. areas in Britain which, in the past, have been peculiarly liable to
severe unemployment in times of depression owing to their dependence for employment
and prosperity on a few basic industries.2 Problems of industrial development outside the
Development Areas are dealt with jointly by a number of Government Departments, but
the main responsibility for advising on the selection of sites rests with the planning authori¬
ties, for it is their duty to ensure that industrial development fits properly into existing and
expanding communities and is consistent with the best use of land.
The New Towns
The New Towns Act, 1946, gives the Government powers to create New Towns in
order to decentralize and disperse industry and industrial population from congested
areas. Under the terms of the Act, the Minister of Housing and Local Government and
the Secretary of State for Scotland, who are the responsible ministers, may, after con¬
sultation with the local authorities concerned, make an order designating any area of land
as the site of a proposed New Town. An existing town may be included within the area.
Once the site has been designated, a Development Corporation is estabUshed with the
function of preparing a master plan, which, when it has received the approval of the
Minister, or the Secretary of State for Scotland, becomes the basis for detailed proposals.
These proposals must be submitted to the Minister, or to the Secretary of State for Scot¬
land, before any action may be taken.
1A declaratory order is an order which decrees that all land to which it refers will be subject
to compulsory purchase whenever it is needed for planning purposes.
2Sce also p. 130.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
256
Tlic Development Corporations have powers, subject to the consent of the Minister, or
the Secretary of State for Scotland, to acquire (by agreement or by compulsory purchase)
any land or property necessary for their purposes. They may also take over the provision
of public services in designated areas, if this should be considered desirable; and they may
provide any housing accommodation which local authorities are empowered to provide.
The capital cost of developing each New Town will be advanced to the corporations from
public funds;1 the corporations will then be responsible for repayment on terms approved
by the Treasury. The corporations must submit their accounts and reports to Parhament
annually.
When the purposes for which Development Corporations are established have been
substantially achieved, the corporations are to be dissolved and the towns taken over by
the appropriate local authorities.
Achievements in New Towns
Although the New Towns have shared in the handicaps imposed by the various short¬
ages previously mentioned, they represent a notable achievement in the translation of plan¬
ning into action. By 1953,12 New Towns in England and Wales and two in Scotland had
been designated and their Development Corporations set up. Eight of these towns—Basil¬
don and Harlow in Essex, Hemel Hempstead, Stevenage, Hatfield and Welwyn in Hert¬
fordshire, Crawley in Sussex, and Bracknell in Berkshire—are designed to help in absorbing
excess industry and population from the London area; the remaining six—Corby in
Northamptonshire, AyclifFe and Peterlee in Durham, Cwmbran in Monmouthshire, and
the Scottish New Towns of East Kilbride, in Lanarkshire, and Glenrothes, in Fife—are to
serve the needs of growing industrial and mining areas.
In England and Wales the total population planned for these New Towns when com¬
pleted is 480,000. By January 1953 it had already increased from the original 122,330 by
between 38,000 and 39,000 persons, and it is estimated that if the present rate of progress
can be kept up, all the remaining people will be provided for in another nine to ten years.
In all 14 New Towns satisfactory results have been achieved in the provision of basic public
services, e.g., water supplies, drainage, roads, gas, electricity, etc.; good progress has been
made in housing and in industrial development—by the end of June 1953, 12,790 new
houses had been completed and 1,248,580 square feet of factory space had been provided—
and advances are being made in the provision of such communal services and amenities as
schools, churches, shopping centres, recreation grounds, community centres, and licensed
premises.
National Parks and Access to the Countryside
The National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act, 1949, provided for the designa¬
tion of a number of extensive areas of beautiful and relatively wild country in England and
Wales as National Parks. The characteristic landscape of these areas is to be carefully pre¬
served, and facilities for open-air recreation are to be improved or provided.
A National Parks Commission for England and Wales was set up by the Act of 1949,
and by 1953 the first six of the 12 National Parks recommended by the Hobhouse
Committee2 had been established. These are: the Peak District, the Lake District, Snow¬
donia in North Wales, Dartmoor in Devonshire, the Pembrokeshire Coast in South
Wales, and the North Yorkshire Moors. An administrative system is now in operation
for the first five of these parks. The Peak and Lake District National Parks are adminis¬
tered by Joint Planning Boards. For Dartmoor and the Pembrokeshire Coast a special
1The Parliamentary Secretary to the Ministry of Housing and Local Government stated in the
House of Commons, in June 1953, that the total cost in the 14 New Towns will be about A25°
million. Of this sum, A15° million has already been sanctioned.
2The National Parks (England and Wales) Committee, which reported in 1947.
SOCIAL WELFARE
257
Park Planning Committee of the county council has been set up, while in Snowdonia a
Joint Advisory Committee will advise the three county councils who will continue to be
responsible for planning.
The Nature Conservancy, estabhshed by Royal Charter in 1949, was given additional
powers under the National Parks Act to arrange for the setting up of Nature Reserves
suitable for the preservation and study of Britain’s flora and fauna. Four of these reserves
were declared in July 1953: Kingley Vale, Sussex; Blcan Woods and Ham Street Woods,
both in Kent; and Monk’s Wood, in Huntingdonshire.
The National Parks Act also provides for a complete survey of all footpaths and bridle¬
ways. This will be the first comprehensive national record of public rights of way, estab¬
lishing them once and for all. This is being done with the assistance of parish and district
councils; the surveys will be collated and published by county councils. The maintenance
of footpaths and other rights of way and the creation of new ones, where desirable, will
also be the responsibility of local authorities.
There is also provision in the Act for long-distance routes, i.e. connecting footpaths
and bridleways with continuous rights of way. The National Parks Commission makes
proposals for the provision of such routes and their maintenance; once the proposals are
approved by the Minister of Housing and Local Government, it falls to the local authorities
to give effect to them. The Pennine Way, which runs from Edale in the Peak District to
the Scottish Border, a distance of some 250 miles (400 km.), was approved in 1951. A route
along the north coast of Cornwall from Devon around Land’s End to Penzance was
approved in 1952. Further routes under consideration are Offa’s Dyke, running from the
coast of Flintshire down the Welsh Marches to Chepstow; a path round the Pembroke-
sliire coast; and an extension of the Cornwall north coast path from Penzance along the
south coast.
The Act also gives local authorities the task of surveying in their areas the access enjoyed
by the public to open country, i.e. mountain, moor, heath, down, cliff and beach, and
empowers them to improve such access where necessary by means of agreements with
owners, or by access orders.
The Scottish National Parks Working Party has considered all five areas recommended
as National Parks in Scotland with a view to their possible development under the
existing statutory powers, and has submitted to the Secretary of State for Scotland a
report on each of these areas. The Scottish Committee of the Nature Conservancy
established its first national Nature Reserve on the slopes of Beimi Eighe in the deer forest
of Kinlochewe in Ross and Cromarty. It has also estabhshed a second national nature
reserve at Morton Lochs, Fife, and a third at Tentsmuir, Fife.
Planning in Northern Ireland
Planning legislation in Northern Ireland provides for the preparation by local authori¬
ties of planning schemes for the development or redevelopment of their areas with the
object of securing proper sanitary conditions, amenities and the most suitable laying out
and use of land. Since the passing of the Planning (Interim Development) Act (Northern
Ireland), 1944, the authorities concerned have made appreciable progress in the pre¬
paration of outline advisory plans, which indicate broadly the proposals for their areas.
The outline advisory plans provide a foundation for the preparation of more detailed
plans at a later stage and facilitate the control of development pending the completion of
the fmal schemes.
XL RELIGION, SCIENCE, AND THE ARTS
RELIGION
Every person living in Britain possesses the rights of religious freedom as they are des¬
cribed in article 18 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights; that is, he may change
his religion at will and may manifest his religion in teaching, practice, worship and
observance. Churches and religious societies of any faith may own property, conduct
schools and propagate their faith in speech and writing. Freedom of conscience for minor¬
ity religious groups and for non-religious groups has been achieved gradually and not
without a struggle.
The Church of England and the Anglican Communion
The Church of England ‘by law established’ occupies a middle position between the
Roman CathoUc Church and Continental Protestantism. At the Reformation it repudi¬
ated the supremacy of the Pope and certain religious doctrines but retained the creeds, the
historic episcopate and liturgical worship, the last being embodied in the Book of
Common Prayer. Religious Orders were restored a hundred years ago. No single law de¬
fines the establishment of the Church of England in any such way as, for example, the Act
of Union, 1707, defines the position of the Church of Scotland. The relation of Church
and State in England is one of mutual obligations, of privileges accorded to the Church
but balanced by certain duties. The Church of England is uniquely related to the Crown.
The Sovereign, who must be a member of the Church of England, is called Defender of
the Faith’, a statutory title as protector of the Church, and promises on his or her Accession
to uphold it. Prayers for the Sovereigmare said in all the statutory services of the Church
and the clergy take the oath of allegiance to the Crown.
The second link of Church and State is through the House of Lords, in which the two
archbishops of Canterbury and York and 24 bishops have seats. This makes it possible for
the mind of the Church to be freely expressed on any great moral issue raised in con¬
nection with the corporate conduct of the State, as well as on more narrowly ecclesiastical
issues. Clergy of the Church of England are legally disqualified from sitting in the House
of Commons. All bishops and deans are appointed by the Sovereign on the advice of the
Prime Minister. The State upholds sentences passed in ecclesiastical courts (see p. 67). The
highest court of appeal from an ecclesiastical court is the Judicial Committee of the Privy
Council.
The State recognizes and protects church property. It makes no payments to the^Church
except for services rendered (e.g., chaplaincies to the armed forces and to prisons). Church
property’ belongs to parishes, dioceses or church societies. Half the Church’s income
comes from present giving and half from past giving, in the form of endowments. Endow¬
ments produce an income of -£8§ million a year and, of this total, property representing
an annual income of -£jj million is administered by the Church Commissioners, most of it
for specific purposes from which it cannot be transferred. The State is represented on this
body and it reports annually to Parliament.
The Established Church is not free to change its forms of worship, as laid down in the
Book of Common Prayer, without the consent of Parliament. A proposed revision (1928)
was accepted by the Church Assembly and the Convocations of Canterbury and York (see
p. 259), though with substantial minority opposition in some of the Houses, but was
rejected by the House of Commons. A Church-appointed commission on Church-State
258
259
RELIGION, SCIENCE, AND THE ARTS
relations reported in January 1952 and suggested certain changes in the relations between
Church and State, but it was opposed to disestabUshment; its report was unanimously
accepted by the Church Assembly.
The Church is organized by geographical areas (parishes and dioceses), and not by con¬
gregations. Every Englishman is born in a parish—about two-thirds being baptized by the
Established Church—and he tends to look to the Church for personal services (baptism of
children, marriage and burial) and to expect it to play a part in local life. Only those who
are baptized and confirmed may receive the Holy Commumon but anyone who is
baptized and not a member of another Church may apply for membership of the electoral
roll in the parish. The total number on the roll is just under 3 million, but about two-
thirds of the population of the country fulfil the two necessary qualifications.
Spiritual authority in the Church of England rests in the bishops. There are 43 dioceses,
29 in the province of Canterbury and 14 m that of York. The most ancient authoritative
bodies in the Church in matters of doctrine and discipline are the Convocations of Canter¬
bury and York. Each is presided over by its archbishop and consists of an upper house of
bishops and a lower house of deans, archdeacons and elected clergy. The Houses of Con¬
vocation meet separately or together in May and October.
In 1919 by Act of Parhament the Church of England was given a National Assembly,
commonly called the Church Assembly. This consists of three houses, Bishops, Clergy and
Laity. The Laity (345 in number, including about 80 women) are elected on the basis of
the electoral roll to represent their dioceses. The Church Assembly may pass regulations
and measures. Regulations affect matters which do not require parhamentary consent,
thus, for example, the Diocesan Conferences were set up in 1935 by regulation. Measures,
when passed through successive stages, are presented to the Ecclesiastical Committee (15
members from the House of Commons and 15 from the House of Lords). This com¬
mittee reports on the expediency and possible legal results of the measure. On its advice
the measure is either laid before Parhament and forwarded on resolution for the Royal
Assent or, more rarely, is the subject of debate like any other Bill. The advantages to the
State are the removal of the greater part of church business from its overcrowded debat¬
ing time, and to the Church the initiation, discussion and framing of necessary matters by a
fully representative church body and their speedy passing into operation.
The Assembly co-ordinates the vast scattered labours of the Church through Councils
which report to it annually. The Training Colleges Council maintains 24 colleges for the
training of teachers—an indication of the part played by the Church in the country s
educational system. The Schools Council, in co-operation with the National Society, deals
with matters affecting the Church Schools. Other councils include the Central Advisory
Council of Training for the Ministry. Selection of ordination candidates lies in the power
of the bishops, but they have recently agreed that candidates under 40 shall attend one of
the Council’s ‘selection centres’ where a group of assessors spend several days with the
men, advise them which of the 22 theological colleges would best suit their needs, and
discuss with those who are rejected the possibility of serving the Church as laymen.
At the time when the Church Assemblywas set up the laity were associated in the govern¬
ment of the local churches through new elected bodies, the Parochial Church Councils.
There are Anglican Churches in Ireland, Scotland and Wales, but these are not estab¬
lished. The Church of Ireland has 14 dioceses and united dioceses, and some 400,000
members; the Episcopal Church in Scotland, seven dioceses and some 108,500 members;
and the Church in Wales, six dioceses and some 200,000 members.
Outside the United Kingdom the Anglican Communion exists wherever Englishmen
have gone as settlers, traders and missionaries. The Protestant Episcopal Church in the
United States of America, the Church of India, Pakistan, Burma and Ceylon, and the
Anglican Churches of South Africa, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, the West Indies,
China, Japan, and West Africa are all autonomous members of the Anglican Com-
26o
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
munion, while there are 21 oversea dioceses, mainly in Africa and Asia, which are under
the jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Canterbury.
Since 1867, except for the war years, the Lambeth Conference has met every tenth year
as an unofficial consultation between all Anglican bishops. It has no authority but enjoys
great moral prestige, and its findings on doctrine, discipline, relations with other com¬
munions, and on the attitude of the Churches to political and social questions are widely
read. In August 1954 the first of a series of Anglican Congresses, including clergy not in
episcopal orders and laymen as well as bishops, will be held in Minneapolis, Minnesota,
U.S.A. The Congresses will take place between the Lambeth Conferences.
The Church of Scotland and other Presbyterian Churches
The Church of Scotland, which in government is Presbyterian, has been described as
‘the supreme example of a Church which is established and yet is free’. Whereas Episco¬
pacy in church government is a hierarchy of persons, in Presbyterianism there is a hier¬
archy of courts. All ministers are of equal status, and the Church is governed locally by
the Kirk Session, consisting of the minister and elected elders: above this is the court of the
Presbytery, then that of the Synod, and finally the General Assembly, which meets
annually and consists of elected ministers and elders presided over by an elected Moderator
who serves for one year. The Sovereign is represented at the General Assembly by the
Lord High Commissioner. The complete independence of the Church of Scotland to
appoint its own officers and decide all matters of doctrine and discipline has been fought
for by the Church with the utmost vigour down the years. The freedom of the Church is
recognized by Parliament without being the subject of debate or modification. The
thorough training of the ministry—lasting a minimum of six years—has given the Church
a high reputation for scholarship and has in turn influenced the standard of education in
the country. The communicant membership of the Church is a million and a quarter.
Next in size among Presbyterian Churches is the Presbyterian Church in Ireland. The
Presbyterian Church of England is organized in 14 Presbyteries and its highest court is the
General Assembly. It admits women to the eldership.
The Free Churches
The largest of the Free Churches is the Methodist Church, the product of a union of
Methodist Churches in 1932. It has three-quarters of a million full members. The supreme
authority in the Church is the Annual Conference and the system of government is in
many ways presbyterian; the Leaders’ Meeting corresponding to the Kirk Session, with
Circuit Meetings and District Synods resembling Presbytery and Synod. It is not, how¬
ever, the form of government that distinguishes Methodists from other Churches. Starting
as a powerful evangelistic movement within the Church of England under the leadership
of the brothers John and Charles Wesley, the Methodists had no idea of founding a Church
until forbidden to preach by ecclesiastical authority. One of the Church’s characteristics is
its strong emphasis on lay leadership. There are more than 25,000 trained lay preachers
sharing the ministers’ work and preaching in thousands of local churches.
The Congregational and Baptist Churches both regard the Church as a covenanted
fellowship of believers, ministers being called to special service and set aside, trained and
recognized by the Church. Local churches have formed county and national unions,
whose secretariat and assemblies, however, have no compulsive authority over them,
though much influence.
The Congregationalists in Britain number 227,000 and the Baptists 335,600. They are
the two oldest dissenting bodies, and the importance they attach to the autonomy of the
local church meeting has been an influential factor in the development of British demo¬
cratic methods. They are the only Churches in Britain which admit women to the
Ministry. Baptists differ from Congregationalists in not practising infant baptism.
261
RELIGION, SCIENCE, AND THE ARTS
The Society of Friends, or Quakers, have no ordained ministry, and do not observe the
Sacraments. They have borne a consistent witness to pacifism, and their influence,
especially in social reform and the relief of suffering, has been out of all proportion to their
number (20,000). The Unitarian and Free Christian Churches deny the necessity of
Trinitarian belief. The Salvation Army, founded in 1878 by William Booth, a Methodist,
replaces ecclesiastical by military terminology. William Booth’s mission to the poorest
attracted first the scorn and then the respect of a large public. The movement is now
world-wide and its social work is well supported.
The Christian Scientists have over 340 branch churches and societies in Britain.
The Roman Catholic Church
The Roman Catholic Church in the United Kingdom claims nearly four million
adherents. The head of the Church in England is the Archbishop of Westminster. There
are 18 dioceses and nearly 2,000 parishes. The insistence of the Church on the education
of children in its own schools has led to the building of elementary schools in the parishes
at great sacrifice. The Church resists any attempt by the State to take over these schools.
Schools, social work and many institutions are staffed by the great Roman Cathohc
Orders for men and women.
Jewry
The virtual destruction of whole Jewish communities on the Continent has left English
Jewry as the largest group of Jews in Europe. These same events have caused religious
organizations among Jews to gain in numbers and influence. The two main divisions are
between Orthodox and Progressive Jews and each has within it several groups of congre¬
gations and synagogues. The Chief Rabbi is the head of the largest group within the
Orthodox Jews.
Muslim Community
Among other non-Christian communities in Britain, the Mushms are the most widely
represented. The principal mosque is the Shah Jehan Mosque at Woking, and there are
also mosques in London, Birmingham, Manchester, Cardiff and Glasgow.
Co-operation between Churches
An outstanding feature of the past decade has been the growth of co-operation between
the Churches. The British Council of Churches was founded in 1942 and includes official
representatives from all the Churches of the British Isles with the exception of the Roman
Cathohc Church. The Council facilitates common action between the Churches and seeks
to further the cause of Christian unity. The Archbishop of Canterbury is President. I he
Church of England, the Church of Scotland and the Free Churches in England, Scotland,
Ireland and Wales also participate in the World Council of Churches which was con¬
stituted at Amsterdam, Holland, in 1948, and now links together 160 Churches in 45
nations for co-operation in action and the study of common problems.
Co-operation of other Churches with the Roman Catholic Church takes place on
specific issues but there is no machinery of continued co-operation. The Council of
Christians and Jews works for better understanding between members of the two
religions, and deals with problems arising in the social field.
THE PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES
While the promotion of the sciences is largely the concern of those learned societies and
institutions devoted specifically to this end, only a small part of the research which is vital
to science is carried out directly by them. Most of die pure or fundamental research is
conducted in the universities, which also play an essential part in promoting the sciences by
262
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
maintaining a steady supply of trained scientists. In practice it has become impossible to
distinguish clearly between science and its extensive applications in everyday life, with the
result that scientific research in the widest sense has become the concern also of industry
and of various Departments of Government.
In recent years it has become an acknowledged responsibility of the Government not
only to undertake research directly but also to keep under review the facilities for the
training of scientists, to encourage fundamental research, to finance certain research pro¬
jects, and to ensure that adequate research is directed to matters of national interest. As a
result a system of collaboration has developed between the universities, industry, die
learned societies and the Government which is of great value to the community and leaves
the greatest possible measure of freedom to individual scientists.
Though scientific research is carried out mainly under three different kinds of adminis¬
tration—university, industry and Government—there is strong liaison and close co-opera¬
tion between them, while the learned societies remain free to play a most important part
in the discussion and publication of the results of research.
In medical research, apart from that undertaken by Government institutions, important
work is done by such independent organizations as the British Empire Cancer Campaign,
the Imperial Cancer Research Fund, and the Nuffield Foundation, and by some large
pharmaceutical firms.
The Learned Societies
The learned societies have had a profound and lasting influence upon the development
and organization of science in Britain; not only have they provided the background for
the continuity of research from the seventeenth century onwards, but they have been a
meeting ground where all scientists can forgather for the exchange of ideas, and a reliable
source from which new ideas for the enrichment of knowledge can flow. Although today
the bulk of research operations is conducted under auspices other than theirs, the learned
societies have retained their traditional function of facilitating the spread of scientific
knowledge and the application of new discoveries.
At present there are over 200 learned scientific societies in Britain with approximately
400 scientific publications. There are also numerous technical institutions and professional
associations, many of which are playing a distinguished part in promoting their own
branches of science and are interested in the education and professional well-being of their
members. Prominent among these are the Institution of Civil Engineers, the Institution
of Mechanical Engineers, the Institution of Electrical Engineers, the Institution of
Metallurgists, the Royal Institute of Chemistry and the Institute of Physics.
The Royal Society, founded in 1660, occupies a unique place in the country’s scientific
affairs, although for two centuries scientists were in a minority among its members, whose
interests lay mainly in history, art, archaeology or exploration. The Society has always
been independent of State control but its advice on scientific matters has frequently been
sought by the Government. Today its influence remains as strong as ever and its Fellows
serve on most, if not all, of the Advisory Councils of Government Departments.
In addition the Society is responsible for the administration of many research funds and
special funds derived from various sources and a number of Government grants. These
funds and grants are used for the promotion of science through research, publications, con¬
gresses, the award of medals, lectures, and in many other ways. Its Fellowship consists of
approximately 500 eminent scientists and 50 foreign members. Admission of the former is
restricted to 25 a year, and of the latter to four a year; a few eminent non-scientists are also
elected to Fellowships. The Society maintains a library, issues a large number of publica¬
tions, including the Philosophical Transactions and the Proceedings, and convenes conferences
which are attended by scientists from all countries.
263
RELIGION, SCIENCE, AND THE ARTS
The Royal Society of Arts (originally the Society for the Encouragement of Arts Manu¬
factures and Commerce) was founded in 1754. and as it was the first society of its kind its
work was at first very wide, covering scientific, technical, industrial and commercial
matters on a world-wide scale. As institutions devoted to the specialized branches of
science and industry came to be established, the Society gradually abandoned some of its
earlier fields of work, but it is still a recognized forum for the discussion of technical and
other subjects.
The Royal Institution was founded in 1799 as a public body for facilitating the introduc¬
tion of useful mechanical inventions and improvements, and for teaching the application of
science to everyday fife. Later it undertook the ‘promotion of chemical science by experi¬
ments and lectures for improving arts and manufactures’, and the diffusion and extension
of useful knowledge’. Its character, however, was largely determined by the work of Sir
Humphry Davy and Michael Faraday who established a tradition of research. Today the
Institution has extensive research laboratories, and lectures are given on the recent
developments in science and other branches of knowledge.
The British Association for the Advancement of Science was founded in 1831 to promote
general interest in science and its applications. At the present day one of its chief activities
is the Annual Meeting. Its 13 sections cover the whole range of pure and applied science
other than medical science, and there is a division for studying the social and international
relations of science. Collaboration with other scientific organizations has always been an
important function of the British Association, and it has an organized relationship wit
over 150 scientific bodies and learned societies. It has also played an important part in the
development of science by taking or recommending action to remove obstacles to the dis¬
covery and application of scientific knowledge.
The Universities
The universities carry the main responsibility for the pursuit of fundamental research
and for the training of scientists. During recent years there has also been a considerable ex¬
pansion of technological training and research facilities within the universities, all of which
now offer work in one or more technological subjects (applied science, engineering, metal¬
lurgy, industrial fermentation, etc.). Early in 1953 it was decided that the Imperial College
of Science and Technology (part of London University) should undergo a major ex¬
pansion with the aim of increasing the number of scientists and technologists under full¬
time training from the present figure of 1,650 to 3,000 by the end of 1962.
The 19 universities and the four university colleges in the United Kingdom (see P-245)
all have laboratories or research departments. About two-thirds of the income of the
universities comes from Government sources. There is no direct departmental control
and the method of administering the grant—through the University Grants Committee
(see p. 245)—ensures academic freedom. Additional funds for the prosecution of research
are also secured in some instances by the private endowment of research fellowships
generally awarded by the universities to selected persons, or by grants from outside bodies
tenable at the universities. Examples are the Leverhulme Fellowships, the Imperial
Chemical Industries Fellowships and the Research Grants of the Nuffield Foundation.
The universities are also assisted by grants from industry and commerce and fi°nj die
Government Research Councils. An example of the close co-operation that has been
achieved between several branches of industry and the research departments of universities
is the Glass Delegation of the University of Sheffield. This is responsible for the general
direction of the work of the Department of Glass Technology and is composed of mem¬
bers appointed by the Council of the University and representatives of firms and com¬
panies who subscribe funds for the furdierance of training and research. By these means
the universities are closely associated with the Government research departments and with
the most important industries in the country.
264
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Research in Industry
Industrial research in Great Britain is conducted by individual industrial firms and organi¬
zations independently of Government aid, by co-operative Research Associations which
make use of facilities afforded by the Government, by sponsored research institutes, and by
universities and a number of the major technical colleges.
Industrial Organizations
The Industrial Research Secretariat of the Federation of British Industries has conducted
a comprehensive survey (1945-46) of the research work done in private organizations
(Scientific and Technical Research in British Industry, FBI, July 1947). This showed that about
1,000 British firms were conducting research: 420 spent at least -£1,000 a year on research,
and the total sum spent by industry on research and development was approximately
£30 million. The number of workers engaged in industrial research was estimated at
45,000; about 10,000 were qualified staff with a university degree or equivalent, and nearly
one-half of these were chemists. About 100 firms had first-class research facilities and
extensive research programmes which embraced both pure and applied research. The
survey showed that about 300 firms were in touch with universities and technical colleges
on research questions, and 60 firms had a very close connection, through endowing
scholarships and research fellowships, with appropriate universities. It also revealed that
more than 300 of the firms surveyed were members of a Research Association and that
more than half of these were members of more than one Research Association.
A later report (Research and Development in British Industry, FBI, July 1952) suggested
that, in the year 1950-51, the total expenditure on research and development had increased
by between 50 and 100 per cent since 1945-46, and the number of qualified staff by about
50 per cent. The other figures remained substantially die same.
Research Associations
One of the first acts of the Advisory Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (see
pp. 265 and 267), when it was established in 1915, was to recommend a scheme by which
the Government a;sociated itself with groups of firms having similar interests to form
Research Associations. Today there are 43 such Research Associations,1 with a combined
income of more than £3 million, of which two-fifths is contributed by the Government
through the Industrial Grants Committee of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research (see p. 267). The amounts of die Government grants are related to the contri¬
butions made by the industries concerned.
The Research Associations are autonomous bodies, governed by their own councils on
which the large majority are representatives of industry. The councils are advised by re¬
search committees in the preparation of research programmes.
Sponsored Research Institutes. A number of sponsored research institutes have been estab¬
lished to meet the needs of private firms which are unable to maintain fully equipped
research laboratories. They are establishments where research can be carried out confi¬
dentially so that the results and any patents which may arise from it are retained as the pro¬
perty of the sponsoring body. Examples of such institutes are the Fulmer Research Institute
and the Sondes Place Research Institute.
National Research Development Corporation. The National Research Development Cor¬
poration was set up by the Board of Trade in 1948. Its function is primarily to develop and
exploit, in die public interest, inventions resulting from research carried out by Govern¬
ment Departments and other public bodies. It is an independent body, subject only to
general direction by the Board of Trade, with powers to borrow from Government funds
Tor a complete list of these Research Associations see the Annual Report of the Department of
Scientific and Industrial Research, 1951-52, pp. 3-4.
RELIGION, SCIENCE, AND THE ARTS 265
up to £5 million in the first five years of its life. Projects selected for development include
electronic digital computers, Merton diffraction gratings and the production of hecogenin
for the manufacture of cortisone.
Government Research Organization
Although the active participation by the Government in scientific effort is, for the most
part, a twentieth-century development, its association with science dates from a much
earlier time. Interest in navigation led Charles II in 1675 to establish Britain’s first State-
supported institution—the Royal Observatory at Greenwich1—for the purpose of correct¬
ing the tables of the positions of the moon and fixed stars ‘for the use of his seamen’. The
Geological Survey of Great Britain—the first national institution of its kind in the world—
originated in 1835. In 1842 the Department of the Government Chemist was founded, and
in 1854 ‘for the safeguarding of seamen’ the Meteorological Office was established by the
Board of Trade. All these Government Departments were using scientific knowledge but
there was little organized effort towards the application of the discoveries made in pure
science. Government scientific organization, hke many British institutions, evolved gradu¬
ally in response to the changing social and economic circumstances of the times.
The need for research in physics and engineering, and particularly into methods of pre¬
cise measurement, led to the establishment of the National Physical Laboratory under the
control of the Royal Society in 1900, with a modest grant from the Treasury towards
equipment and a yearly grant towards upkeep.
From 1909, however, the Government assumed a wider responsibility for promoting
and encouraging scientific research and since that time its assistance has been adapted to
meet the rapidly changing conditions in industry and education.
The Development Commission, appointed in 1909 by the Government, recommended
that financial aid should be made available from the Development Fund to ‘aid and
develop agriculture and rural industries by promoting scientific research’. In 1911 the
Development Fund was used to establish a comprehensive scheme which led to the forma¬
tion of most of the present-day agricultural research institutes.
In 1913 a Medical Research Committee (the forerunner of the Medical Research
Council) was appointed to administer the research funds provided under the National
Health Insurance Act of 1911.
Up to the outbreak of the first world war, the Government’s contribution to scientific
research was made directly through such organizations as these, and indirectly through
grants administered on its behalf by such bodies as the Royal Society and the Imperial
College of Science and Technology.
The recognition of the importance of scientific research and of the application of
scientific knowledge to commerce and industry led to the establishment of the Depart¬
ment of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR) as a separate Government Department
in 1916 (see pp. 41 and 267). The Advisory Council for Scientific and Industrial Re¬
search (to which all proposals for new work are referred by the DSIR in the first instance)
was given responsibility for (1) instituting specific researches; (2) establishing or develop¬
ing special institutions or departments of existing institutions for the specific study of
problems affecting particular industries or trades; (3) the establishment and award of re¬
search studentships and fellowships.
In 1918 the Royal Society relinquished financial responsibility for the National Physical
Laboratory to the DSIR, although the Royal Society continued to advise on the scientific
direction of the Laboratory.
The Forestry Commissioners were appointed in 1919 with powers to undertake and aid
research for the promotion of forestry.
1Now in process of removal to Herstmonceux, Sussex.
s
266
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In 1920 the Government established the Medical Research Council with a grant in aid
provided directly by Parliament.
The third of the Councils created by the Government for the promotion of research, the
Agricultural Research Council, was established in 1931. In addition to its duties as adviser
to the Development Commissioners and the Agricultural Departments (for England
and Wales and for Scotland), the Council was given funds of its own from which grants
could be made for special research projects.
During the second world war a Scientific Advisory Committee to the War Cabinet was
created, with the object of co-ordinating defence research and civil research.
The Lord President of the Council, as the Minister responsible for the three Research
Councils, and as President of the Scientific Advisory Committee, came to be regarded as
the member of the Cabinet responsible for the direction of Government scientific
organization.
Post-war Developments
At the end of the second world war, the Government established an Advisory Council
on Scientific Policy ‘to advise the Lord President of the Council in the exercise of his re¬
sponsibility for the formulation and execution of Government scientific policy’.
The Advisory Council, appointed by the Lord President in January 1947, has 15
members—12 eminent scientists from the universities, industry and Government service,
and three senior Government administrators.
In the same year the Defence Research Policy Committee was established ‘to advise the
Minister of Defence and Chiefs of Staff on matters connected with the formulation of
scientific policy in the defence field’.
These two bodies replaced the Scientific Advisory Committee to the War Cabinet.
In order to give adequate attention to each of the subjects within its wide range of
interest, the Advisory Council has established the following standing committees:
The Committee on Scientific Manpower
The Scientific Library and Technical Information Committee
The Committee on Overseas Scientific Relations.
Government Machinery for Civil Scientific Research
The principles underlying Government scientific organization are briefly as follows:
1. The Lord President of the Council is responsible for the formulation and execution
of Government scientific policy and is advised by the Advisory Council on
Scientific Policy on general questions which relate to the whole field of civil
science.
2. The Lord President is the Minister responsible to Parliament for the Department of
Scientific and Industrial Research, the Medical Research Council, the Agricultural
Research Council, and the Nature Conservancy, and is chairman of the three Privy
Council Committees to which they report—the committees for Scientific and
Industrial Research, Medical Research, and Agricultural Research and Nature
Conservation. (For proposed new arrangements for the organization of atomic
energy development see Appendix.)
3. Other Ministers are responsible for the scientific establishments within their own
Departments.
4. The advice of the Research Councils is at the disposal of the Executive Depart¬
ments and there is close haison between them, but the Research Councils are not
subject to departmental control.
RELIGION, SCIENCE, AND THE ARTS
267
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research
The DSIR1 is responsible to the Committee of the Privy Council for Scientific and
Industrial Research of which the Lord President is chairman. This Committee is advised
by the Advisory Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (see pp. 264 and 265),
which includes in its membership eminent scientists and leading industrialists, two mem¬
bers closely connected with organized labour and assessors appointed by Government
Departments.
With the exception of medicine and agriculture, the DSIR includes in its scope all
branches of natural science and their application to industrial processes. Its activities fall
into three main groups:
1. Scientific research in the national interest, and to meet the needs of Government
Departments.
2. The encouragement of research and the application of scientific knowledge in
industry.
3. The encouragement of fundamental research at universities and elsewhere, and the
maintenance of an adequate supply of trained research workers for laboratories of
all kinds.
The first of these functions is discharged through 14 national research organizations (of
which the National Physical Laboratory at Teddington, Middlesex, is the largest) under
the Department’s own control and direction, and financed from its own vote.2 The NPL,
in addition to its work on precise measurement and the maintenance of standards, carries
out fundamental and applied research under the following main heads: aerodynamics,
electricity, electronics, engineering, mathematics (including statistics), metallurgy, physics,
radio, ship design, light and metrology.
The second of the DSIR’s functions is discharged mainly through the co-operative
Research Associations (see p. 264); while its third function is carried out by means of
limited grants to individual workers or institutions for special investigations.
The close contacts maintained between the DSIR and other Govermnent Departments,
Research Associations and other bodies help to ensure that the scientific resources of the
Department are applied to the solution of problems which are of most importance to the
national economy and are used to make the maximum contribution to improving in¬
dustrial efficiency.
Medical Research Council
The Medical Research Council (MRC) is the successor of the Medical Research
Committee established in 1913 under the National Health Insurance Act. The Council
was incorporated under its present title by Royal Charter in 1920.
1See also p. 41.
2National Physical Laboratory
Building Research Station
Chemical Research Laboratory
Fire Research Station
Food Investigation Organization including:
Low Temperature Research Station
Torry Research Station and Humber
Laboratory
Ditton Laboratory *
Smithfield and Covent Garden
Laboratories
Forest Products Research Laboratory
Fuel Research Station
Geological Survey and Museum of Practical
Geology
Hydraulics Research Station
Mechanical Engineering Research Laboratory
Pest Infestation Laboratory
Radio Research Station
Road Research Laboratory
Water Pollution Research Laboratory
268
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The MRC is responsible to the Committee of the Privy Council for Medical Research
of which the Lord President is chairman, the Minister of Health is vice-chairman, and
the Secretaries of State for the Home Department, Scotland, Commonwealth Relations,
and the Colonies are members.
The MRC has 12 members. Nine of these members are appointed for their scientific
qualifications; and of the other three, one must be a member of the House of Lords and
one a member of the House of Commons. The scientific members are appomted by the
Privy Council Committee after consultation with the Medical Research Council and the
President of the Royal Society.
The Council’s chief function is to undertake or promote scientific investigations to ob¬
tain new knowledge likely to be of value in the field of curative and preventive medicine.
In promoting investigations on particular subjects it has the advice of a large number of
expert technical committees which it appoints for the purpose. In general, the arrange¬
ments for the support of research fall under three headings:
1. Investigations by members of the Council s scientific staff, mostly working in the
Council’s own research establishments.
2. Temporary research grants to independent investigators in universities and else¬
where.
3. Research studentships and travelling fellowships.
The Council’s principal research establishment is the National Institute for Medical
Research, at Mill Hill, London. In addition, the Council maintains more than 40 research
units, departments or groups attached to university or hospital institutions; some of these
are concerned with clinical research and others with laboratory studies.
The Public Health Laboratory Service is directed by the MRC on behalf of the Ministry
of Health. It consists of a chain of public health laboratories throughout England and
Wales, the largest establishment of the Service being the Central Public Health Laboratory,
Colindale (London), which includes the National Collection of Type Cultures, the
Standards Laboratory for Serological Reagents, and reference laboratories specializing in
the identification of particular groups of infective micro-organisms.
Agricultural Research Council
The Agricultural Research Council (ARC) was established by Royal Charter in 1931
It is responsible to the Committee of the Privy Council for Agricultural Research and
Nature Conservation, of which the Lord President of the Council is chairman, and the
Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries is vice-chairman. The other members of the Com¬
mittee are the Secretaries of State for the Home Department, Scotland, and the Colonies,
and the Ministers of Education and Housing and Local Government.
The ARC consists of 15 members, of whom five are appointed for their general experi¬
ence of, and interest in, agriculture, and the remainder for their scientific qualifications.
The Privy Council Committee, after consulting the ARC itself and (as regards the
scientific members) the President of the Royal Society, makes the appointments.
The Council plans and co-ordinates work over the entire field of agricultural research
and is assisted in this task by standing committees and a number of technical committees
and conferences.
The Council advises both the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries and the Department
of Agriculture for Scotland on the programmes, estimates and staffing of the Agricultural
RELIGION, SCIENCE, AND THE ARTS
269
Research Institutes1 which, with certain exceptions, have their own governing bodies, but
are almost wholly financed from State funds by means of annual block grants from the
A XhTcouiSTaTiTrestarch stations and units under its direct control in Great Britain.2
In addition the ARC devotes part of its funds to encouraging research by means ol
special research grants which are allocated to one or other of the research institutes, to
university departments or to advisory centres. It also awards scholarships and training
grants.
Nature Conservancy
The Nature Conservancy was established by Royal Charter in 1949 and is responsib e
to the Committee of the Privy Council for Agricultural Research and Nature Conserva¬
tion. Its functions, as summarized in the charter, are to provide scientific advice on the
conservation and control of the natural flora and fauna of Great Bntam; to establish mam-
tain and manage nature reserves in Great Britain, including the maintenance of physica
features of scientific interest; and to organize and develop the research and scientific
services related thereto .
Other Government-Sponsored Scientific Research Work
All Departments rely to some extent on one or other of the Government Research
Councils for scientific advice. While some use these bodies as their mam source of
scientific information, a few have set up supplementary research orgamzations of their
own.
Defence Research with Civil Applications
Research and development undertaken by the Admiralty is almost exclusively directed
to meeting the requirements of the Royal Navy, but a substantial amount of this work
1Rothamsted Experimental Station, Harpenden,
Herts
Plant Breeding Institute, Cambridge
John Innes Horticultural Institution, Bayfordbury,
Herts
Horticultural Research Station, East Malhng, Kent
Agricultural and Horticultural Research Station,
Long Ashton, Bristol
Experimental and Research Station, Cheshunt,
Herts (which is being replaced by a new Glass¬
house Crops Research Station at Toddington,
Sussex)
Welsh Plant Breeding Station, Aberystwyth
Institute for Research in Plant Physiology,
Imperial College of Science and Technology,
London
National Institute for Research in Dairying,
Reading
Foot and Mouth Disease Research Institute,
Pirbright, Surrey
National Vegetable Research Station,
Wellesbourne, Warwickshire
Grassland Research Station, Drayton, Warwick¬
shire, and Hurley, Berks
National Institute of Agricultural Engineering,
Silsoe, Bedfordshire
Poultry Genetics Station, Cambridge
Hops Research Centre, Wye College, Kent
Macaulay Institute for Soil Research, Aberdeen
Scottish Society for Research in Plant Breeding,
Edinburgh
Animal Diseases Research Association, Moredun
Institute, Edinburgh
Rowett Research Institute, Aberdeen
Hannah Dairy Research Institute, Ayr
Scottish Horticultural Research Station, Mylne-
field, Aberdeen
Scottish Agricultural Machinery Testing Station,
Howden, Midlothian
Experimental Field Station, Compton, Berks
Animal Breeding and Genetics Research Organi¬
zation, Edinburgh
Institute of Animal Physiology, Babraham,
Cambridgeshire
Poultry Research Centre, Edinburgh
Plant Virus Research Unit, Cambridge
Unit of Insect Physiology, Cambridge
Unit of Animal Reproduction, Cambridge
Unit of Experimental Agronomy, Oxford
Unit of Biometrical Genetics, Birmingham
Unit of Microbiology, Sheffield
Unit of Soil Physics, Cambridge
Potato Genetics Station, Cambridge
Potato Storage Investigation Team,
Sutton Bonnington, Leicestershire
Unit of Plant Nutrition, Bristol
270
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
has important civil applications. The Royal Observatory and the National Institute of
Oceanography, whose research activities are mainly in the civil field, are administered by
the Admiralty.
The Ministry of Supply has the largest Government scientific organization in Great
Britain. It carries out research needed to meet the technical requirements of defence and is
also responsible for research in some civilian fields, e.g., the Royal Aircraft Establishment
and the National Gas Turbine Establishment at Farnborough. Some fundamental research
is also carried out for the Ministry by universities and industrial organizations.
The Air Ministry is responsible for the Meteorological Office, where the research carried
out has many applications on the civil side.
Atomic Energy
Since the second world war responsibility for atomic energy research and development
has broadly rested with the Ministry of Supply. With the formation of the new govern¬
ment in November 1951, however, the Paymaster-General was specially charged with the
supervision of atomic energy research and production, with a seat in the Cabinet. In April
1953 Prime Minister announced that a committee had been appointed to devise a
plan for transferring responsibility for atomic energy from the Ministry of Supply to a
non-departmental organization. (For proposed new arrangements see Appendix.)
The respective functions of the various atomic energy establishments in Britain at
present are as follows.
The Atomic Energy Research Establishment at Harwell, in Berkshire, is responsible for
fundamental research into nuclear physics and atomic energy, and provides basic scientific
information to the other establishments.
The Radio-Chemical Centre at Amersham, in Buckinghamshire, is a dependency of the
Harwell Establishment. It is concerned with preparing radioactive substances such as
radium, radon and radioactive isotopes produced in the atomic piles. These are used for
medical, scientific and industrial purposes (see p. 180).
The production of fissile material is directed from headquarters at Risley, near War¬
rington. Production factories are situated at Springfields, near Preston, where pure
uranium is produced from uranium concentrates; at Windscale, in Cumberland, where
plutonium is produced from uranium by means of atomic piles; at Capenhurst, in Ches¬
hire, where there is a gaseous diffusion plant for separating the uranium isotope U.235
from the more abundant isotope U.238, thus providing a fissile material which can be used
as an alternative to plutonium. An experimental atomic power station is associated with
Windscale.
Research work on atomic weapons is carried on at the Establishment at Aldermaston, in
Berkshire, and its out-stations at Woolwich and Fort Halstead.
Agriculture
Apart from research at the grant-aided Institutes and the centres financed by the ARC,
the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries conducts research in its own Veterinary Labora¬
tory at Weybridge, Surrey, and also at its Plant Pathology Laboratory at Harpenden,
Herts; and its Infestation Division at Tolworth, Surrey, conducts research into problems
affecting the destruction and control of insect pests of stored food, rodent pests and other
animal and bird pests. The Department of Agriculture for Scotland maintains a plant
pathology laboratory in Edinburgh (carrying out research in entomology and helmin¬
thology). In Northern Ireland research in all the major agricultural sciences is carried out
directly by the Ministry of Agriculture.
Fisheries
The authorities concerned with fisheries research are the Ministry of Agriculture and
Fisheries, which maintains a laboratory for marine research, a number of research vessels,
271
RELIGION, SCIENCE, AND THE ARTS
and an experimental station for shellfish investigation; the Scottish Home Department,
which maintains a research laboratory at Aberdeen and four research ships; and the
Development Commissioners. . T)
The Development Commissioners, through their Advisory Committee on Fishery Re¬
search, co-ordinate all fishery research, not only that which is aided by the Development
Fund (see p. 265). The latter bears a large part of the cost of fishery investigation by the
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries and fishery research in Scotland. From it a number
of independent institutions receive grants for marine and freshwater research.1
Food
The Ministry of Food, under the direction of its Chief Scientific Adviser, conducts re¬
search in nutrition and food technology. It has experimental laboratories and kitchens in
London and Grimsby and has recently established an experimental factory at Aberdeen to
facilitate the commercial development and application of the results of research.
Forestry
The Forestry Commission2 is responsible for forestry in Great Britain and undertakes
experimental work relating to silvicultural and allied problems. By means of grants, it
also aids forest research work undertaken by various universities and by the Imperial
Forestry Institute, Oxford.
Fuel and Power
The Ministry of Fuel and Power has responsibility for research on safety in mines, and
plays a direct part in research such as the development of coal-consuming gas turbines,
underground gasification and total gasification. There is close collaboration between the
Ministry and the Scientific Departments of the National Coal Board, the British Electricity
Authority and the Gas Council, all of whom are responsible for research in their own fields.
Transport
The Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation is concerned with two main fields of
scientific research: research on radio aids to marine navigation, conducted by the Admira ty
Signal and Radar Establishment, the cost being borne by the Ministry of Transport and
Civil Aviation; and road research, in co-operation with the DSIR, including soil mcc 1-
anics, materials, construction and road safety.
Land Use and Planning
The Ministry of Housing and Local Government is responsible for policy relating to the
use and development of land in England and Wales. Through its Technical Services
Directorate, the Ministry deals with technical planning and geographical, geological,
economic and sociological matters. Similar arrangements are made for Scotland by the
Department of Health for Scotland. The Ministry of Health and Local Government is
responsible for the general administration of the planning legislation in Northern Ireland.
Building
The Ministry of Works is responsible for reviewing the whole field of building research
and the technical development of the building industry and for securing the results of
research for the use of industry.
Hhe Marine Biological Association, Plymouth
University of Liverpool (Port Erin Biological Station)
Scottish Marine Biological Association, Millport, Isle of Cumbrae
Freshwater Biological Association, Ambleside, Westmorland
Dove Marine Laboratory (King’s College, Newcastle-upon-Tyne)
2See pp. 35 and 156.
272 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Radio and Telecommunications
The Post Office undertakes scientific research on a wide range of subjects relating to tele¬
phones, telegraph and radio systems which is carried out by the Research Branch of the
Engineering Department. It also undertakes the experimental development of radio trans¬
mitters and receivers for Post Office services and other Government Departments.
Analytical Chemistry
The Department of the Government Chemist is responsible for providing analytical
services to all Government Departments that may require them. It carries out special in¬
vestigations, e.g., in connection with nutritional and physiological surveys, and conducts
fundamental research in infra-red spectrography, chromatography and X-ray study of
crystals.
Medicine and Health
The Ministry of Health is responsible for conducting and promoting research into the
cause, prevention and treatment of illness. It controls the Public Health Laboratory Service,
which is administered for the Ministry by the Medical Research Council (see pp. 267-8).
The Department of Health for Scotland has similar responsibilities, and an Advisory
Committee on Medical Research in Scotland works with the Medical Research Council.
In Northern Ireland, the Hospitals Authority (a statutory body set up by the Minister of
Health and Local Government) has permissive powers to conduct or assist medical re¬
search. In addition, it has a statutory duty to provide adequate bacteriological and patho¬
logical services.
The General Register Office carries out research in four main fields: (1) analysis and inter¬
pretation of statistics of causes of death; (2) statistical inquiry into the treatment of cancer
and its results; (3) morbidity as revealed in hospital statistics; and (4) mental health.
Colonial Research
The bulk of the research work relating to Colonial development is done locally, but
much of it requires close collaboration with research institutes and laboratories in Britain.
It is the function of the Colonial Research Council toco-ordinate the work of the specialist
committees and to advise on general questions relating to policy.
The Colonial Products Research Council was set up by the Colonial Office in 1943 for
the organization of research under its own director. It initiates schemes of research in
Colonial raw materials, such as sugar, timber, mineral oils, etc.
Anti-Locust Research
In 1931 a small locust research organization at the Imperial Institute of Entomology in
London was internationally adopted as the world centre for locust research. This organiza¬
tion, later known as the Anti-Locust Research Centre, has during the past twenty years
received and co-ordinated information on locust movements and breeding from 40 coun¬
tries, undertaken scientific research into the life-history and habits of the different species,
and investigated and developed methods for their control and destruction. A half of the
expenditure on control is contributed by the member countries of the Commonwealth
(the United Kingdom itself contributing one third).
Other Research IVork
Finally there are a number of scientific institutions administered by Government De¬
partments which undertake a certain amount of research work in addition to their other
scientific activities. These include the Royal Botanic Gardens, the British Museum
(Natural History), the Science Museum, the Imperial Institute and the Ordnance Survey
Department.
RELIGION, SCIENCE, AND THE ARTS
273
Parliamentary and Scientific Committee
The Parliamentary and Scientific Committee is a non-party body of members of both
Houses of Parliament and representatives of certain scientific and technical institutions,
formed with the object of providing permanent liaison between scientific bodies and
Parliament. Steps are taken by the Committee to enlist the support of numerous scientific
societies so that the influence of science can be made as effective as possible in national
affairs.
Scientific Liaison Overseas
The history of scientific progress is essentially a story involving many nations, and the
organization of a country’s scientific research would be incomplete without provision for
adequate liaison with other countries.
Before the second world war a vast amount of international scientific collaboration
took place through the exchange of university staffs, the awards of scholarships and
fellowships, the close relations existing between the learned societies in this country and
their equivalent bodies abroad, and through international conferences and congresses.
The war and the post-war period saw the emergence of a number of new developments
in oversea scientific collaboration which reflected the Government’s recognition of its
responsibility in the whole field of science. The result has been that today there now exist
a number of official channels through which scientific liaison can be conducted, the princi¬
pal being:
1. The British Commonwealth Scientific Offices. A feature of the war-time pattern of
scientific collaboration was the establishment of Scientific Missions, in London by the
United States and the Commonwealth countries, and in Washington by the United King¬
dom and the other Commonwealth countries; the latter subsequently joined together as
the British Commonwealth Scientific Office in Washington. Immediately after the war a
British Commonwealth official Scientific Conference was held in London, and in view
of the success of the office in Washington during the war period, it was recommended that
this office be continued in peace time, and in addition that a British Scientific Office be set
up in London. These recommendations were approved by all Commonwealth Govern¬
ments. Since 1948 the Scientific Offices in London of the Commonwealth countries have
been located in the same building, and are closely associated with the Overseas Liaison
Division of the DSIR.
2. The Standing Committee on Overseas Scientific Relations of the Advisory Council on
Scientific Policy was set up after the war to provide, among other things, for discussion of
general policy on oversea scientific representation, scientific relations with Common¬
wealth and foreign countries, and scientific aspects of the work of the United Nations.
3. The Overseas Liaison Division of the DSIR is responsible for the executive work
arising from the Standing Committee’s activities. This division is regarded as the general
inter-departmental body responsible for oversea scientific liaison, and is placed within the
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for convenience of organization.
4. Commonwealth Agricultural Bureaux. Machinery exists in the Commonwealth Agri¬
cultural Bureaux for liaison in the field of agricultural science between countries of the
Commonwealth. In the United Kingdom there are 10 Bureaux, specializing in various
branches of agricultural science, and two Institutes—the Commonwealth Mycological
Institute and the Commonwealth Institute of Entomology. A third Institute, the Com¬
monwealth Institute of Biological Control, has its headquarters in Ottawa, Canada. The
Bureaux collect, collate and disseminate information resulting from agricultural research.
5. The British Council. The aims of the British Council in the pure and applied sciences
arc to foster closer co-operation between British scientists and scientists of other countries,
and to promote a better understanding of Britain among oversea specialists by dissemina-
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
274
ting a knowledge of British activities and achievements. Under the first objective the
exchange of visits between scientists in the United Kingdom and other countries is of
prime importance. Besides arranging lecture or advisory tours overseas by eminent
British scientists, the British Council, among many activities of a similar nature, brings to
the United Kingdom every year a number of senior oversea specialists, postgraduate
students and technicians on visits of varying duration, for the purpose of study in British
universities and other institutions, or for discussion with equivalent personnel in Britain.
In addition to publishing the British Agricultural Bulletin and British Medical Bulletin, both
intended primarily to keep oversea specialists informed of progress in Britain, the Council
maintains a considerable and much used speciahst information service. In the 60 countries
in which the British Council has representations, libraries are maintained and in many
instances these have strong sections of scientific and technological literature.
The British Council maintains at its headquarters speciahst departments for agriculture,
medicine, science and engineering, while in some countries scientists are attached to its
oversea representatives. The Council is advised by eminent scientists who serve on its
Science Advisory Committee and specialist panels for the different subjects.
Government Expenditure on Research
Central government funds to a total of over £216 million for scientific research and
development were voted for the financial year I953_54- Besides civil estimates of £197
million, this sum included1 £17-7 million in respect of Navy Estimates and -£510,000 in
respect of Air Estimates. Included in the Civil Estimates were: Ministry of Supply, £180-6
million; DSIR, £s'7 million; Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, £2-3 million;
Medical Research Council, £i-8 million; Development and Welfare (Colonies, etc.),
£1-5 million; Agricultural Research Council and Nature Conservancy, £1-2 million.
Science Centre
An important decision to bring together learned scientific societies and Government
research agencies in a ‘Science Centre’ was announced by the last Government in 1950,
and confirmed by the present Government in June 1952. The Centre is to be built on the
South Bank of the Thames immediately below Waterloo Bridge on a site purchased by
the London County Council for the purpose. It is intended to improve facilities and con¬
tacts between scientists and users of science, both nationally and internationally.
THE PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
Various institutions are concerned either wholly or in part with the preservation of
Britain’s cultural heritage and the promotion of literature and the arts. Government
interest in this sphere is limited to financial support of certain of these institutions. There
is no Ministry of Fine Arts or equivalent organization to formulate or administer policy
in the arts, though bodies such as the Standing Commission on Museums and Galleries
(appointed 1931) and the Royal Fine Arts Commission (appointed 1924) act in an advisory
capacity. Local authorities, under section 132 of the Local Government Act, 1948, may
now use part of the revenue from the rates for the encouragement of the arts.
The Arts Council (see p. 56) is the organization mainly responsible for the encourage¬
ment of the arts in Britain, while the British Film Institute encourages the development
of, and experiment in, the art of the film. The British Council (see p. 56) is responsible for
promoting a wider knowledge of British arts overseas.
Music festivals have for many years been a part of Britain’s artistic life; but since the war
there has been a marked increase in the number of festivals celebrating all the arts. These
Tull particulars will be found in Civil Estimates I953_54- Class IV, 10. Appendix pp. SS~S%- HMSO.
4s. net.
275
RELIGION, SCIENCE, AND THE ARTS
festivals range from the Edinburgh International Festival of Music and Drama, which
lasts three weeks and attracts many tens of thousands of visitors, to small-scale festivals
(such as Aldeburgh) lasting a week or less. Many of them are backed by the Arts Council
as well as the local authorities concerned.
Drama
There is nothing at present in the nature of a State-owned theatre in Britain, but a site
for a national theatre has been acquired in London on the South Bank; the foundation
stone was laid by Queen Elizabeth, now the Queen Mother, on 13 th July 195 r- Tlie Arts
Council grants subsidies to some companies and organizations that work on a non-profit-
distributing basis (i.e. any profits made are used to finance future productions). The
Customs and Excise Department also assists the serious theatre by granting remission of
entertainment tax to companies functioning on a non-profit-making basis.
Among the older producing organizations possessing their own theatres are the
Shakespeare Memorial Theatre Company at Stratford-upon-Avon, with its seasons of
plays in true repertory now running for about nine months a year, and the Old Vic
Theatre in London, with a semi-permanent company presenting seasons of the classics,
principally Shakespeare, in its original building (in the Waterloo Road) which has been
repaired after extensive war damage.
In London some fifty theatres are let to producing managements for every type of
theatrical entertainment, for limited or long runs, and during the summer months for
many years plays have also been given in the Open Air Theatre in Regent s Park.
The provinces are served by (a) productions toured before or after London presenta¬
tion, (b) companies specially formed for touring, and (c) local repertory theatres. Some of
the last named are assisted financially and otherwise by the Arts Council, and though of
necessity the quality of the work of the companies varies greatly, the repertory movement
is vital and inspiring, and from these small theatres many of the country s most important
dramatists, producers, actors and plays have emerged.
Owing to restrictions no new theatres have been built in Britain since the war, although
several damaged buildings have been reconstructed, and some converted from other uses.
Professional theatre organizations include the London Theatre Council and Provincial
Theatre Council, the Society of West End Managers, the Theatrical Managers Associa¬
tion, the Council of Repertory Theatres, British Actors’ Equity (the actors trade union)
and the League of Dramatists. Theatre staffs are protected by the National Association of
Theatrical and Kinematograph Employees.
The amateur theatre is widespread throughout the United Kingdom—over 33>000
amateur societies are known to exist. This movement is sponsored and fostered by the
British Drama League, the Scottish Community Drama Association, local education
authorities and other public bodies. The British Drama League organizes lectures, courses
and competitions, and generally advises and assists. It also possesses the largest play library in
the country, to which all its members have access.
In schools and universities the high place of drama in the field of national culture has
been accorded increasing recognition in recent years. For instance, Bristol University has
created a Chair of Drama and an experimental theatre.
The Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, founded in 1904 and now grant-aided by the
Government, gives a two-year course of training in all branches of theatre art, and there
are several other important dramatic schools, including the Central School of Speech
Training and Dramatic Art, and the Webber-Douglas School; the Old Vic has a School in
Bristol.
The British Council is responsible for making the British theatre better known abroad
by organizing and sponsoring international tours by important companies, including the
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
276
Old Vic and the Shakespeare Memorial Company, and by sending overseas exhibitions of
theatrical design and lecturers on drama.
Films
The first cinematograph exhibition in Britain was given in 1896; and within ten years
Britain was in the forefront of film production. This early ascendancy did not survive the
impact of the first world war, and since 1914 British films have had to contend with keen
and increasing American competition. Legislation, first introduced in 1927 and culmi¬
nating in the Cinematograph Films Act, 1948, Rtid its subsequent amendments, has given
some assistance by means of the quota system, under which a certain proportion (varying
from 5 to 40 per cent) of British films must be shown in British cinemas each year.
It was not until the second world war that the British cinema re-emerged with new
vitality and began again to exert an important influence on film development by the pro¬
duction of many notable feature films depicting Britain s ordeals and achievements in the
war. These films were based on the documentary technique which had been developed
since 1929 for the making of factual informative films sponsored by the Government or
by commercial organizations. British feature films in the post-war years have been
influenced by this trend, and realistic treatment is now a characteristic of British feature
production, both in dramatic films and in the light-hearted satirical comedies that have
won acclaim in recent years.
The art of film production is a costly one which depends upon a commercially pros¬
perous industry for its development and well-being, and needs adequate financial backing
combined with freedom for the film maker to experiment and to express his own ideas.
There is no State-owned feature production unit in Britain, but the National Film Finance
Corporation (see p. 55) is empowered to lend part of feature production costs. These
loans are repayable from box-office receipts. The Corporation is solely concerned with
finance and has no brief to influence the content of the film.
The British Film Institute, which promotes the development of the film as an art and
is financed by Exchequer grants, administers the National Film Library. It is also respon¬
sible for the National Film Theatre, where programmes of experimental, scientific and
documentary films, as well as ‘classic features’, are shown regularly. The Institute arranged
for the production of three out of four of the first three-dimensional films to be shown in
London during the Festival of Britain.
The number of production companies, studios and cinemas in Britain varies with the
financial state of the film industry. In 1953 there were 32 feature production companies
belonging to the British Film Producers Association, 60 short film or specialized film
producers belong to the Association of Specialized Film Producers, and 4>597 cinemas.
Fine Arts
To judge by public interest the visual arts are in a flourishing condition, and exhibitions
of experimental work are well attended. Britain is fortunate in having at present painters
and sculptors with an international reputation and a number of younger artists of great
promise. 1 1 1 r • J
There are some 20 colleges of art, each serving a region, and schools ot art in most
towns. In London the most notable are the Royal College of Art (specializing in industria
design), the Slade School (painting, drawing and sculpture), and the Central School of
Arts and Crafts. The Courtauld Institute, London University, is the chief academic
institution for art history.
Among the exhibiting societies are the Royal Academy (which holds a summer ex¬
hibition of work by members and non-members, and in winter exhibits collections o
national schools), the Royal Society of British Artists, the Royal Institute of Painters in
Oils, the Royal Society of Painters in Watercolour, and the London Group. The Institute
2?7
RELIGION, SCIENCE, AND THE ARTS
of Contemporary Arts, in whose newly opened rooms exhibitions and lectures are held,
surveys the whole field of contemporary art.
Among notable organizations concerned with the arts, the Arts Council operates on a
nation-wide scale. It arranges important international exhibitions, circulates exhibitions
throughout the country, has its own galleries in London, organizes tours of art films, and
makes grants to arts societies. The British Council fosters knowledge of British fine arts
overseas by means of exhibitions, the dissemination of reproductions and photographs,
and the provision of information and advice to inquirers overseas and to visitors in
Britain. The Council of Industrial Design (founded 1946) aims at encouraging well-
designed manufactures; the Royal Institute of British Architects grants diplomas of quali¬
fication to architects, and guides architectural education; the National Building Record
compiles photographic records of all notable buildings; the Royal Commission on His¬
torical Monuments advises on the care of buildings and ancient monuments, and is
publishing a series of county surveys designed ultimately to cover the whole country. The
National Trust, whose functions include protection of houses of historic or architectural
importance, owns many works of art. Amateur art societies also play an important part
and are increasing in number.
Museums and Art Galleries
The national collections in London contain probably the most comprehensive existing
collection of examples of the world’s culture. The British Museum alone covers an
enormous field, and illustrates the history of man through the arts, especially the arts of
the ancient and medieval world and of peoples in primitive states of civihzation, the
Department of Prints and Drawings possesses a magnificent collection. The Victoria
and Albert Museum contains works of fine and applied art of all countries and periods,
arranged mainly according to material, though since the war primary collections have
been arranged to bring together, by style, period or nationality, masterpieces of all the
arts. The National Gallery presents, with perhaps unique balance and completeness,
paintings by almost all the greatest European masters. The Tate Gallery embodies two
collections: (a) the British school from the eighteenth century onwards, with a few
earlier works, and (b) modern foreign schools since 1800. Both sections include modern
sculpture. Special exhibitions of the work of particular artists are a feature of this and other
galleries. Other important collections are at the National Portrait Gallery, the Wallace
Collection (furniture, objets d’art and paintings, mainly French of the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries), the Dulwich Gallery (reopened in 1953), the Imperial War Museum
(which has a Department of Paintings and Sculpture), the National Maritime Museum at
Greenwich and the London Museum (reopened in Kensington Palace during 1951)*
The National Gallery of Scotland, in Edinburgh, besides its Scottish paintings has a fine
collection of European paintings; there is also a Scottish National Portrait Gallery, and the
Royal Scottish Museum, Edinburgh, has an art collection. The National Museum of
Wales (Cardiff) includes departments of archaeology and of folk life (chiefly Welsh) and
of fine and applied arts. . A ,
All large cities have art galleries and museums; among the most notable are the Ash-
molean Museum (Oxford), the Fitzwilliam Museum (Cambridge), the York Museum,
and the galleries at Birmingham, Glasgow, Belfast, Manchester, Liverpool (reopened in
1951) and Leeds. The permanent collections of these, and of many galleries in smaller
towns, are supplemented periodically by travelling exhibitions organized by the Aits
Council and the circulation department of the Victoria and Albert Museum.
Literature
There is no direct governmental support of literature, though the Arts Council, sup¬
ported by Government grant, encourages poetry, but literature is the concern of severa
semi-official bodies and there are many private literary societies and clubs. English htera-
278
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
ture is taught in all schools, colleges and universities, either as part of a general course or
as a specialist subject.
Societies and Institutions
The National Book League (14,500 members) encourages the reading of and interest
in books. Its exhibitions, notably that held in the Victoria and Albert Museum in 1951
and the annual exhibitions of book design, are widely popular. The English Association
(5,000 members) aims to uphold the standards of English writing and speech. The Royal
Society of Literature (500 members) is concerned with the advancement of literature.
The British Academy, an organization concerned with humanistic studies, has a section
dealing with literature and philology. The Arts Council supports poetry readings through¬
out the country. Interest in poetry is also fostered by the Poetry Society (3,000 members)
and the annual Eisteddfod (the bardic festival held in Wales). Specialist societies include
the Early English Text Society, the Bibliographical Society, the Edinburgh Bibliographi¬
cal Society, and a number of those devoted to particular authors of which the largest is the
Dickens Fellowship (10,000 members). In addition many towns have their local literary
societies. The British Council is active in encouraging a knowledge of English literature
abroad.
Books
In Britain the output of new books amounts to over 13,000 separate titles a year. For
literary subjects the 1952 annual figures for new titles were: bibliography and literary
history 284, biography and memoirs 482, essays and belles-lettres 109, fiction 2,558, poetry
and drama 565. There are many periodicals concerned in whole or in part with literature,
of which the best known critical weekly is The Times Literary Supplement. Some classes of
books are produced as Government publications by Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, but
the great majority of books, including works of literature, are produced by commercial
publishers, though some of the outstanding individual works come from the university
presses, notably the Clarendon Press (Oxford) and the Cambridge University Press. Lead¬
ing organizations representing the interests of those concerned with book production are:
the Publishers’ Association, the Booksellers’ Association and the Society of Authors. A
number of literary prizes are awarded annually; these include the two James Tait Black
Memorial Prizes for biography and literature, the John Llewellyn Rhys Memorial Prize
for young writers of promise, the Hawthornden Prize for imaginative writing, and the
Somerset Maugham Award for young writers. In 1953 the Arts Council offered awards
for two published books of original English verse.
Libraries
The largest library in Britain is at the British Museum in London (over 5,000,000
printed books); there are also national libraries of Scotland (at Edinburgh) and Wales
(at Aberystwyth). Other general libraries of similar size are the Bodleian Library (Oxford)
and the Cambridge University Library. These five are ‘copyright’ libraries; they have the
right to a free copy of each book published in Britain. The London Library (600,000
volumes) is the most important private subscription library. Specialist libraries of parti¬
cular interest in London include the Art Library at the Victoria and Albert Museum, the
Public Record Office (which contains the National Archives), the National Library for
the Blind (over 301,000 volumes in Braille and Moon types), the Science Library at South
Kensington, the Natural History Museum Library, the Central Music Library, the Patents
Office Library, and the British Library of Political and Economic Science. The Arts
Council has recently founded a reference library of modern English poetry, which is
housed at the National Book League.
Public libraries are maintained by local authorities in every county and county borough
and by many boroughs and urban district councils. In rural areas there is a travelling
RELIGION, SCIENCE, AND THE ARTS
2?9
library service. In 1950 these public libraries held between them over 42 million books and
had an annual circulation issue of over 311 million. The National Central Library is a
centre for inter-library lending (both in Britain and abroad) and has access to over 21
million books.
Music, Opera and Ballet
The pattern of music in Britain today is expressed in many forms; orchestral, choral,
opera and ballet dominate the general design and are increasingly popular. Seasons of
orchestral concerts are held periodically throughout the country. In London they are
associated mainly with the Royal Festival Hall on the South Bank, opened in May 1951
in connection with the Festival of Britain, and the Royal Albert Hall, Kensington.
Queen's Hall, destroyed during the second world war, is to be rebuilt. Wigmore Hall is
famous as London’s premier recital centre.
Despite the growth of new orchestras in the past few years, a number of older orchestras
have retained their long-established reputation. Among the leading British orchestras are
the London Symphony Orchestra, the BBC Symphony Orchestra, the London Phil¬
harmonic, the Royal Philharmonic, the Philharmonia, the Halle (Manchester), the Liver¬
pool Philharmonic, the City of Birmingham, the Bournemouth Municipal, the Yorkshire
Symphony, the Scottish National and the BBC Scottish Orchestras. In addition, there are
highly specialized string orchestras such as the Boyd Neel and the Jacques. Many of these
orchestras receive financial assistance from the Arts Council, whose aim is to provide not
only an opportunity of presenting new works, conductors and soloists, but to improve
the standard of performance generally.
Choral singing is a feature in British musical life and the principal choral societies,
such as the Royal Choral, BBC Choral, Huddersfield Choral, Halle Choir, Liverpool
Philharmonic Choir, London Philharmonic Choir and the Bach Choir, as well as many
others, are associated with famous orchestras in major choral works. Most of these choirs
and hundreds of similar choral and orchestral societies and music clubs are affiliated to the
National Federation of Music Societies.
Music festivals in Britain, originating with the Three Choirs Festival held annually at
Gloucester, Worcester and Hereford in rotation, have been in existence for over zooyears.
The festival idea, now a marked feature in the musical life of Britain, has developed con¬
siderably and festivals are now held annually in many cities and towns, the most prominent
being the Edinburgh International Festival of Music and Drama, the Cheltenham Festival
(contemporary British music), the Llangollen International Eisteddfod and the ancient
National Eisteddfod of Wales (whose origins date back to the seventh century). The
Leeds and Norwich festivals of choral music are held on a triennial basis.
Professional organizations which look after the interests of music and musicians include
the Musicians’ Union, the Incorporated Society of Musicians, the Composers’ Guild and
the Songwriters’ Guild.
Regular seasons of opera and ballet are given in London at the Royal Opera House,
Covent Garden, at Sadler’s Wells, and at Glyndebourne in Sussex. Other companies
include the Carl Rosa, one of the oldest opera organizations in Britain, and the English
Opera Group (formed in 1947), noted for its performances of chamber opera. In 1944
the Covent Garden Opera Trust was formed to make the famous opera house the home
of a national opera and ballet. In 1949 the Government acquired the lease of the building,
the Trust receiving its Government grant through the Arts Council. As well as giving
seasons of opera in London, the Opera Company, which numbers about 200 and has a
permanent orchestra, tours the provinces. London’s other permanent home of opera and
ballet is the Sadler’s Wells Theatre.
The Sadler’s Wells Ballet, which is now the resident company at Covent Garden, paid
visits to Canada and the United States in 1949, 1950 and 1953 in the course of which it
28o
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
enhanced its already high international reputation. It has also toured widely in Europe
under the British Council’s auspices. Training is provided at the Sadler’s Wells Ballet
School, which has played a large part in raising British ballet to its present high level.
Most prominent among the Colleges of Music are the Royal Academy of Music, the
Royal College of Music, the Royal Manchester College and the Royal Scottish Academy,
which benefit from Government grants. Added to these are the Trinity College of Music
and the Guildhall School of Music and Drama. Youth orchestras are strongly encouraged,
and children’s concerts, given by symphony orchestras directed by prominent conductors,
are a regular feature of the country’s musical activities and have helped to develop among
the youth of the community an appreciation of the world’s greatest music. The National
Youth Orchestra, made up of the most promising of the younger musicians, is noted for
its high standard of performance.
The British Council has done much to make British music more widely known
throughout the world. Tours of British orchestras, soloists and opera are arranged, re¬
cordings of works by British composers are sponsored, and libraries of British music,
recorded and in printed score, are maintained in 57 countries. At London headquarters a
central music reference library of music literature, scores and recorded music is main¬
tained for the use of visitors. Distinguished oversea musicians are invited to Britain as
guests of the Council to experience, first-hand, something of British music and musicians,
and extensive arrangements are made to cover each individual interest.
XII. BROADCASTING AND THE PRESS
THE BRITISH BROADCASTING CORPORATION
Constitution and Policy
In November 1922 the British Broadcasting Company Limited came into existence,
and on 1st January 1927 it was taken over by the British Broadcasting Corporation. The
BBC is not a Government Department, nor is it a commercial company working for
profit, but a public corporation created by Royal Charter. The policy of the BBC is
governed by its Charter, granted for successive limited periods, which establishes the
BBC as a corporate body and requires that the broadcasting services should be a means of
information, education and entertainment, and should be developed to the best advantage
and in the national interest. Under the current charter, which came into force on 1st July
1952 and will be due for renewal in 1962, the Corporation consists of nine Governors
appointed by the Queen in Council. The Governors are normally appointed for a period
of five years. To them the Director-General, as chief executive officer, is immediately
responsible for the efficient working of the organization. He is assisted by six Directors,
responsible respectively for Home Sound Broadcasting; Television Broadcasting; Exter¬
nal Broadcasting; the Spoken Word; Technical Services; and Administration. The num¬
ber of staff employed at 30th June 1953 was 12,389 (including 602 part-time).
The BBC derives its legal powers to maintain broadcasting stations from its Licence
and Agreement with the Postmaster-General. The Agreement contains financial clauses
and also certain general provisions as to the manner in which the broadcasting service
should be operated.
Although the Government retains formal responsibility for the BBC, in practice the
Corporation operates independently. It has from the first been the agreed policy of Parlia¬
ment that the BBC should be free from control in the daily conduct of its business, includ¬
ing both the planning of programmes and general administration. The BBC studies the
needs and reactions of its listeners through its Audience Research system; it is assisted by
32 advisory bodies and is constantly consulting outside authorities and experts, but its
decisions are its own. In its various activities the BBC devolves responsibility at all levels
to die greatest extent consistent with agreed policy and with its high standards of quality.
Finance
Broadcasting services today are financed from three main sources: (1) the sale (by the
Post Office) of receiving licences; (2) a grant-in-aid from the Exchequer for the External
Services; (3) profits from the BBC publications, mainly the Radio Times which has a
weekly sale of nearly 8 million copies and attracts a large advertising revenue.
The annual licence for the reception of sound broadcasting costs £1 (except in the case
of registered blind persons whose hcences are free); the licence for ‘sound’ and television
together costs £2. One licence covers all the receiving sets in a household, but a separate
licence is required for a set fitted in a motor car. Before the second world war all the
BBC’s operations were financed out of its proportion of the licence income. During the
war it was completely financed by grant-in-aid; but, as from 1st January 1947 the pre¬
war system of financing out of licence income was restored for all home broadcasting
services, including television.
Under the current ten-year Licence and Agreement, which came into force on 1st July
1952, the licence fee system is continued to meet the cost of home broadcasting, and for
the first three years of the charter’s span the BBC is to receive 85 per cent of the licence
281
282
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
revenue (after the deduction of l\ per cent by the Postmaster-General to cover collection
and other expenses), and thereafter a sum equal to such percentage, or an additional per¬
centage, as may be directed by the Treasury, to meet the needs of the Home Services. In
addition, the BBC is authorized to borrow up to £10 million for capital expenditure. The
cost of the External Services is borne, as before, by a grant-in-aid from the Exchequer.
The gross revenue from the sale of broadcast receiving licences during the year ended
31st March 1953 amounted to £14,874,191; and the Corporation received a net income of
£11,694,833. The number of current receiving licences in the United Kingdom in March
1953 was: sound 10,749,779 (including 61,095 free to blind persons), television 2,142,452,
making a total of 12,892,231. By end-August 1953 the total was 13,056,689, of which
2)539>I03 licences were for television sets, and 196,161 for sound sets fitted in cars.
Net revenue from publications in the year ended 3tst March 1953 amounted to
£1,001,618, and grant-in-aid receipts were £4,695,000.
The Beveridge Report and the Monopoly Issue
The constitutional development of the BBC has been assisted by successive independent
committees of inquiry appointed by the Government from time to time to make recom¬
mendations as to the future of the service. A committee, under Lord Beveridge, appointed
by the Lord President of the Council and the Postmaster-General in the autumn of 1949,
issued its Report in January 1951 after an exhaustive investigation. The findings of the
Report amounted to a strong vote of confidence in the achievements of the BBC—
‘something of which any country might be proud . The committee paid a tribute to the
‘efficiencyof the BBC, to the sense of pubhc spirit which animates it and to its substantial
success in maintaining impartiality and high standards of taste and culture. . . . There are
some fields, notably music, in which development of pubhc taste and understanding may
with justice be attributed to the work of the BBC in the past 25 years’.
While the committee recommended that broadcasting should, subject to possible
developments in higher frequency, remain the ‘prerogative of a single corporation, it
proposed certain safeguards against the dangers of monopoly, and advocated increased
regional autonomy, together with a strengthening of the numbers and powers of the
Board of Governors, and the setting up of a body within the BBC to report on criticisms
and suggestions from the general public.
The Government’s comments on the committee’s report were issued in July 1951 in a
White Paper which accepted the majority of the recommendations and outlined proposals
for their implementation. Several points in these proposals were the subject of consider¬
able parliamentary debate and it was emphasized by the Government that they were not
final. The Government which took office in the autumn of 1951 renewed the BBC
charter (which expired at the end of 1951) for an interim period of six months to afford
time to consider the important issues involved in the granting of a new charter for a term
of years. This interim period was concluded on 1st July 1952 when the current ten-year
charter came into force. _ , . . ,
The current charter maintains the former position of the BBC as the only broadcasting
organization in the United Kingdom having any claim on the revenue from receivmg
licences; enlarges the Board of Governors from seven to nine members, of which three
are specially charged with responsibility for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland; and
estabhshes Broadcasting Councils for Scotland and for Wales.
The BBC is required to develop and extend the television services. In this expanding
field the possibility of competitive television is not excluded, subject to the consideration
by ParHament of the terms and conditions under which any such system would operate.
(For the Government’s proposals see Appendix.) The current ten-year Licence^ and
Agreement continues the ban on commercial broadcasts by the BBC, except with the
permission of the Postmaster-General.
BROADCASTING AND THE PRESS
383
The Sound Services
Since 15th March 1950 the BBC has operated on the wavelengths allocated in the
Copenhagen Agreement.
1. For Home Listeners
The BBC provides three main services for home listeners:
(a) The Home Service, running continuously from 6.30 a.m. to 11.3 p.m., is a care¬
fully balanced programme designed to appeal to all sections of the community. It
is the vehicle for the majority of the BBC’s most important talks, for plays, con¬
certs, documentary features and religious broadcasts, and also for all the educa¬
tional broadcasts to schools (see p. 244). It includes controversial discussions, and
time is allotted for political party broadcasts in the ratio of each party’s poll at the
last General Election. Many national and sporting events are broadcast from the
scene of action.
Linked with this basic Home Service are the six Regional Home Services cover¬
ing Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland, and the North, Midlands, and West
of England. These services carry many of the major items of the basic Home
Service but also include their own programmes produced within the region.
Material is freely interchangeable over this network.
(h) The Light Programme, running continuously from 9.0 a.m. to midnight, is devoted
to entertainment in the widest sense, and includes commentaries on every form of
sport. It contains also a more serious element including book reviews, discussions,
and some classical music.
(c) The Third Programme, running continuously from 6.0 p.m. to midnight, is a
cultural programme of especial interest to the serious listener. It broadcasts, with¬
out regard to length or difficulty, the masterpieces of music, art and letters which
lend themselves to transmission in sound, and it provides series of lectures by
eminent speakers. It has been in operation since 29th September 1946.
News. There are eight news broadcasts daily in the Home and Light programmes:
Home Service at 7 a.m., 8 a.m., 1 p.m., 6 p.m., 9 p.m., and a summary at 11 p.m. Light
Programme at 9 a.m., 7 p.m., 10 p.m., and a summary at 11.56 p.m. For its sources of
news the Corporation relies on the leading news agencies, the BBC’s correspondents at
home and abroad, and the monitoring service.
The BBC’s Audience Research organization estimates that, at any one time on a winter
evening, about 1 in 4 of the adult population of Britain may be expected to listen to one
of the three main programmes. It is calculated diat the average winter evening audience
for the Light Programme is nearly 5,670,000, for the Home Service 3,240,000, and for the
Third Programme in the neighbourhood of 90,000.
2. External Services
The general purpose of the BBC, in all its broadcasts to listeners within the Common¬
wealth or in other lands, is to form a friendly link of information, culture and entertain¬
ment; to give news of world-wide importance as it is known in Britain; to show what
the British nation as a whole is thinking about the news; and to reflect the British way of
life.
The relevant Government Departments prescribe the extent of the External Services
but have entrusted to the BBC the responsibility for their content.
The External Services of the BBC include:
(<i) The General Overseas Service in English can be described as the descendant of the
original ‘Empire Service’, which began in 1932. This service is designed for British
284
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
communities all over the world as well as for English-speaking listeners in foreign
countries. It includes many programmes taken from the BBC’s home services,
and is on the air for 21 hours in every 24.
(b) Special Services directed to the Commonwealth in English and other languages.
(c) Services directed to foreign countries, mainly broadcast in the language of the country
addressed. The BBC’s news services have established a great reputation for objec¬
tivity and integrity. Every day nearly 100 news broadcasts are directed to oversea
listeners in some 45 languages.
(d) The Transcription Service provides recorded programmes in English (talks, drama,
features, music, etc.) which are distributed principally to radio organizations
throughout the Commonwealth and in the United States, and to broadcasting
stations of the Armed Forces overseas. It also produces programmes in foreign
languages.
Oversea Offices. The BBC maintains oversea offices in Berlin, Cairo, New Delhi, New
York, Paris, Singapore, Sydney and Toronto. Their purpose is to meet the programme
requirements of the Home and External Services, to encourage local stations to rebroad¬
cast BBC transmissions and transcription recordings and to disseminate information about
the BBC External Services.
Apart from the oversea offices, the BBC maintains a high-power short wave relay
station for South-East Asia, at Singapore (Tebrau).
Television
Experiments in television broadcasting started in Britain in the autumn of 1929, and in
November 1936 the BBC began to give from Alexandra Palace the first public service of
high definition television in any part of the world. By September 1939 (when the
Alexandra Palace station was closed down for military reasons) the programme technique
had made considerable progress and the number of receiving sets was approximately
20,000.
The Television Service from Alexandra Palace was reopened in June 1946 and a second
transmitter at Sutton Coldfield, near Birmingham, came into action in December 1949,
relaying the Alexandra Palace programmes.
By December 1952 five high-power transmitting stations were in operation: Alexandra
Palace covering London and the Home Counties; Sutton Coldfield covering the Mid¬
lands; Holme Moss covering the North of England; Kirk o’ Shotts covering Central
Scotland; and Wenvoe covering South Wales and parts of the West of England.
These stations make television accessible to about four-fifths of the population of the
United Kingdom and form the main part of the BBC’s plan for a national television
coverage.
In June 1953 the Director-General of the BBC, Sir Ian Jacob, announced that during
the remaining nine years of the current charter the BBC hoped to complete five medium-
power stations; to rebuild the London station with higher power; and to erect a further
eight low-power stations in the Channel Islands, the Isle of Man, East Anglia, south-east
England, west Wales, Cumberland, Inverness, and Londonderry. This would result in
effective television coverage for 97 per cent of the population of the United Kingdom.
In July 1953 the Government announced its agreement to an immediate start on these
projects and to the expansion of very high frequency sound services to ensure better sound
reception.
By January 1955 it is hoped that new medium-power television stations will have been
set up at Aberdeen, Belfast, the Isle of Wight, Plymouth, and Pontop Pike (in the county
of Durham), and also low-power stations to serve the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man.
These developments will make BBC television available to some 90 per cent of the
population.
BROADCASTING AND THE PRESS
285
The BBC is building, on a 13-acre site at Shepherds Bush in London, a set of studios
and accompanying accommodation which will, it is hoped, be the ‘best television centre
in the world’.
Television programmes are broadcast daily between 3.0 p.m. and 10.35 P-ih. on week¬
days, and between 5 p.m. and 1045 P-m- on Sundays. There are intervals in each pro¬
gramme, and actual viewing time averages five hours a day. In addition, the Outside
Broadcasting Department of the Television Service televises national occasions, public
events and sporting fixtures. There is a daily television programme for children, including
a morning programme from 11.0 a.m. to 12.00 noon on Saturdays. Television for schools
is in the experimental stage.
Research. Constant research during 1952-53 resulted in developments in the design of
measuring equipment and television cameras, in the reduction of the effects of inter¬
ference, and in improvements in the technical quality of the pictures transmitted. Techni¬
cally Britain is committed for some years to the present 405-line standard, but preliminary
experiments are being made on systems using higher standards of definition, and on tele¬
vision in colour. To facilitate work of this kind, a flexible television channel, which can
be operated at will on standards of definition from 400 to 1,000 lines, has been designed
and constructed for use in the laboratories.
THE PRESS
The British read more newspapers than any other nation in the world. For every 1,000
inhabitants in the United Kingdom, 598 copies of daily papers are sold, compared with
441 in Luxembourg (second on the list), 440 in Australia and 356 in the United States.
The British News of the World has the largest circulation of any newspaper in the world.
On the other hand, the average number of pages in British newspapers is 8-12, com¬
pared with over 24 in the United States; and, also, while circulations have risen, the actual
number of publications has dropped by about one-quarter since 1921. In 1953 the Press
consisted of 146 daily newspapers, 18 Sunday papers, over 1,300 weekly papers, and nearly
4,000 periodicals. Daily newspaper prices are i£d. for the popular papers and from 2d.
to 4d. for the ‘quality’ papers (The Times, Manchester Guardian, Daily Telegraph). Some
of the most important papers and periodicals are shown in Table 29, but such a table
cannot convey the diversity of appeal of the Press. The British Press caters for all political
views and many different levels of education and interest; it is free from Government
interference or censorship. While a large proportion of weekly newspapers are regional
in appeal, the periodical press covers a wide field: religion, education, science, politics,
economics, music, literature, drama and art, women’s specialized interests, sport, hobbies,
country life, fiction and humour. There are also many papers which cover the important
fields of finance, trade, industry and technical interests.
In 1947 a Royal Commission on the Press was appointed to inquire into the finance,
control, management and ownership of the Press. Its report, which included a number of
recommendations, was issued in June 1949 (Cmd. 7700) and has been recognized as a
comprehensive and authoritative analysis of the British Press.
Ownership
As Table 29 shows, several companies or groups own more than one newspaper. At the
beginning of 1953 the largest group, Kemsley Newspapers, owned about 24 per cent of
the morning newspapers and 12 per cent of the evening papers, representing 50 per cent
of morning circulation and 20 per cent of evening circulation in England and Wales.
Other important groups owning provincial papers are Westminster Press Provincial
Newspapers Ltd., Provincial Newspapers Ltd., the Northcliffe Newspaper Group Ltd.,
and the Harmsworth Press.
286
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Press Trusts, which have been described as ‘voluntary agreements of owners to limit
their sovereignty in the public interest’, govern the direction of the News Chronicle and
Star, Manchester Guardian, Observer, The Times, Economist and Spectator.
TABLE 29
Title
General
Pohtical
Tendency
Owner or
Controller
Circulation
average
January-June
(inc.) 1953
National Dailies
The Times
Daily Telegraph
Manchester Guardian
Daily Express
Daily Mail
Daily Herald
News Chronicle
Daily Worker
Daily Mirror
Daily Sketch
Independent
Conservative
Liberal
Policy conservative
though not neces¬
sarily that of Con¬
servative Party.
Stresses importance
of British Empire.
Conservative
Labour
Liberal
Communist
Left-wing
Conservative
Times Publishing Co.
Ltd. Largest shareholder,
Col. the Hon. J. J. Astor
Lord Camrose and
members of his family
The Scott Trust
London Express News¬
papers Ltd. Controlling
shareholder, Lord
Beaverbrook
Associated Newspapers
Ltd. Major shareholder,
Lord Rothermere
Daily Herald Ltd. 51%
of shares owned by
Odhams Press Ltd., 49%
by Trades Union Con¬
gress
DailyNewsTrust. Two-
thirds of trustees mem¬
bers of Cadbury family.
Policy directed by Lord
Layton
People’s Press Printing
Society Ltd. Shares
owned by large number
of small shareholders.
Editorial executives
members of Communist
Party
Daily Mirror News¬
papers Ltd. Chairman,
Mr. Cecil King
Associated Newspapers
Ltd.
225,213
1,005,101
136,892
4,077,835
2,173,917
1,872,805
1,355,600
91,355
4,535,637
931,000
BROADCASTING AND THE PRESS
287
TABLE 29 (contl)
Title
London Evenings
Evening News
Star
Evening Standard
Sundays
Observer
Sunday Times
News oj the World
General
Political
Tendency
Owner or
Controller
People
Sunday Express
Sunday Dispatch
Reynolds News
Sunday Chronicle
Sunday Empire News
Sunday Pictorial
Sunday Graphic
Weekly Periodicals
Economist
As for Daily Mail
As for
News Chronicle
As for
Daily Express
Independent
Conservative
General political
sympathies con¬
servative
Independent
As for
Daily Express
As for Daily Mail
Supports the Co¬
operative Move¬
ment and the
Labour Party
Conservative
Conservative
As for
Daily Mirror
Conservative
Independent
Circulation
average
January-June
(inc.) 1953
As for Daily Mail
As for News Chronicle
As for Daily Express
The Observer Ltd. All
shares owned by The
Observer Trust
Kemsley Newspapers
Ltd. Major shareholder,
Lord Kemsley
News of the World Ltd.
Odhams Properties Ltd.
Policy controlled by
Odhams Press Ltd.
As for Daily Express
As for Daily Mail
Co-operative Press Ltd.
Shareholders, co-opera¬
tive societies
Kemsley Newspapers
Ltd.
Kemsley Newspapers
Ltd.
Sunday Pictorial News¬
papers Ltd.
Kemsley Newspapers
Ltd.
Largest shareholder,
Financial News Ltd.,
chairman of whose
board is Lord Layton.
Governed by a Trust
guaranteeing the inde¬
pendence of the editor
1,503,293
1,107,538
777,669
475,609
531,566
8,168,820
5,129,137
3,246,845
2,743,749
689,466
897,886
1,964,000
5,262,856
1,125,554
49,927
288
BRITAIN! AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
TABLE 29 (contd.)
Title
Neu> Statesman and
Nation
Spectator
Time and Tide
Tribune
The Listener
Illustrated Weeklies
Picture Post
Illustrated
John Bull
Illustrated London
News
Sphere
General
Political
Tendency
Independent
Socialist
Independent
Right-wing
Left-wing Labour
but strongly anti-
Communist
Texts of broad¬
casts
Owner or
Controller
Private company among
whose directors are
G. D. H. Cole, David
Low, and the editor, B.
Kingsley Martin
Private Trust
Public company. Largest
shareholder, Viscountess
Rhondda
Private company. Three
of its four directors are
Labour M.P.s
British Broadcasting
Corporation
Hulton Press Ltd.
Odhams Press Ltd.
Odhams Press Ltd.
Illustrated London News
& Sketch Ltd.
Illustrated Newspapers
Ltd.
Circulation
average
January-June
(inc.) 1953
71,544
41,131
not available
not available
136,407
1,040,487
1,109,162
1,091,463
not available
not available
Scotland
Scotland has seven morning, nine evening and two Sunday papers. There are also 164
weekhes. The Scotsman (Edinburgh) and the Glasgow Herald, published daily, have national
reputations, and regular oversea' subscribers. The average circulation (January to June
I953) of The Scotsman is 55,556, and of the Glasgow Herald 76,408. Dundee and Aberdeen
papers have more than regional circulation. The largest group owners of papers and
periodicals are Thomson, Leng & Co., Ltd., of Dundee.
Northern Ireland
Northern Ireland has three morning papers and one evening, all printed in Belfast; it
has 45 weekly newspapers, but no Sunday editions.
Provincial Papers
There are 26 English and Welsh provincial morning papers with a total circulation of
over 2} million copies, and 68 provincial evening papers with a circulation of over 6i
million. The Yorkshire Post, Birmingham Post and Liverpool Daily Post have a national
reputation as ‘quality’ papers although their circulation is mainly provincial. There arc
also well over 1,000 provincial weeklies in England and Wales.
BROADCASTING AND THE PRESS
289
Channel Islands and Isle of Man
The Channel Islands have three evening papers and four weeklies, and the Isle of Man
has one daily and five weeklies.
News Agencies
There are five principal news agencies:
Reuters Ltd. This world-famous agency distributes foreign and Commonwealth news
to British newspapers, and foreign and British news to over 3,000 newspapers outside
Britain. It is owned by the British Press and three Commonwealth news agencies. All
profits are used to develop the service.
Press Association Ltd. This agency distributes home news. It is owned by British pro¬
vincial newspapers. All profits are used to develop the service.
Exchange Telegraph Company Ltd. This is a public company which distributes home and
foreign news, mainly to British papers.
Associated Press. This is a branch of the Associated Press of America. It distributes over¬
sea news.
British United Press. This is a Canadian subsidiary of the United Press of America. It also
distributes oversea news.
Training for Journalism
In 1952 agreement was reached on a scheme for the training and education of junior
journalists in newspaper offices. A National Advisory Council, on which are representa¬
tives of the principal Press organizations and unions, administers the scheme, which is
based on the voluntary co-operation of newspaper offices. Previously, journalists were,
broadly, of two classes: those who, as boys of 16 to 18, entered newspaper offices and
worked their way up, learning by experience; and graduates of universities who held
some of the specialized posts, e.g., correspondents abroad or on special subjects, leader-
writers and editorial office staff. The second class was considerably smaller than the first.
Press Institutions
Both employers and employees in the industry are well organized and there is a large
number of Press institutions. On the employers’ side, the most important are the News¬
paper Proprietors’ Association, whose members are proprietors of London (national)
daily and Sunday newspapers, the Newspaper Society, whose members are proprietors
of provincial daily and weekly newspapers in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, the
Scottish Daily Newspaper Society, and the Periodical Proprietors’ Association. On the em¬
ployees’ side there are the National Union of Journalists and the Institute of Journahsts. The
National Union of Joumahsts has a membership of about 12,650 working journalists;
editors who have powers of dismissal are excluded. The Institute of Journalists, which has
a membership of some 2,800, admits editors. Free-lance journalists (who are not on the
staff of any one paper or group of papers but send contributions to any journal) may
belong to the NUJ or loj. The aims of these organizations are the improvement of wages
and working conditions ofjoumalists and of the status of the Press.
The Guild of British Newspaper Editors aims, inter alia, to sustain the dignity of
editorship, to raise and safeguard the professional status of editors, to protect the rights
and freedom of the Press, and to improve the education and training of junior journalists.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Press Council
Following the recommendations of the Royal Commission on the Press, a Press
Council representative of the various Press organizations was set up in 1953. Its aims are:
to preserve the established freedom of the British Press;
to maintain the character of the British Press in accordance with the highest pro¬
fessional and commercial standards;
to keep under review any developments likely to restrict the supply of information
of pubhc interest and importance;
to promote and encourage methods of recruitment, education and training of
journahsts;
to promote a proper functional relation among all sections of the profession;
to promote technical and other research;
to study developments in the British Press which may tend towards greater concen¬
tration or monopoly;
to publish periodical reports recording its own work and reviewing from time to
time the various developments in the British Press and the factors affecting them.
APPENDIX
LEGISLATIVE CHANGES PROPOSED FOR 1954
Among the proposed measures outlined by the Government at the opening of the new
Parhamentary session in November 1953 as likely to be introduced during the coming
year were:
legislation to facilitate the repair and improvement of existing houses;
the ending of food rationing and allocation;
the introduction of new methods of marketing and of providing price guarantees for
agricultural produce, to replace State trading when rationing ends;
the transfer of responsibility for atomic energy development from the Ministry of
Supply to a statutory corporation, with the Lord President of the Council as
responsible minister;
the removal of restrictions on private trading in raw cotton, and the winding up of
the Raw Cotton Commission;
legislation to provide for a competitive television service to operate side by side with
the BBC service;
the establishment of a non-profit-making company to be responsible as from 1955
for the British Industries Fair;
legislation to revise, consolidate and extend the law on the safety, health and welfare
of miners and quarrymen;
the reorganization of electricity supply in Scotland.
It was also stated that the Government would give consideration to reform of the
House of Lords.
Housing. The Government’s policy for promoting the repair and improvement of
houses, while stimulating the resumption of slum clearance, was outlined in a White
Paper, Houses: The Next Step (Cmd. 8996). It involves legislation permitting landlords
under certain conditions to make limited increases in rents to meet the increased costs of
repairs. It is proposed to ease the conditions for grants in aid of improvements and also to
enable local authorities to acquire slum property by compulsory purchase in order to
carry out temporary repairs where such property cannot be demolished and replaced
immediately.
Food Rationing and Control. A White Paper, Decontrol of Food and Marketing of
Agricultural Produce (Cmd. 8989) announced the Government’s decision to end rationing,
allocation and price control of meat and bacon in the summer of 1954 and to restore the
import of meat to private traders, subject to appropriate arrangements about existing
contracts. The decontrol of milk products and fats in the course of 1954 had been an¬
nounced in October; the year 1954 will thus see the end of food rationing.
291
292
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Agricultural Marketing and Price Guarantees. The White Paper also announced
the arrangements to be made for the marketing of agricultural produce as controls on
foodstuffs are removed. In general the intention is to end Government buying but to
continue producers’ price guarantees and where suitable to make use of marketing boards
in implementing Part I of the Agriculture Act, 1947.
Atomic Energy Development. A further White Paper, The Future Organization of
the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Project (Cmd. 8986) stated that, as from 1st January 1954,
ministerial responsibility for atomic energy development would be transferred from the
Minister of Supply to the Lord President of the Council. A Bill would be introduced to
set up an Atomic Energy Corporation, with an executive board, to administer the project,
and the existing atomic energy establishments (see p. 270) would be transferred to this
Corporation. The Ministry of Supply would, however, remain responsible to the Services
for the provision of complete atomic weapons and would place contracts with the Cor¬
poration for nuclear components of such weapons and for research according to Service
requirements. The money required to finance the Corporation’s activities would be voted
annually by Parhament in the form of a grant to the Lord President’s Department.
Television. The Government’s proposals for competitive television, as set out in a
White Paper, Broadcasting: Memorandum on Television Policy (Cmd. 9005) would involve
the setting up by statute of a public corporation which would own and operate a new
network of transmitting stations and would hire its facilities to privately financed companies
under contract. These companies would provide programmes and would draw revenue
from advertisements. The corporation, which would operate like the BBC under licence
from the Postmaster-General, would have flexible powers of control and would be
responsible for safeguarding the standards of programmes.
British Industries Fair. The Government will introduce legislation to implement
the recommendations contained in a report (Cmd. 9013) by the Exhibition Advisory
Committee to the Board of Trade that responsibility for the British Industries Fair (see
p. 122) should be transferred as from 1955 from the Board of Trade to a non-profit-
making company whose board would be nominated by trustees representative of
industry, and that the initial working capital of the company for a period of five years
should be guaranteed by the Government. Management of the Birmingham section of
the Fair is to remain with the Birmingham Chamber of Commerce.
26th November 1953
BIBLIOGRAPHY
This bibliography is in no sense comprehensive: it is only intended to be a short guide to
further reading on the subjects covered in this Handbook.
The Central Office of Information reference documents listed are obtainable at United
Kingdom Information Offices overseas. They are not immediately available in the United
States, but equivalent free material can be supplied by British Information Services,
30 Rockefeller Plaza, New York 20, N. Y.
Acts of Parliament referred to in the text can be obtained from HMSO at varying prices
Publications for which no price is given are known to be out of print.
I. THE BRITISH ISLES
Physical Background
Manley, G. Climate and the British Scene Collins
Stamp, L. Dudley. Britain’s Structure and Scenery. 2nd edn Collins
 The Face of Britain For the British Council, Longmans
 The Land of Britain: Its Use and Misuse. 2nd edn
Longmans
 and Beaver, S. H. The British Isles: a Geographic and
Economic Survey. 3rd edn Longmans
Steers, J. A. The Coastline of England and Wales
Cambridge University Press
 The Sea Coast Collins
Tansley, Sir Arthur. The British Isles and their Vegetation. 2 vols
[reprinting] Cambridge University Press
British Regional Geology Handbooks. Various authors HMSO
Demographic Background
National Council of Social Service. Scotland’s Changing
Population NCSS
Political and Economic Planning. Population Policy in Great
Britain PEP
Trevelyan, G. M. English Social History Longmans
Zweig, F. Labour, Life and Poverty Gollancz
Annual Reports of the
Registrar-General, Northern Ireland For 1951 Belfast, HMSO
Registrar-General, Scotland For 1950 HMSO
Census Reports of Great Britain 1801-1931 (Guides to Official
Sources No. 2) HMSO
Census 1951 (England and Wales). Prehminary Report HMSO
Census 1951. Great Britain. One Per Cent Sample Tables
Part I. Ages and Marital Condition, Occupations, Industries,
Housing of Private Households HMSO
Part II. Characteristics and Composition of Private Households,
Non-Private Households, Education, Birthplace and
Nationality, Fertility, Welsh and Gaelic Languages,
Conurbation Supplement HMSO
s. .
1952 25 o
1947 21 0
1940 I O
1950 50 O
1943 30 O
1946 45 O
1953 25 O
1939
1946 2 6
to to
1948 4 0
1950 3 6
1948 15 o
1944 21 o
1948 7 6
1953 3 o
1953 10 6
1951 3 6
1951 5 o
1952 17 6
1952 40 o
293
294
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
1951
1951
1952
1952
1953
1953
1953
1953
1953
1953
1953
s. d.
1 6
3 o
7 6
10 0
8 o
9 o
6
6
11
11
11 o
15 o
10 o
Census of Northern Ireland 1951. Prehminary Report
Belfast, HMSO
Census of Scotland 1951. Preliminary Report HMSO
Census of Scotland 1951. Report
Vol. I Part 1. City of Edinburgh HMSO
Part 2. City of Glasgow HMSO
Part 3. City of Aberdeen HMSO
Part 4. City of Dundee HMSO
Part 5. County of Aberdeen HMSO
Part 6. County of Angus HMSO
Part 7. County of Argyll HMSO
Part 8. County of Ayr HMSO
Part 9. County of Banff HMSO
Vol. II. Population of Towns and Larger Villages (excluding
Burghs) and of Urban and Rural Areas HMSO 1952 4 o
External Migration: A Study of the available Statistics 1815-1950,
by N. H. Carrier and]. R. Jeffery HMSO 1953 8 6
Internal Migration: Some Aspects of Population Movement within
England and Wales HMSO 1951
Matters of Life and Death: A short account of the growth of the
population of England and Wales HMSO 1951
Registrar-General’s Statistical Review of England and Wales
Part I. Medical: Text 1948 and 1949 HMSO 1953
Tables 1951 HMSO 1953
Part II. Civil: Text 1940-45 HMSO 1951
Tables 1951 HMSO 1953
Report of the Royal Commission on Population
Cmd 7695 HMSO 1949
The British Household [mimeographed] Social Survey, CO I 1948
1 6
10 o
12 6
5 o
5 o
7 6
5 o
II. GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
Campion, Lord, and others. British Government since 1918
Allen & Unwin 1950
Clarke, J.J. Outlines of Central Government, including the Judicial
System of England, nth edn Pitman 1950
Jennings, Sir Ivor. The British Constitution. 3rd edn
Cambridge University Press 1950
 The Law and the Constitution. 4th edn
University of London Press 1952
Keith, A. Berriedale. The Constitution of England, from Queen
Victoria to George VI. 2 vols Macmillan 1940
Robson, W. A. The British System of Government, rev. edn
For the British Council, Longmans 1952
Stout, Hiram. British Government
New York, Oxford University Press 1953
Wade, E. C. S., and Phillips, G. G. Constitutional Law. 4th edn
Longmans 1950
The Monarchy
Barker, Sir Ernest. British Constitutional Monarchy, rev. edn
COI
16 o
12 6
15 o
12 6
2 6
40 o
35 o
1952
free
BIBLIOGRAPHY
295
Churchill, Randolph S. They Serve the Queen [on the Royal
Household] Hutchinson
Fletcher, If an Kyrle. The British Court, Its Traditions and
Ceremonial Cassell
Legge-Bourke, Major Henry. The Brigade of Guards on
Ceremonial Occasions Macdonald
 The Household Cavalry on Ceremonial Occasions
Macdonald
Marshall, Howard. Coronation Day 1953 Hutchinson
Nicolson, Sir Harold. King George the Fifth: His Life and Reign
Constable
Tanner, Lawrence E. The History of the Coronation Pitkin
Most Excellent Majesty, by Dermot Morrah For COI, HMSO
Royal Ceremonial Reference Paper R.2551 COI
Parliament
Bulmer-Thomas, Ivor. The Party System in Great Britain
Phoenix House
Butler, D. E. The British General Election of 1951 Macmillan
 The Electoral System in Britain 1918-51
Oxford University Press
Campion, Lord. An Introduction to the Procedure of the House of
Commons. 2nd edn Macmillan
 and others. ParUament: A Survey Allen & Unwin
Gordon, Strathearn. Our Parhament. 4th edn Hansard Society
Hansard Society. Papers on Parliament: A Symposium
Hansard Society
 Parhamentary Government in Britain: A Symposium
Hansard Society
 The British Party System Hansard Society
Jennings, Sir Ivor. Parhament [new edn in preparation]
Cambridge University Press
Mackenzie, K. R. The English Parliament Penguin Books
Nicholas, H. G. The British General Election of 1950 Macmillan
Schofield, A. N. Parhamentary Elections Shaw
 Supplement 1951 Shaw
‘The Times’. The House of Commons 1951, with full results of the
polling, biographies of Members and unsuccessful candidates. . .
and a complete analysis ... of the General Election, October
‘The Times’
General Elections in Great Britain Reference Paper R.2224 COI
The British Parhament Reference Pamphlet RF.P.2661 COI
The Privy Council, Her Majesty’s Government, Government
Bridges, Sir Edward. Treasury Control Athlone Press
Finer, S. E. A Primer of Public Admimstration Muller
Jennings, Sir Ivor. Cabinet Government. 2nd edn
Cambridge University Press
Keith, A. Berriedale. The British Cabinet System. 2nd edn rev.
by N. H. Gibbs Stevens
s. d.
1953 12 6
1953 7 6
1952 10 6
1952 10 6
1953 10 6
1952 42 o
1952 17 6
1953 2 o
1953 free
1953 25 o
1952 21 o
1953 21 o
1947
1952 22 6
1953 15 o
1949 6 o
1949 6 o
1952 10 6
1939
1950 2 o
1951 21 o
1950 52 6
1953 25 o
1951 10 6
1951 free
1953 free
Departments
1950 2 o
1950 6 o
1951 3° 0
1952 37 6
296
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Neill, Desmond G., Editor. Devolution of Government: The Ex¬
periment in Northern Ireland
For the Institute of Public Administration, Allen & Unwin 1953
Handbook on Scottish Administration HMSO 1950
Her Majesty’s Ministers and Heads of Pubhc Departments [6 issues
a year] HMSO
How Northern Ireland is Governed: Central and Local Govern¬
ment in Northern Ireland, by Hugh Shearman Belfast, HMSO 1951
Scottish Administration Reference Paper R.2105 CO/ 1951
The Civil Service
Bridges, Sir Edward. Portrait of a Profession: The Civil Service
Tradition Cambridge University Press 1950
Critchley, T. A. The Civil Service Today Gollancz 1951
Monck, Bosworth. How the Civil Service Works Phoenix House 1952
Munro, C. K. The Fountains of Trafalgar Square Heinemann 1952
The British Civil Service Reference Paper R.2553 CO/ 1953
Public Corporations and State-Sponsored Bodies
Chester, D. N. The Nationahsed Industries: An Analysis of the
Statutory Provisions. 2nd edn
For the Institute of Pubhc Administration, Allen & Unwin 1951
Goodman, Edward. Forms of Public Control and Ownership
Christophers 1951
Houldsworth, Sir Hubert, and others. Efficiency in the
Nationahsed Industries
For the Institute of Pubhc Administration, Allen & Unwin 1952
Robson, W. A. Problems of Nationalized Industry Allen & Unwin 1952
Reports from the Select Committee on Nationahsed Industries
Session 1951-52 HMSO 1952
Session 1952-53 HMSO 1953
Local Government
Burton,}. H. Local Rates Stevens 1950
Clarke, J.J. Outlines of Local Government of the United Kingdom
16 th edn Pitman 1949
The Corporation of London Oxford University Press 1950
Eyre, Frank, and Hadfield, E. C. R. The Fire Service. 2nd edn
Oxford University Press 1953
Hadfield, E. C. R., and MacColl, J. E. British Local Government
Hutchinson 1948
Jackson, W. Eric. The Structure of Local Government in England
and Wales. 2nd edn Longmans 1952
Jessup, Frank. Problems of Local Government in England and
Wales Cambridge University Press 1949
Morrison, Herbert. How London is Governed. 2nd edn
fames Barrie 1949
Schofield, A. N. Local Government Elections. 2nd edn Shaw 1950
Tillett, N. R. Town Hall and Shire Hah Harrap 1949
Warren,}. H. The Local Government Service Allen & Unwin 1952
Local Government in Britain [revised edition in preparation]
Reference Pamphlet RF.P.2698 COI
s. d.
6 o
1 6
1 o
6
free
1 6
12 6
25 o
12 6
free
7 6
8 6
7 6
25 o
6 6
4 o
4 o
10 o
15 o
9 6
7 6
15 o
3 6
8 6
52 6
8 6
18 o
free
BIBLIOGRAPHY
297
Notes on the Work of the County Council and its Principal Officers
and Departments
Reference Papers R.1856, R.1860 and R.1904 COI 1949-50
The Chief Officers of a Metropolitan Borough
Reference Paper R.1726 COI 1949
Law and Order
Denning, Sir Alfred. The Changing Law Stevens
 Freedom under the Law Stevens
Eddy, J. P. The Justices’ Handbook: A Guide to Law, Evidence and
Procedure in Magistrates’ Courts. 3rd edn Stevens
Giles, F. T. The Magistrates’ Courts Penguin Books
Gloag, W. M., and Henderson, A. D. Introduction to the Laws of
Scotland. 5 th edn William Green
Hanbury, H. G. English Courts of Law. 2nd edn
Oxford University Press
James, Philip S. Introduction to English Law. 2nd edn Butterworth
Jenks, Edward. The Book of English Law, rev. by K. J. Ll. Davies
John Murray
Joyce, J. A. Justice at Work Chapman & Hall
Rubinstein, Ronald. John Citizen and the Law. 3rd edn
Penguin Books
Tillett, N. R. The Law and the People Harrap
Criminal Statistics for England and Wales Annual
For 1952 Cmd 8941 HMSO
Criminal Statistics, Scotland Annual For 1952 Cmd 8818 HMSO
Police
Hart, J. M. The British Police Allen & Unwin 1951
Martienssen, Anthony. Crime and the Police1 Seeker & Warburg 1951
Reith, Charles. A Short History of the British Pohce
Oxford University Press 1948
Thomas, T. Lewis. Pohce Administration
Police Review Publishing Co. 1952
Annual Reports of
The Commissioner of the Police of the Metropolis
For 1952 Cmd 8944 HMSO 1953
H.M. Inspector of Constabulary, Scotland
For 1952 Cmd 8858 HMSO 1953
H.M. Inspectors of Constabulary (Counties and Boroughs in
England and Wales) For 1951-52 HMSO 1953
Notes on the Work of the County Council and its Principal Officers
and Departments. IV. The Pohce Force
Reference Paper R.1900 COI 1950
Treatment of Offenders
Fox, Lionel W. English Prisons and Borstal Systems Routledge 1952
Fry, Margery. Arms of the Law Gollancz 1951
1953
1949
1953
1949
1952
1953
1953
1953
1952
1952
1950
1953
1953
5. d.
free
free
10 o
8 o
18 o
2 o
63 O
6 o
15 o
18 o
12 6
3 6
8 6
5 6
2 6
15 o
10 6
3 6
3 6
6
1 o
free
30 o
8 6
’Also a Penguin edition 1953 price 2s. od.
298
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Annual Reports
The Commissioners of Prisons For 1952 Cmd 8948 HMSO
Prisons in Scotland For 1952 Cmd 8817 HMSO
Prisons and Borstals, rev. edn HMSO
The Probation Service, Its Objects and Its Organisation, rev. edn
HMSO
Report of the Committee on Prisoners’ Aid Societies
Cmd 8879 HMSO
Report of a Committee to Review Punishments in Prisons, Borstal
Institutions, Approved Schools and Remand Homes
Parts I and II. Prisons and Borstal Institutions
Cmd 8256 HMSO
Parts III and IV. Approved Schools and Remand Homes
Cmd 8429 HMSO
Report of the Royal Commission on Capital Punishment 1949-53
Cmd 8932 HMSO
IH. DEFENCE
Brassey’s Annual: The Armed Forces Year Book 1953, edited by
Rear-Admiral H. G. Thursfield Clowes
Jane’s All the World’s Aircraft 1952-53, edited by Leonard
Bridgman Sampson Low
Jane’s Fighting Ships 1953-54, edited by Raymond Blackman
Sampson Low
Lewis, M. The Navy of Britain Allen & Umvin
Sheppard, E. W. A Short History of the British Army. 4th edn
Constable
Annual Estimates for the Services
Air Estimates 1953-54 HMSO
Memorandum on Air Estimates 1953-54 Cmd 8771 HMSO
Army Estimates 1953-54 HMSO
Memorandum on Army Estimates 1953-54
Cmd 8770 HMSO
Navy Estimates 1953-54 HMSO
Statement by the First Lord of the Admiralty
Cmd 8769 HMSO
Ministry of Defence Estimate Annual 1953-54 HMSO
Statement on Defence Annual 1953 Cmd 8768 HMSO
Central Organisation for Defence Cmd 6923 HMSO
Civil Defence Manual of Basic Training [series of pamphlets]
HMSO
Britain’s Armed Forces Reference Paper R.2594 COI
Civil Defence in Britain Reference Paper R.2534 COI
National Service in Britain Reference Paper R.2423 COI
The Territorial Army and the Army Emergency Reserve
Reference Paper R.2578 COI
s. d.
1953 6 o
1953 I 9
1950 2 6
1952 1 0
1953 1 9
1951 3 6
1952 2 6
1953 12 6
1953 63 o
1952 84 o
1953 84 o
1948 30 0
1950 30 o
1953 8 o
1953
1953 7
1953
1953 10
1953 6
1953 9
1953 9
1946 2
1949 1 o
to to
1953 I 6
1953 free
1953 free
1952 free
1953 free
O VO 0\ -f*
BIBLIOGRAPHY
299
IV. THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
Jones, G. P., and Vool, A. G. A Hundred Years of Economic
Development in Great Britain. 2nd edn Duckworth
Seers, Dudley. The Levelling of Incomes since 193 8 Blackwell
Worswick, G. D. N., and others. The British Economy, 1945-50
Oxford University Press
Annual Abstract of Statistics
No. 88,1938-50 HMSO
No. 89, 1952 HMSO
Economic Survey Annual from 1947 For 1953 Cmd 8800 HMSO
National Income and Expenditure of the United Kingdom Annual
1938-46 Cmd 7099 HMSO
1946-52 (prepared by the Central Statistical Office) HMSO
Recovery Record: The Story of Marshall Aid in Britain HMSO
Monthly Digest of Statistics HMSO
Digest of Scottish Statistics Twice yearly HMSO
V. FINANCE
Armstrong, F. E. The Book of the Stock Exchange Pitman
Hicks, U. K. Public Finance, rev. edn Nisbet
Horne, H. O. A History of the Savings Banks
Oxford University Press
King, W. T. C. A History of the London Discount Market
[new edn in preparation] Routledge
Lavington, F. The English Capital Market Methuen
Raynes, H. E. A. A History of British Insurance Pitman
Sayers, R. S. Modem Banking. 3rd edn Oxford University Press
Annual Reports of
The Commissioners of Customs and Excise
For 1951-52 Cmd 8727 HMSO
The Commissioners of Inland Revenue
For 1951-52 Cmd 8726 HMSO
Finance Accounts of the United Kingdom for the Financial Year
Annual 1952-53 HMSO
Financial Statement Annual
1953-54 HMSO
National Debt Annual
1938-53 Cmd 8975 HMSO
United Kingdom Financial Institutions
Reference Paper R.2346 COI
VI. TRADE
External Trade
Gillett Brothers Discount Company. The Bill on London
Chapman & Hall
Institute of Bankers. The Sterling Area [ninepamphlets]
Institute of Bankers
Political and Economic Planning. Britain and World Trade
PEP
 The Sterling Area: History and Mechanism PEP
1948
1951
1952
1952
1952
1953
1947
1953
1951
1947
1951
1947
1936
1934
1950
1951
1953
1953
1953
1953
1953
1952
1952
1949
1947
1951
s. d.
21 o
5 o
35 o
21 o
21 o
i 6
1 o
6 o
2 6
4 6
4 o
30 o
10 6
18 o
35 o
17 6
6 o
7 o
3 o
1 3
1 3
free
15 o
.. 1 o
18 o
2 o
300
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Smith, J. G. Organized Produce Markets Longmans 1926
Swiss Bank Corporation. British Exports and Exchange Restric¬
tions Abroad. 7th edn Swiss Bank Corporation 1953
Annual Statement of Trade of the United Kingdom with British
and Foreign Countries 1951
Vol. I. Summaries of the Import and Export Trade HMSO 1953
Vol. II. Detailed Statements respecting Articles Imported
„ and Re-exported, and of Imports and Exports of
Gold and Silver Bullion and Coin HMSO 1953
Vol. III. Details of Exports of the Produce and Manufactures
of the United Kingdom HMSO 1953
Vol. IV. Details of Trade with Individual Countries HMSO 1953
Supplement: Imports into and Exports from each
Port of the United Kingdom 1949-51 HMSO 1953
Assistance to Exporters. Thirteenth Report from the Select Com¬
mittee on Estimates. Session 1952-53 HMSO 1953
Commonwealth Trade in 1951. A Memorandum prepared in the
Intelligence Branch of the Commonwealth Economic Committee
Annual HMSO 1952
United Kingdom Balance of Payments Annual
1946-1953 Cmd 8976 HMSO 1953
Accounts Relating to the Trade and Navigation of the United
Kingdom Monthly HMSO
Board of Trade Journal Weekly HMSO
Report on Overseas Trade Monthly HMSO
Domestic Trade
Chisholm, C., Editor. Marketing Survey of the United Kingdom.
2nd edn Business Publications 1951
Jefferys, J. B., and others. Distribution of Consumer Goods: A
Factual Study of Methods and Costs in the United Kingdom in
1938 Cambridge University Press 1950
 Retail Trading in Britain 1850-1950 [in preparation]
Cambridge University Press
Smith, Henry. Retail Distribution: A Critical Analysis. 2nd edn
Oxford University Press 1948
Britain’s Shops: A Statistical Summary of Shops and Service
Establishments HMSO 1952
Census of Distribution and Other Services 1950
Vol. I. Retail and Service Trades HMSO 1953
The Co-operative Movement in Britain
Reference Paper R.2524 COI 1953
VII. INDUSTRY
Organization and Production
Allen, G. C. British Industries and their Organization. 3rd edn
Longmans 1951
British Productivity Council. The British Productivity Council:
Pohcy and Programme BPC 1953
s. d.
free
35 o
63 o
70 o
30 o
10 o
5 o
1 o
2 6
12 6
9
2 6
5 gns.
40 o
10 6
3 6
7 6
free
17 6
6
BIBLIOGRAPHY
301
Political and Economic Planning. Government and Industry:
A Survey of the Relations between Government and Privately
Owned Industry PEP 1952
Distribution of Industry Cmd 754° HMSO 1948
Industry and Employment in Scotland Annual For 1952 HMSO 1953
The Regional Boards for Industry Treasury and COI 1951
Industrial Development in Scotland Reference Paper R.2531 COI 1953
Productivity in the United Kingdom Reference Paper R.2205 COI 1951
Recent Industrial Developments in the United Kingdom
Reference Paper R.2415 COI 1952
United Kingdom Development Areas
Reference Paper R.2692 COI 1953
United Kingdom Monopolies Commission
Reference Paper R.2545 COI 1953
Agriculture
Easterbrook, L. F. British Agriculture. 4th edn
For the British Council, Longmans 1950
Ernle, Lord. English Farming Past and Present Longmans 1936
Orwin, C. S. A History of Enghsh Farming Nelson 1949
Watson, J. A. S., and More, J. A. Agriculture: The Science and
Practice of British Farming. 9th edn Oliver & Boyd 1950
Agricultural Research Service HMSO 1953
Agricultural Statistics, United Kingdom
Part I. Acreage and Production ofCrops, Numbers of Livestock,
etc., 1950-51 HMSO 1953
Part II. Output and Utilisation of Farm Produce, 1943-5°
HMSO 1953
Agricultural Survey in Scotland Edinburgh, HMSO 1946
Annual Reports of Department of Agriculture for Scotland
Agriculture in Scotland 1952 Cmd 8792 HMSO 1953
Annual Review and Fixing of Farm Prices 1953 Cmd 8798 HMSO 1953
British Farming, by W. B. Mercer HMSO 1951
Farm Incomes in England and Wales 1950-51 Annual HMSO 1953
Survey of Agricultural, Forestry and Fishery Products and their
Utihsation HMSO 1953
Agriculture : Journal of the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries
Monthly HMSO
Scottish Agriculture: Journal of the Department of Agriculture for
Scotland Quarterly HMSO
Agriculture in Britain [under revision]
Reference Pamphlet RF.P.2096 COI 1950
County Agricultural Executive Committees
Reference Paper R.2687 COI 1953
Fisheries and Forestry
Fisheries
Annual Reports
Fisheries of Scotland For I952 Cmd 8850 HMSO 1953
Flerring Industry Board For 1952 Cmd 8840 HMSO 1953
White Fish Authority (and Accounts) For 1952-53 HMSO 1953
s. d.
21 o
1 6
2 6
free
free
free
free
free
free
1 o
12 6
26 o
2 6
2 6
2 6
8 6
3 6
6
3 <5
6 6
7 6
9
1 o
free
free
2 6
1 6
2 3
302
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Annual Statistical Tables
Scottish Sea Fisheries For 1952 HMSO
Sea Fisheries For 1951 HMSO
Forestry
Taylor, W. Ling. Forests and Forestry in Great Britain
Crosby Lockwood
Annual Reports of
The Forestry Commissioners For 1951-52 HMSO
Britain’s Forests [series of 15 booklets] HMSO
Census of Woodlands 1947-49: Summary Report HMSO
Dedication of Woodlands: Principles and Procedure.
3rd edn HMSO
Forestry Commission Guide: New Forest HMSO
National Forest Park Guides:
Argyll HMSO
Forest of Dean, Glen More, Hardknott HMSO
Snowdonia HMSO
Glen Trool HMSO
Fuel, Power, and Water Supply
Fuel and the Future. Proceedings of a Conference under the Auspices
of the Fuel Efficiency Committee. 3 vols HMSO
Ministry of Fuel and Power Statistical Digest Annual
For 1951 HMSO
Report of the Committee on National Policy for the Use of Fuel
and Power Resources [Ridley Report] Cmd 8647 HMSO
Coal
National Coal Board. Plan for Coal NCB
 Some Notes on the British Coal Industry NCB
Statham, I. C. F. Coal-mining English Universities Press
Townshend-Rose, H. The British Coal Industry Allen & Unwin
Annual Reports and Accounts of
The National Coal Board For 1952 HMSO
Coal Mining: Report of the Technical Advisory Committee
[Reid Report] Cmd 6610 HMSO
British Coalmining since Nationalization
Reference Paper R.2226 COI
Petroleum
King, A. L. Statistics Relating to the Petroleum Industry, with
Particular Reference to the United Kingdom
Royal Statistical Society
United Kingdom Petroleum Industry Advisory Committee.
UK Petroleum Industry Statistics Relating to Consumption and
Refinery Production Annual
For 1951 and 1952 Petroleum Information Bureau
Electricity and Gas Supply
British Gas Council. The Rise of the Gas Industry in Britain
British Gas Council
1953
1952
1945
1953
1948
to
1953
1951
1953
1951
1946
1947-49
1948
1950
1948
1952
1952
1950
1952
1951
1951
1953
1945
1951
1952
1953
1949
s. d.
4 0
1 6
12 6
3
to
1 3
9
2 o
3 6
1 6
. 2 o
2 6
3 o
15 6
21 o
6 6
2 6
free
22 6
12 6
8 6
3 6
free
2 0
free
15 o
o 'O
BIBLIOGRAPHY
303
Political and Economic Planning. The Gas Industry in Great
Britain PEP
Self, Sir Henry, and Watson, Elizabeth M. Electricity Supply in
Great Britain Allen & Unwin
Annual Reports and Accounts of the
British Electricity Authority For 1952-53 HMSO
Gas Council For 1952-53 HMSO
North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board For 1952 HMSO
Report of the Committee on Hydro-Electric Development in
Scotland Cmd 6406 HMSO
Electricity Supply in Britain Reference Paper R.2099 COI
Water Supply
Metropolitan Water Board. London’s Water Supply 1903-53:
A Review of the Work of the Metropolitan Water Board
Staples Press
Veal, T. H. P. The Supply of Water. 2nd edn Chapman & Hall
Walters, R. C. S. The Nation’s Water Supply Nicholson & Watson
Annual Reports of the
Water Pollution Research Board For 1952 HMSO
National Water Pohcy Cmd 6515 HMSO
River Boards: A Guide to their Powers and Functions HMSO
Some Manufacturing Industries
Association of British Chemical Manufacturers. Report on
the British Chemical Industry
Association of British Chemical Manufacturers
Castle, H. G. Britain’s Motor Industry Burke Publishing Co.
Political and Economic Planning. Locomotives: A Report on
the Industry PEP
 Motor Vehicles: A Report on the Industry PEP
‘The Times’ Survey of the British Motor Car Industry ‘ The Times’
Report of Working Party on
China Clay HMSO
Cotton HMSO
Jute HMSO
Pottery HMSO
Wool HMSO
The British Electrical Engineering 'ndustry
Reference Paper R.2295 COI
The British Plastics Industry Reference Paper R.23 86 COI
United Kingdom Aircraft Industry Reference Paper R.2457 COI
Supplement Reference Paper R.2676 COI
United Kingdom Chemical Industry
Reference Paper R.2633 COI
United Kingdom Motor Vehicle Industry
Reference Paper R.2532 COI
United Kingdom Office Equipment Industry
Reference Paper R.2630 COI
1939
1952
1953
1953
1953
1942
1951
1953
1950
1936
1953
1944
1950
1949
1950
1951
1950
1952
1948
1946
1948
1946
1947
1952
1952
1952
1953
1953
1953
1953
s. d.
13 o
20 O
8 6
6 o
2 6
9
free
15 o
25 o
31 6
2
3 o
5 o
21 o
12 6
15 o
2 6
3
2 6
1 3
3 6
free
free
free
free
free
free
free
CN 0\
304
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
United Kingdom Pharmaceutical Industry-
Reference Paper R.2516 COJ
United Kingdom Prefabricated Buildings Industry
Reference Paper R.2588 COI
The United Kingdom Textile Industries
Introductory Reference Paper R.2275 COI
Cotton Reference Paper R.2277 COI
Jute Reference Paper R.2279 COI
Linen Reference Paper R.2278 COI
Rayon and Synthetic Fibres Reference Paper R.2281 COI
Silk Reference Paper R.2280 COI
Wool Reference Paper R.2276 COI
VIII. TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
Shipping
Blake, G. British Ships and Shipbuilders Collins
Bown, A. H. J., and Dove, C. A. Port Operation and
Administration Chapman & Hall
Chamber of Shipping of the United Kingdom. Annual Report
1952-53 Chamber of Shipping of the United Kingdom
Corporation of Lloyd’s. Lloyd’s List Annual Review 1952
Corporation of Lloyd’s
Docks and Inland Waterways Executive. Review of Trade
Harbours 1948-50 Docks and Inland Waterways Executive
Duff, Peter. British Ships and Shipping Harrap
Ford, P., and Bound, J. A. Coastwise Shipping and the Small Ports
Blackwell
Hardy, A. C. The Book of the Ship Sampson Low
Lloyd’s Register of Shipping. Annual Summary of Merchant
Ships launched in the world during 1952
Lloyd’s Register of Shipping
Lloyd’s Register of Shipping 1953-54 Annual
Lloyd’s Register of Shipping
Mead, Cdr. Hilary P. Trinity House Sampson Low
Owen, Sir David J. The Origin and Development of the Ports of
the United Kingdom. 2nd edn Allman
Port of London Authority. 44th Annual Report 1952-53 PLA
‘Shipping World’ Year Book and Who’s Who 1953-54, edited by
Sir Archibald Hurd ‘Shipping World’
Stewart, Colin, Compiler. Merchant Ships (British Built, 1952)
Harrap
Thornton, R. H. British Shipping Cambridge University Press
Ports of the United Kingdom Reference Paper R.2292 COI
Inland Transport
Walker, G. Road and Rail: An Enquiry into the Economics of
Competition and State Control. 2nd edn Allen & Unwin
Annual Reports and Accountsof the British Transport Commission
For 1952 HMSO
Transport PoHcy Cmd 853 8 HMS'O
1952
1953
1952
1952
1952
1952
1952
1952
1952
1946
1950
1953
1952
1951
1949
1951
1949
1953
1953
1947
1949
1953
1953
1953
1939
1952
1947
1953
1952
s. d.
free
free
free
free
free
free
free
free
free
21 o
27 6
6
2 o
12 6
10 6
30 o
free
12 gns.
15 o
30 o
1 o
60 o
30 o
12 6
free
18 6
10 6
3
BIBLIOGRAPHY
305
Railways
British Railways Executive. Facts and Figures about British
Railways, rev. edn BRE 1953
Nock, O. S. British Trains: Past and Present Batsford 1951
Ward, Sir Michael Barrington, and other members of the Railway
Executive. Unification of British Railways : Administrative
Principles and Practice ‘Modern Transport’ 1951
Williamson,}. W. Railways To-day. 2nd edn
Oxford University Press 1951
Roads
*
Jeffreys, Rees. The King’s Highway: An Historical and Auto¬
biographical Record of the Development of the Last Sixty Years
Batchworth Press 1949
Pilcher, R. S. Road Passenger Transport Pitman 1947
Tripp, Sir Alker. Road Traffic and its Control. 2nd edn
Edward Arnold 1950
The Highway Code [new edn in preparation] HMSO 1946
Road Traffic Census 1950 HMSO 1952
London Transport
London Transport Executive. London Travel Survey 1949 LTE 1950
Passingham, W. J. The Romance of London’s Underground
Sampson Low 1933
London Traffic Congestion: Report by the London and Home
Counties Advisory Committee HMSO 1951
Report of the Committee on the Taxicab Service Cmd 8804 HMSO 1953
London’s Underground Reference Paper R.1672 COI 1948
Inland Waterways
Docks and Inland Waterways Executive. British Waterways
Docks and Inland Waterways Executive 1951
FIadfield, Charles. British Canals: An Illustrated History
Phoenix House 1950
Rolt, L. T. C. The Inland Waterways of England Allen & Unwin 1950
Ulster Transport Authority
Annual Report of the
Ulster Transport Authority For 1951-52 Belfast, HMSO 1953
Civil Aviation
British Independent Air Transport Association. Annual
Report For 1952-53 BIATA 1953
Veale, S. E. Airliners and Airways of To-day Pilot Press 1948
Annual Reports of the
Air Transport Advisory Council (and Statement by the Minister
of Civil Aviation) For 1952-53 HMSO 1953
British European Airways Corporation (and Accounts)
For 1952-53 HMSO 1953
British Overseas Airways Corporation (and Accounts)
For 1952-53 HMSO 1953
5. d.
free
16 o
2 6
7 6
18 o
40 o
1
5 o
7 6
2 o
1 3
free
2 6
16 o
21 o
1 o
free
3 o
5 6
2 6
306
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Civil Aviation. Report for 1948 and 1949 HMSO 1950 3 o
London Airport; Northolt Airport; Prestwick Airport; Renfrew
Airport HMSO 1948-4963.1 o
London’s Airports Cmd 8902 HMSO 1953 6
Report of the Committee on Certification of Civil Aircraft and
Approval of Equipment and Memorandum by the Minister of
Civil Aviation Cmd 7705 HMSO 1949 6
Report of the Committee on Recruitment, Training and Licensing
of Personnel for Civil Aviation and Memorandum by the Minis¬
ter of Civil Aviation Cmd 7746 HMSO 1949 9
British Aircraft: Types shown by the Society of British Aircraft
Constructors at Famborough 1952 COI 1953 free
The Post Office
Kay, F. G. Royal Mail Rockliff
Robinson, Howard. Britain’s Post Office Oxford University Press
Annual Accounts
Cable and Wireless Ltd. (with Report of Directors)
For 1952-53 Cmd 8913 HMSO
Post Office Commercial Accounts For 1952-53 HMSO
Monarchs of All They Surveyed: The Story of the Post Office
Surveyors HMSO
Post Office 1951: A Review of the Year’s Activities HMSO
IX. LABOUR AND MANAGEMENT
Courtauld, Samuel. Ideals and Industry
Cambridge University Press
Flanders, Allan. Trade Unions Hutchinson
Heginbotham, H. The Youth Employment Service Methuen
International Labour Office. National Employment Services:
Great Britain ILO
Morton, F. J. Burns. The New Foremanship Chapman & Hall
Vol. I. 2nd edn
Vol. II
National Institute of Industrial Psychology. Joint Consulta¬
tion in British Industry Staples
Northcott, C. H. Personnel Management: Its Scope and Practice.
3rd edn Pitman
Political and Economic Planning. British Trade Unionism.
rev. edn PEP
Sharp, Ian G. Industrial Concihation and Arbitration in Great
Britain Allen & Unwin
Taylor, Gordon Rattray. Are Workers Human? Falcon Press
Webb, Sidney and Beatrice. History of Trade Unionism. 2nd edn
Longmans
Annual Reports of the
Chief Inspector of Factories For 1951 Cmd 8772 HMSO
Ministry of Labour and National Service
For 1952 Cmd 8893 HMSO
For 1939-46 Cmd 7225 HMSO
1951 21 o
1953 21 o
1953
1953 2
1952 2 6
1952 3 o
1949 12 6
1952 8 6
1951 8 6
1952 6 o
1946 16 o
1949 12 6
1952 21 o
1952 21 o
1949 8 6
1951 25 o
1950 10 6
1920 25 o
1953 6 6
1953 5 o
1947 7 o
On O
BIBLIOGRAPHY
307
Directory of Employers’ Associations, Trade Unions, Joint
Organisations, etc. HMSO 1948
Employment Policy Cmd 6527 HMSO 1944
Human Relations in Industry: Report of a Conference 1952 HMSO 1952
Industrial Relations Handbook, rev. edn HMSO 1953
A Short Guide to the Factories Acts 1937 and 1948 HMSO 1949
The Worker in Industry (Ministry of Labour Centenary Lectures
1951) HMSO 1952
Ministry of Labour Gazette Monthly HMSO
The Employment of Older Men and Women
Reference Paper R.2377 COI 1952
Labour Relations and Working Conditions in Britain
Reference Pamphlet RF.P.2662 CO/ 1953
The Trade Unionist in Britain
Reference Pamphlet RF.P.2442 COI 1952
Vocational Education and Training Reference Paper R.1903 COI 1950
Women in Britain Reference Paper R.243 3 CO/ 1952
X. SOCIAL WELFARE
State and Voluntary Services
Amulree, Lord. Adding Life to Years.
For the National Council of Social Service, Bannisdale Press 1951
Beveridge, Lord. Voluntary Action Allen & Unwin 1948
 and Wells, A. F., Editors. The Evidence for Voluntary
Action Allen & Unwin 1949
Cole, G. D. H. The British Social Services, rev. edn
For the British Council, Longmans 1949
Family Welfare Association. Guide to the Social Services: A
Year Book of Information respecting the Statutory and Voluntary
Means of Assistance. 44th edn Staples Press 1952
Hall, M. Penelope. The Social Services of Modem England
Routledge & Kegan Paul 1952
Morris, C., Editor. Social Case-Work in Great Britain
Faber & Faber 1950
National Council of Social Service. Voluntary Social Services:
Handbook of Information and Directory of Organisations NCSS 1951
Wickwar, H. and M. The Social Services: An Historical Survey.
rev. edn John Lane 1949
Younghusband, E. L. Social Work in Britain: Supplementary
Report on the Employment and Training of Social Workers
Dunfermline: Carnegie United Kingdom Trust 1951
Social Service: A Quarterly Survey NCSS p.a.
Social Work: A Quarterly Review of Family Casework
Family Welfare Association p.a.
Children in Britain Reference Paper R.2548 COI 1953
Social Services in Britain Reference Pamphlet RF.P.2539 COI 1953
Social Work and the Social Worker in Britain
Reference Pamphlet RF.P.2238 COI 1951
s. d.
3 6
1 o
3 6
4 6
6
3 6
1 o
free
free
free
free
free
8 6
16 o
16 o
I o
5 0
25 o
12 6
6 o
12 6
free
10 o
6 o
free
free
free
308
BRITAIN! AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
National Insurance and Assistance, and Child Care
Marsh, David C. National Insurance and Assistance in Great
Britain Pitman 1951
Rathbone, Eleanor. Family Allowances Allen & Unwin 1949
Rowntree, B. Seebohm, and Lavers, G. R. Poverty and the
Welfare State: A Third Social Survey of York Longmans 1951
Annual Reports of the
Ministry of National Insurance For 1952 Cmd 8882 HMSO 1953
National Assistance Board For 1952 Cmd 8900 HMSO 1953
Children in the Care of Local Authorities in England and Wales,
November 1952 Cmd 8910 HMSO 1953
Government Actuary. Interim Reports on the operation of
The National Insurance Act, 1946 For 1951-52 HMSO 1953
The National Insurance (Industrial Injuries) Act, 1946
For 1950-51 HMSO 1952
Maternity Benefits Cmd 8446 HMSO 1952
Report of the Care of Children Committee [Curtis Report]
Cmd 6922 HMSO 1946
Social Insurance and Allied Services [Beveridge Report]
Cmd 6404 HMSO 1942
Work ofthe Children’s Department ofthe Home Office HMSO 1951
National Insurance and Allied Social Security Services in Britain
Reference Pamphlet RF.P.2562 COI 1953
Health
Clarke, J. J. Introduction to Public Health Law Cleaver-Hume Press 1949
Clegg, Hugh. Medicine in Britain. 4th edn
For the British Council, Longmans 1951
Ross, Sir James Stirling. The National Health Service in Great
Britain Oxford University Press 1952
Annual Reports of the
Board of Control (Lunacy and Mental Treatment)
For 1952 HMSO 1953
Central Health Services Council For 1952 HMSO 1953
Department of Health for Scotland and Scottish Health Services
Council For 1952 Cmd 8799 HMSO 1953
Ministry of Health
Part I. 1. National Health Service "] For
2. Welfare, Food and Drugs, >1952 HMSO 1953
and Civil Defence J Cmd 8933
Part II. On the State ofthe Pubhc Health
For 1950 Cmd 8582 HMSO 1952
Part III. On the State ofthe Pubhc Health
For 1951 Cmd 8787 HMSO 1953
Medical Auxiharies. Reports of the Committees
Cmd 8188 HM50 1951
National Health Service Summarised Accounts Annual
For 1951-52 HMSO 1953
National Health Service (Scotland) Summarised Accounts Annual
For 1951-52 HMSO 1953
s. d.
20 o
15 o
7 6
3 6
2 o
4
6
6
1 3
4 6
6 o
5 o
free
7 6
2 o
30 o
6
1 3
4 o
5 o
6 0
6 6
5 o
2 o
1 6
BIBLIOGRAPHY
309
Social Workers in tire Mental Health Services. Report of the
Committee Cmd 8260 HMSO 1951
Health Services in Britain [under revision]
Reference Pamphlet RF.P.2051 COI 1952
Maternity and Child Welfare in England and Wales [under revision]
Reference Paper R.1690 COI 1948
Nursing and Midwifery in England and Wales [under revision]
Reference Paper R.2272 COI 1951
Education
Barker, Sir Ernest. British Universities, rev. edn
For the British Council, Longmans 1949
British Council. Higher Education in the United Kingdom: A
Handbook for Students from Overseas, rev. edn Longmans 1952
Curtis, S. J. Education in Britain since 1900 Bakers 1952
 History ofEducation in Great Britain. 3rd edn
University Tutorial Press 1953
Dent, H. C. British Education, rev. edn
For the British Council, Longmans 1949
Dongerkery, S. R. Universities in Britain Oxford University Press 1953
Gardner, D. E. M. Education under Eight
For the British Council, Longmans 1949
National Institute of Adult Education. Adult Education in the
United Kingdom: A Directory of Organisations
National Institute of Adult Education 1950
Annual Reports of the
Ministry of Education
Education in 1952 Cmd 8835 HMSO 1953
Education 1900-1950 Cmd 8244 HMSO 1951
Scottish Education Department
Education in Scotland in 1952 Cmd 8813 HMSO 1953
Curriculum and Examinations in Secondary Schools [Norwood
Report] HMSO 1943
Education for Commerce. Report of a Special Committee HMSO 1949
Further Education (Ministry ofEducation Pamphlet No. 8) HMSO 1947
Further Education: A Report of the Advisory Council on
Education in Scotland Cmd 8454 HMSO 1952
Guide to the Educational System of England and Wales HMSO 1945
The Health of the School Child. Report of the Chief Medical
Officer of the Ministry ofEducation for 1950 and 1951 HMSO 1952
Memoranda on the Ministry ofEducation Estimates Annual
For 1953-54 Cmd 8791 HMSO 1953
Ministry ofEducation Building Bulletins: Nos. 1-9 HMSO 1949
to
1953
The New Secondary Education (Ministry of Education Pamphlet
No. 9) HMSO 1947
Our Changing Schools: A Picture for Parents HMSO 1950
Primary School in Scotland: Memorandum on the Curriculum
HMSO 1950
Public Education in Scotland HMSO 1952
s. d.
1 6
free
free
free
1 o
5 o
18 o
18 6
1 o
12 6
2 o
2 o
5 o
7 6
3 6
3 o
1 6
2 o
5 o
1 9
5 o
6
1 o
to
4 o
2 6
2 O
2 6
2 O
3io
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Public Schools and the General Educational System [Fleming
Report] HMSO 1944
Secondary Education: A Report of the Advisory Council on Edu¬
cation in Scotland Cmd 7005 HMSO 1947
Seven to Eleven: Your Children at School (Ministry of Education
Pamphlet No. 15) HMSO 1949
Training and Supply of Teachers: Report covering the period July
1949 to February 1951 HMSO 1951
University Grants Committee. University Development from 1947
to 1952 Cmd 8875 HMSO 1953
Education in Britain Reference Pamphlet RF.P.2285 COI 1952
Education in Britain’s Armed Forces Reference Paper R.2390 COI 1952
Technological Education in Britain Reference Paper R.2652 COI 1953
Vocational Education and Training Reference Paper R.1903 COI 1950
Youth Services
Morgan, A. E. Youth Services. For the British Council, Longmans 1948
Percival, Alicia C. Youth will be Led: The Story of the Voluntary
Organizations Collins 1951
Standing Conference of National Voluntary Youth Organi¬
sations. Youth in Britain 1953 NCSS 1953
Purpose and Content of the Youth Service HMSO 1945
Youth Organizations in Britain Reference Paper R.2196 CO/ 1951
Housing and Planning
Housing
Housing Manual 1949 HMSO 1949
 Supplement. Housing for Special Purposes HMSO 1951
 Supplement. Houses 1952 HMSO 1952
 Supplement. Houses 1953 HMSO 1953
Housing Return, England and Wales Quarterly Cmd Paper HMSO
Housing Return, Scotland Quarterly Cmd Paper HMSO
ReportofWorkingParty on Building Operations HMSO 195°
Third Report on Cost of Housebuilding HMSO 1952
Housing in Britain [under revision]
Reference Pamphlet RF.P.2208 COI 1951
Planning
Abercrombie, Sir Patrick. Town and Country Planning. 2nd edn
Oxford University Press 1943
Cole, G. D. H., Editor. Britain’s Town and Country Pattern
Faber & Faber 1943
Howard, Ebenezer. Garden Cities of To-morrow. [New edn of
To-morrow: A Peaceful Path to Real Reform, first published in
t898] Faber & Faber 1946
Mumford, Lewis. The Culture of Cities Seeker & Warburg 1938
Osborn, F. J., Editor. Planning and Construction
[Todd Publishing Group] Harrap 1948
Purdom, C. B. The Building of Satellite Towns: A Contribution
to the Study of Town Development and Regional Planning.
2nd edn Dent 1949
Williams-Ellis, Clough. Town and Country Planning
For the British Council, Longmans 1951
s. d.
3 6
6 o
1 o
1 o
3 6
free
free
free
free
2 o
8 6
free
4
free
3 6
2 0
1 o
3 o
1 3
1 o
2 6
1 3
free
5 o
2 6
8 6
21 0
25 o
50 o
2 6
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Annual Reports of the
Central Land Board For 1952-53 HMSO 1953
Development Corporations of the New Towns
For 1951-52 HMSO 1952
National Parks Commission For 1951-52 HMSO 1952
The Density of Residential Areas HMSO 1952
Design in Town and Village, by T. Sharp, F. Gibberd and
W.G. Holford HMSO 1953
Development Plans Explained HMSO 1951
National Parks and Access to the Countryside HMSO 1950
Programme of Highland Development Cmd 7976 HMSO 1950
Report of the Committee on Compensation and Betterment 1942
[Uthwatt Report] Cmd 6386 HMSO 1942
Report of the Committee on Footpaths and Access to the Country¬
side Cmd 7207 HMSO 1947
Report of the Committee on Land Utilisation in Rural Areas 1942
[Scott Report] Cmd 6378 HMSO 1942
Report of the National Parks (England and Wales) Committee
[Hobhouse Report] Cmd 7121 HMSO 1947
Report of the Royal Commission on the Distribution of the Indus¬
trial Population 1939 [Barlow Report] Cmd 6153 HMSO 1940
Town and Country Planning 1943-51: Progress Report
Cmd 8204 HMSO 1951
Town and Country Planning in Britain
Reference Pamphlet RF.P.2225 COI 1951
XI. SCIENCE AND THE ARTS
Science
British Council. Scientific and Learned Societies of Great Britain:
A Handbook compiled from Official Sources. 57th edn
Allen & Unwin 1951
Commonwealth Agricultural Bureaux. Gazetteer of Agricul¬
tural and Forestry Research Stations in the British Common¬
wealth CAB 1952
Dunsheath, Percy, Editor. Industrial Research
[Todd Publishing Group] Harrap 1947
Edwards, R. S. Co-operative Industrial Research Pitman 1950
Federation of British Industries. Report of the Third Con¬
ference of Industrial Research Directors and Managers
Federation of British Industries 1953
 Research and Development in British Industry: A Survey
of Expenditure 1950-51 Federation of British Industries 1952
Heath, SirH. Frank, and Hetherington, A. L. Industrial Research
and Development in the United Kingdom: A Survey
Faber & Faber 1946
Hill, D. W. Co-operative Research in Industry Hutchinson 1947
Petrie, G. F., Editor. British Medical Science and Practice: An
Anthology Longmans 1953
Royal Society. Report of Empire Scientific Conference 1946.
2 vols Cambridge University Press 1948
 The Year Book of the Royal Society of London
Royal Society 1953
3ii
s. d.
6
15 o
2 6
5 o
7 6
2
1 o
4 6
1 3
4 o
4 6
9 o
6 o
free
30 o
30 o
25 o
20 o
3 6
1 3
25 o
10 6
15 o
42 o
7 6
O VO
312
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Annual Reports of the
Advisory Council on Scientific Policy
For 1952-53 Cmd 8874 HMSO
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research
For 1951-52 Cmd 8773 HMSO
Medical Research Council For 1951-52 Cmd 8876 HMSO
National Physical Laboratory For 1952 HMSO
A Description of the Work of the Department of Scientific and
Industrial Research HMSO
Government Scientific Organisation in the Civilian Field HMSO
Harwell: The British Atomic Energy Research Establishment
1946-51 HMSO
Jubilee Book of the National Physical Laboratory, by John
Langdon-Davies HMSO
Scientific Research in British Universities HMSO
The British Contribution to Nuclear Research and the Develop¬
ment of Nuclear Energy Reference Paper R.243 8 COI
Radioactive Isotopes Reference Paper R.2366 COI
The Arts
Arts Council of Great Britain. Annual Report 1952-53
Arts Council
 The Arts Council of Great Britain: What It Is and What
It Does Arts Council
British Council. Annual Report 1952-53 British Council
Libraries, Museums and Art Galleries Year Book James Clarke
[new edn in preparation price c. 50s.]
Drama
Drama 1945-50 For the British Council, Longmans
Kemp, T. C., and Trewin, J. C. The Stratford Festival: A History of
the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre Cornish
Who’s Who in the Theatre, edited by John Parker, nth edn Pitman
Films
British Film Institute. Annual Reports
For 1952 British Film Institute
Field, Mary. Good Company: The Story of the Children’s Enter¬
tainment Film Movement in Great Britain 1943-1950 Longmans
Forman, Denis. Films 1945-50 For the British Council, Longmans
Low, Rachel. The History of the British Film Allen & Unwin
Vol. I. (with Roger Manvell) 1896-1906
Vol. II. 1906-1914
Vol. III. 1914-1918
Political and Economic Planning. The British Film Industry:
A Report on Its History and Present Organization PEP
 The Factual Film PEP
Rotha, Paul, and others. Documentary Film. 3rd edn Faher & Faber
Annual Reports of the
Cinematograph Films Council For 1952-53 HMSO
National Film Finance Corporation (and Statement of
Accounts) For 1952-53 Cmd 8816 HMSO
1953
1953
1953
1953
1949
1951
1952
1951
1952
1952
1952
1953
1953
1953
1948
1951
1953
1952
1953
1952
1952
1948
1949
1951
1952
1947
1952
1953
1953
s. d.
6
8 o
6 6
2 6
1 o
1 6
6 o
4 o
8 6
free
free
2 6
free
free
5 o
25 o
80 o
free
12 6
2 6
25 o
35 o
18 o
42 o
4
1 o
BIBLIOGRAPHY
313
Films from Britain: 1,000 Films on Educational, Scientific and Cul¬
tural Subjects available for Sale Abroad HMSO 1952
Fine Arts
Architect’s Year Book Elek 1953
Directory of Museums and Art Galleries in the British Isles
Museums Association 1948
Lees-Milne, James, Editor. The National Trust: A Record of Fifty
Years’ Achievement. 2nd edn Batsford 1946
Who’s Who in Art. 6th edn Art Trade Press 1952
Annual Reports of the
Royal Fine Art Commission For 1952 Cmd 8888 HMSO 1953
Literature
Annual Bibliography of English Language and Literature 1942
[1943-44 in preparation] Cambridge University Press 1952
British National Bibliography. Annual
The Council of the British National Bibliography 1953
Library Association Year Book 1952 Library Association 1953
Poetry 1945-50 For the British Council, Longmans 1951
Prose Literature 1945-50 For the British Council, Longmans 1951
Scott-James, R. A. Fifty Years of English Literature Longmans 1951
Shakespeare Survey. Annual Cambridge University Press 1953
Year’s Work in English Studies 1950, edited by Frederick S. Boas
and Beatrice White [1951 in preparation] Oxford University Press 1952
Music and Ballet
Ballet Annual, edited by Arnold L. Haskell Black 1953
Ballet 1945-50 For the British Council, Longmans 1951
British Federation of Music Festivals Year Book 1952-53
British Federation of Music Festivals 1953
Music Book. Annual Hinrichsen 1952
XII. BROADCASTING AND THE PRESS
Broadcasting
Beachcroft, T. O. British Broadcasting, rev. edn
For the British Council, Longmans 1948
British Broadcasting Corporation. BBC Year Book 1952 BBC 1952
 The BBC Television Service: A Technical Description.
3rd edn BBC 1952
Coase, R. H. British Broadcasting: A Study in Monopoly
Longmans 1950
Simon of Wythenshawe, Lord. The BBC from Within Gollancz 1953
Swift, J. Adventure in Vision: The First Twenty-Five Years of
Television Lehmann 195°
The Television Annual 1954, edited by Kenneth Baily Odhams 1953
Annual Reports and Accounts of the
British Broadcasting Corporation For 1952-53 Cmd 8928 HMSO 1953
Copy of a New Charter of Incorporation Granted to the BBC
Cmd 8605 HMSO 1952
Copy of the Licence and Agreement between the Postmaster-
General and the BBC Cmd 8579 HMSO 1952
5. d.
7 6
42 o
21 o
12 6
50 o
6
25 o
160 o
15 o
2 6
2 6
15 o
18 o
15 o
21 0
2 6
5 o
25 o
1 o
3 6
2 6
12 6
15 o
15 o
9 6
4 6
9
6
x
3H
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Overseas Broadcasting: Report from the Select Committee on
Estimates HMSO 1952
Report of the Broadcasting Committee 1949 Cmd 8116 HMSO 1951
Appendix H. Memoranda Submitted to the Committee
Cmd 8117 HMSO 1951
Television Advisory Committee. First Report 1952 HMSO 1953
The Press
Camrose, Lord. British Newspapers and their Controllers Cassell 1947
Hadley, W. W., Editor. Kemsley Manual ofjournalism Cassell 1950
Herd, Harold. The March ofjournalism: The Story of the British
Press from 1622 to the Present Day Allen & Unwin 1952
Mass Observation. The Press and Its Readers Art & Technics 1949
Newspaper Press Directory Benn Bros. 1953
Political and Economic Planning. Report on the British Press
PEP 1938
Sinclair, Robert. The British Press: The Journahst and His
Conscience Home & van Thai 1949
Willing’s Press Guide 1953. Annual Willing's Press Service 1953
Writers’and Artists’Year Book 1953. Hmma/ Black 1953
Report of the Royal Commission on the Press Cmd 7700 HMSO 1949
OFFICIAL HISTORIES OF THE SECOND WORLD WAR
UNITED KINGDOM
Civil Series Longmans and HMSO
British War Economy, by W. K. Hancock and M. M. Go wing 1949
British War Production, by M. M. Postan I952
Civil Industry and Trade, by E. L. Hargreaves and M. M. Gowing I952
Coal, by W. H. B. Court I951
Contracts and Finance, by W. Ashworth 1953
Control of Raw Materials, by J. Hurstfield 1953
The Economic Blockade, Vol. I (1939-41), by W. N. Medlicott 1952
Food, Vol. I, The Growth of Policy, by R. J. Hammond I951
Problems of Social Policy, by R. M. Titmuss 1950
Statistical Digest of the War (prepared in the Central Statistical
Office) i95i
Works and Buildings, by C. M. Kohan I952
Medical Series Longmans and HMSO
The Army Medical Services (Administration), Vol. I, edited by
F.A.E.Crew 053
Civilian Health and Medical Services, Vol. I, edited by Sir
Arthur MacNalty I953
The Emergency Medical Services
Vol. I. England and Wales, edited by C. L. Dunn I952
Vol. II. Scotland, Northern Ireland, and the Principal Air-Raids
on Industrial Centres in Great Britain, edited by C. L.
Dunn 1953
Medical Research, edited by F. H. K. Green and Sir Gordon Covell 1953
Medicine and Pathology, edited by V. Zachary Cope I952
s. d.
6 6
6 6
10 6
1 6
8 6
25 o
21 o
7 6
42 o
8 6
21 o
7 6
9 o
21 o
32 6
37 6
21 o
22 6
35 o
35 o
25 0
25 o
32 6
32 6
50 o
45 o
50 o
50 o
40 o
50 o
INDEX
Page
Access to the countryside . .
Accidents:
air ..
industrial ..
mines
road
Accidents Prevention Movement
Admiralty
research
256-7
.. 204
.. 225
.. 225
194-5
.. 225
32, 79, 8o, 81, 131
8o, 269-70, 271
.. 271
Signal and Radar Establishment
Advisory Council for Scientific and
Industrial Research .. 264, 265, 267
Advisory Council on Scientific Policy 266, 273
Advisory Council on Treatment of
Offenders .. .. .. .. .. 74
Aerodromes .. .. 207, 208-9
Age distribution, population .. 8, 9, 214
Agricultural colleges .. 146, 151, 152
Agricultural Executive Committees .. 146
Agricultural Improvement Council .. 151
Agricultural Land Commission .. 146
Agricultural Land Service .. .. • • 147
Agricultural Land Tribunal .. .. 147
Agricultural Machinery Advisory Com¬
mittee .. .. .. .. .. 151
Agricultural machinery industry .. 151, 179
Agricultural Research and Nature Con¬
servation Committee .. 266, 268, 269
Agricultural Research Council 151, 266, 268-9
Agricultural Research Institutes .. 151,269
Agricultural workers:
earnings
numbers employed
Agriculture ..
advisory services ..
allotments ..
artificial insemination
crops
education ..
farm buildings
farm drainage
farm management
farm tenancy
farming, types of ..
fertilizers ..
grass
guaranteed prices ..
hill farming
horticulture
land use
livestock ..
marketing schemes
mechanization
milk and dairying..
.. 224
127, 138, 214, 216
32, 96, 138-52, 268-9
146, 147, 151-2
147-8
.. 149
139, 140-1, 149
.. 152
• • 149
.. 148
146-7
.. 147
140-2
.. 177
140, 149
145-6, 291, 292
..150
Page
 143
138, 140, 141, 146-7
140, 142, 148, 149-50
54, 143, 145-6, 291, 292
150-1, 179
139, 150, 291
price control & decontrol 95, 145-6, 291, 292
production .. 96, 139-40, 142, 149
research .. .. 151-2, 266, 268-9, 270
smallholdings .. .. .. 147-8
subsidies and grants .. 143-6, 148, 150
Agriculture and Fisheries, Ministry of 32, 139,
146, 151, 154, 250, 270-1
Air Charter Companies .. .. .. 206
Air Corporations .. 43, 52, 201-8, 211
Air Council .. .. .. .. 32, 86-7
Air Finance .. .. .. .. .. 171
Air Force, see Royal Air Force
Air Ministry .. .. 32-3, 79, 86, 208, 270
Air Registration Board .. .. 56, 207
Air Safety Board .. .. .. .. 207
Air-Sea Search and Rescue Service .. 208
Air Training Corps .. .. 88, 207, 248
Air transport, see Civil Aviation
Air Transport Advisory Council
Aircraft:
civil..
industry
military
Airmail services
Airports
Allotments
Almoners
Ambulance services:
civil defence
National Health
Amphibious Warfare Headquarters
Anghcan Communion
Anglican Congress ..
Anglo-American Productivity Council
Anti-Locust Research Centre
Appeal, Courts of ..
Appointments Service
Appropriation, see Finance
Approved schools (for young offenders)
Arbitration Boards ..
Archbishops:
Canterbury 28 footnote, 258, 259, 260, 261
Westminster .. .. .. .. 261
York .. .. 28 footnote, 258, 259
202, 205, 206
171-2, 203-9
171-2
82, 87, 208
.. 211
203, 205, 208, 209
• - 147, 148
237, 240
.. 89
..239
34, 78
258-60
.. 260
.. 136
.. 272
27, 63, 64, 66, 258
.. 217
76
222
315
316
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Area Boards:
electricity .. .. .. ■■ 52, 161-3
gas   52, 164
Armed Forces .. .. .. 17, 78-88
national service in.. .. 78 footnote, 79
pre-service organizations 83, 86, 88,207,248-9
reserves .. .. 79, 80, 83, 85-6, 87-8
staff colleges .. . , .. 34,78
strength .. .. .. .. .. 80
supply .. .. .. .. 80, 292
troop-carrying (air) .. .. .. 206
See also Army, Royal Air Force, Royal
Navy
Army .. .. .. .. 41, 79, 80, 84-6
Army Cadet Force .. .. .. 86, 248
Page
185
282
229
43, 84
. . 86
•• 277
245, 276
276-7
• • 149
Army Council
Army Emergency Reserve
Art galleries ..
Art schools ..
Art societies ..
Artificial insemination
Arts Council of Great Britain 56, 274, 275, 277,
278, 279
Arts, promotion of .. .. .. 274-80
Assizes .. .. .. .. 65, 66
Associated Press .. .. .. .. 289
Association of British Chambers of Com¬
merce .. .. .. .. 133-4, i3(5
Atomic Energy Corporation .. .. 292
Atomic energy establishments 180, 270, 292
Atomic weapons .. .. 80, 270, 292
Atomic energy research 41, 266, 270, 291, 292
Attendance centres (young offenders) .. 77
Attested herds .. .. .. ..150
Attorney-General .. .. .. 28, 39, 69
Auxiliary Fire Service .. .. 88, 89
Aviation, see Aircraft industry, Civil avia¬
tion and Royal Air Force
B
BBC, see British Broadcasting Corporation
BEAC, see British European Airways Cor¬
poration
BIF, see British Industries Fair
BOAC, see British Overseas Airways Cor¬
poration
Balance of payments .. .. 95,113-7
Ballet .. .. .. .. .. 279-80
Baltic Mercantile and Shipping Exchange 184,
206
Bank notes .. .. .. .. .. 104
Bank of England 40, 51, 55, 104, 106, 107, 118
Bank rate .. .. .. .. .. 104
Banking system .. .. .. 103-5
Baptist Church .. .. .. .. 260
Barristers .. .. .. ,. 69,70
Belfast Harbour Commissioners
Beveridge Reports:
broadcasting
social insurance
Bicycle industry, see Cycle industry
Bills, parliamentary:
Money Bills .. .. .. 24, 25, 98
procedure .. .. .. .. ..24-5
Royal Assent .. .. .. 18, 25, 259
Birth rate .. .. 6, 8, 2x4, 243, 246
Blind persons:
employment and training .. .. 219
free broadcasting reception .. .. 281
National Library for .. .. .. 278
Blood transfusion service .. .. .. 237
Board of Trade 42, 120, 122-3, 130, 250, 292
Books:
lent by public libraries .. .. .. 279
numbers published .. .. .. 278
Borough Councils .. .. .. .. 58
Borstal Institutions .. .. .. 74, 76
Boy Scouts Association .. .. 247, 248
Boys’ Brigade .. .. .. 247, 248
British Academy .. .. .. .. 278
British Association for the Advancement of
Science .. .. .. .. .. 263
British Bankers’ Association .. .. 104
British Boot, Shoe and Allied Trades
Research Association .. .. • • 179
British Broadcasting Corporation .. 51, 281-5
British Ceramic Research Association .. 178
British Commonwealth Scientific Offices .. 273
British Cotton Industry Research Associa¬
tion (Shirley Institute) .. .. • - 175
British Council 56, 273-4, 275-6, 277, 278, 280
British Council of Churches .. .. 261
British Drama League .. .. .. 275
British Electricity Authority 52, 161-3, 271
British Empire Cancer Campaign .. .. 262
British Employers’ Confederation 133, 136, 220,
222, 223
British European Airways Corporation 52,
201-3, 204-5, 208, 211
British Film Institute .. .. 274, 276
British Hotels and Catering Services .. 189
British Independent Air Transport Associa¬
tion .. .. .. .. .. 206
British Industries Fair .. 122, 291, 292
British Institute of Management • • 42
British Isles .. .. .. .. .. 1-14
area .. .. .. .. .. 1
climate .. .. .. .. .. 4
demographic background .. ..5-14
geology .. .. .. .. .. 2
rainfall .. .. .. 4-5, 166, 168
vegetation 4-5
British Motor Corporation.. .. .. 171
INDEX
317
Page
British Museum .. .. 272, 277, 278
British Overseas Airways Corporation 52, 180,
201-4, 2o8
British Productivity Council .. .. 136
British Red Cross Society 89, 228, 239, 249
British Road Services (haulage) .. .. 188
British Scientific Office .. .. .. 273
British Standards Institution . . 42, 56
British Transport Commission 52, 131, 173, 185,
188-9, 190, 195, 199, 200
British Travel and Holidays Association 42, 117
British United Press
Broadcasting ..
Corporation
to schools ..
Budget
Building:
agricultural
contractors’ plant ..
educational
industry
prefabricated buildings
production
research
societies
.. 289
281-5, 29i» 292
.. 51,281-5
244, 283
95-6, 100-2, 137
.. 149
.. 180
.. 246
133, 251-2, 271
180, 252
252, 253, 255
252, 271
.. 252
See also Housing
Building Apprenticeship and Training
Council .. .. .. .. .. 250
Bulk-buying, see State-importing
Burghs (Scotland) .. .. .. 58-61
c
CID, see Criminal Investigation Department
Cabinet .. .. .. .. 26, 29-31
Office .. .. .. .. 29-30
Cable and Wireless Services .. 51,212
Canals.. .. .. .. 186,199-200
Cancer research .. .. .. 262, 272
Canteens .. .. .. .. 13, 225
Capital development in industry .. 96, 137-8
Capital Issues Committee .. .. .. 108
Careers Advice Service .. .. .. 217
Catering establishments, rationing .. 126
Catholic Marriage Advisory Council .. 228
Census of Distribution .. .. ..125
Census of Population .. 6, n, 12, 36, 250
Central Advisory Water Committee .. 168
Central After-care Association (prisoners) 76
Central Council for Health Education .. 226
Central Council for the Care of Cripples.. 227
Central Council of Physical Recreation .. 249
Central Criminal Court .. .. .. 65
Central Electricity Board ..
Central Health Services Council
Central Land Board
Central Office of Information
51, 161
•• 235
.. 38
• • 37
Page
Central Public Health Laboratory .. .. 268
Central School of Arts and Crafts .. 276
Central Statistical Office .. .. .. 30
Central Transport Consultative Committee 189
Central Youth Employment Executive .. 218
Chamber of Shipping .. .. 183-4
Chambers of Commerce 122,133-4, 13 b, 292
Chancellor of the Exchequer .. 31, 99, 100
Chancery Division (High Court) .. 63
Channel Islands 1, 6,19, 27, 36, 37, 204, 209, 233,
289
Chemical industries .. .. .. 176-7
Chief Constables of Counties .. .. 72
Chiefs of Staff Committee .. .. 78, 84
Children:
care of 227, 228, 229, 231, 233-4, 238, 239,
240-1, 244
employment
free transport to school ..
handicapped
numbers attending schools
nurseries
welfare services 234, 238, 239, 240-1, 244
See also Families, Family allowances,
Schools, and Youth Service
Choral societies
Christian Scientists ..
Church Army
Church Assembly
Church Commissioners
Church in Wales (Anglican)
Church Lads’ Brigade
Church of England:
appointment of clergy
archbishops .. 258,
Church Assembly
Ecclesiastical Courts
finance
organization
overseas
relations with Monarchy
relations with State
schools
training colleges ..
Church of England Children’s Society 227, 228
Church of England Moral Welfare Council 228
Church of Ireland (Anglican) .. .. 259
Church of Scotland (Presbyterian) 67 footnote,
258, 260
Church schools:
Anglican .. .. .. .. .. 259
Roman Catholic .. .. .. .. 261
Churches .. .. .. .. 258-61
co-operation .. .. .. .. 261
relations with Monarchy and State 15, 17, 18,
67 footnote, 258-9, 260
welfare work 75-6, 227-8, 237, 247, 248
223, 224, 225
.. 244
..244
.. 241
..239
■ ■ 279
.. 261
.. 228
258, 259
.. 258
• • 259
247, 248
18, 29, 258
259, 260, 261
258, 259
67, 258
.. 258
258-9
259-60
15, 17, 18, 258
258-9
• • 259
• • 259
X’
318
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Cinemas
Citizens’ Advice Bureaux
City of London:
Corporation
Police Force
Civil aviation
accidents
aerodromes
Air Attaches
Air Safety Board
Page
14, 276
.. 228
58, 59. 61
70, 71, 73
201-9
.. 204
207, 208-9
207-8
.. 207
Page
mes
42-3
Air Transport Advisory Council 202, 205, 206
airmails
airports
charter operations
Corporations
finance
gliding
helicopter services..
independent airline compa
licences
Ministry of Transport and
navigational aids ..
private flying
research
safety measures
scheduled services
tourist services
traffic control
See also Aircraft
Civil Defence
Civil engineering
Civil Service
Commission
Royal Commission on
Clergy:
appointment .. .. 18, 29, 258
membership of House of Lords .. 21, 258
non-membership of House of Commons 21,
258
prison visiting .. .. .. • • 75
training .. .. .. .. .. 259
Climate .. .. .. .. .. 4
Clyde Navigation Trust .. .. .. 185
Coal:
coalfields .. .. .. .. 3,4, 158
industry .. .. .. .. 157-60
National Coal Board 51, 158-60, 226, 271
.. 2ix
203, 205, 208, 209
.. 206
43, 52, 201-8, 211
171, 202, 203, 204, 205
.. 207
.. 205
205- 6
43, 207
201-2, 207
208-9
206- 7
172, 270
07, 208, 225
203-7
204, 205
207, 208
59, 88-9
133
46-50, 210
46, 48
49 footnote
rationing ..
See also Mines and quarries
Coalminers:
earnings
employment statistics
meat ration
medical services ..
Coastguard Service
Coke production
126
159, 224-5
• • 159
.. 126
.. 226
42, 185
.. 166
146, 151, 152
245, 276
259
245
219
280
72
243-4, 259
245, 263
Colleges:
agricultural
art ..
clergy training
for adult students .
for disabled
music
police
teachers’ training .
technical
See also Universities
Colonial Development Corporation .. 53
Colonial Office .. .. 33, 56, 272
Colonial Products Research Council .. 272
Colonial Research Council .. .. 272
Colonial Service • • 33 footnote, 47 footnote
Combined Cadet Force .. .. .. 86
Commissioners of Police .. .. .. 72
Commodity exchanges .. .. .. 122
Commons, House of, see House of Com¬
mons
Commonwealth Agricultural Bureaux and
Institutes .. .. .. .. 151,273
Commonwealth co-operation:
financial .. .. .. .. 107,117
for defence.. .. .. .. .. 78-9
for research .. .. 151, 272, 273
for trade .. .. .. .. 95, 122
reciprocal social service agreements .. 233
Commonwealth Development Finance
Company .. .. .. .. .. 107
Commonwealth Institute of Biological
Control .. .. .. .. 151, 273
Commonwealth Mycological and Ento¬
mological Institutes .. .. 151,273
Commonwealth, Queen Head of  15
Commonwealth Relations Office 33, 47 foot¬
note, 56
Commonwealth Scientific Offices .. 273
Communications, see Civil Aviation, Post
Office, Shipping and Transport
Comptroller and Auditor General
Concert halls
Congregational Church
Consolidated Fund ..
Consumer Consultative Councils and
Committees
electricity ..
gas 
transport ..
Consumer goods:
distribution
personal expenditure on
rationing ..
Contractors’ plant industry
Controls
building materials
.. 99
.. 279
.. 260
25, 98
51, 52 footnote
52, 161
52, 164
.. 189
124-5
.. 94
-6, 143, 291
.. 180
134-5
.. 251
125
INDEX
319
capital issues
exchange ..
import and export
industry
land use
price
raw materials
recruitment of labour
Page
.. 108
104, 117-20
120-1
..134
.. .. 250
42, 96, 145-6, 291
121, 125, 134-5
217
removal of 96, 121, 134-5, 145. 251 footnote,
291, 292
rents .. .. .. .. 253, 291
siting of industry .. .. ..130
town and country planning .. 254, 255
See also Rationing
Convocations of Canterbury and York 258, 259
Co-operative banks .. .. .. .. 106
Co-operative societies .. .. 106,124
Coronation .. .. .. .. 16, 17
Coroner’s Court .. .. .. .. 66
Corporations, public .. .. .. 50-3
See also Nationalization
Cotton Board .. .. .. 55, 175
Cotton textile industry .. .. 174, 175
Council of Christians and Jews .. .. 261
Council of Industrial Design 42, 56, 277
Counsellors of State .. 18 footnote
County Agricultural Executive Com¬
mittees .. .. .. .. .. 146
County Borough Councils .. .. 58, 60, 61
County Councils 58, 60, 61
County Courts .. .. .. 63, 68
County District Councils .. .. 58, 61
Court of Session .. .. .. 64, 68
Courtauld Institute .. .. .. .. 276
Courts-martial, see Military courts
Courts of Appeal .. 27, 63, 64, 66, 258
Courts of Law .. .. .. .. 63-7
Covent Garden Opera Trust .. .. 279
Criminal Investigation Department .. 72
Criminal Record Office .. .. .. 72
Criminals, treatment of .. .. .. 73-7
Crown, see Monarchy
Crown Agents for the Colonies .. .. 33
Crown Office (Scotland) 45
Crusade of Rescue .. .. .. .. 228
Currency regulations, see Exchange control
Customs and Excise Department 34, 100, 275
Customs and Excise duties .. .. 100, 102
Cycle industry .. .. .. .. 171
D
DSIR, see Scientific and Industrial Re¬
search, Department of
Day nurseries .. .. .. • • 239
Death, causes of, statistical research .. 272
Death duties .. .. .. 38, 100, 102, 103
Death grants ..
Death rate
Death sentence
Defence
Armed Forces
Civil
expenditure
Ministry of
supply
US aid
Defence Bonds
Defence Research Policy Co
Dental services
Dentists:
in National Health Service .. 236, 237-8
qualifications and training .. 235, 240
Departments, see Government Departments
Detention centres (young offenders) .. 77
Detergents .. .. .. .. .. 177
Devaluation of sterling .. .. .. 115
Development areas .. .. 55, 130, 255
Development charges .. 39, 254 footnote
Development Commission .. 265, 271
Development Corporations of New Towns 54,
250, 255-6
Development Councils (in industry) .. 55
Page
232, 233
.. 6, 8
... 74
78-89
78-88
88-9
78-9, 101
34, 78, 79, 266
80, 81, 84, 87, 292
79, 101 footnote
.. 105
mmittee .. 266
235, 236, 237-8
Development Fund
Diocesan Conferences
Dioceses (Church of England)
Diphtheria immunization ..
Director of Public Prosecutions
Department of
Disablement:
benefit
death benefit to dependants
employment of disabled ..
rehabilitation .. 217-8,
Disablement Resettlement Service
265, 271
..259
259, 260
..239
73 footnote
••39
232-3
• •233
217-9
219, 237, 241
218-9, 237
Discharged Prisoners’ Aid Societies .. 76
Discount market .. .. .. .. 106
Dock workers .. 53, 185, 200, 225
Docks .. .. .. 54, 185-6, 200
Docks and Inland Waterways Board of
Management .. .. .. ..189
Docks and Inland Waterways Executive 188,189,
199-200
Dockyards, naval
Doctor Barnardo’s Homes
Doctors:
in National Health Service
qualifications and training
Dollar loans ..
Domestic help
Drama
Dulwich Gallery
Dyestuffs industry
.. 46, 82, 131
.. 227
236, 237-8, 240
235, 240, 245
115-6
12, 13, 239
275-6
•• 277
176-7
320
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
E
Page
Ecclesiastical Committee .. .. .. 259
Ecclesiastical Courts .. 67, 258
Economy, national .. .. .. .. 90-6
See also Balance of Payments and Public
Finance
Edinburgh International Festival of Music
and Drama
Education
adult
agricultural
building for
examinations
fees ..
finance
forestry
275, 279
241-7
242, 244-5
.. 152
.. 246
• • 243
.. 246
101, 246
156
grants, fellowships and scholarships 242, 243,
245, 246, 263, 273
Ministry of 34, 218, 242, 243, 246, 247, 249
 75
prisoners
schools
teachers
technical
technological
Elections:
Local Government
Parliamentary
Electrical engineering industry
Electricity supply
Electronics industry ..
Employers’ Association of the Port of
Liverpool .. .. .. •• •• I84
Employers’ organizations 133, 184, 220, 221, 275
Employment:
Armed Forces
children
civil, statistics
deployment of labour
disabled persons ..
distributive trades
earnings
exchanges and offices
hours of work
manufacturing industries
private enterprise ..
public undertakings
recruitment of labour
services (Ministry of Labour)
241, 242-4, 246, 259, 261
 243-4,259
  245-6
 245, 263
• • 59
21, 22-3
173, 180
161-4, 291
.. 180
80, 215
223, 224, 225
12, 13, 214, 215, 216
.. 127, 214-5
217-9
125, 216
• • 224
216, 217, 218
13, 224, 225
131-2, 214, 216
..130
.. 130
.. 217
216-9
terms and conditions of .
training centres
welfare
women
Page
England, area .. .. .. .. 1
English Association .. .. .. 278
Episcopal Church in Scotland .. .. 259
Estate duties, see Death duties
Estimates .. .. 26, 79, 98-9, 101-2
Select Committee on .. 26, 99-100
European Payments Union.. .. 90, 95, 115
European Recovery Programme .. 1x5, 116
Everest, British first ascent of • • I4
Excess profits levy .. .. .. 96, 102
Exchange control .. .. 104,117-20
Exchange Equalization Fund .. .. 104
Exchange Telegraph Company .. .. 289
Exchequer .. .. .. •• 97. 101-3
Excise duties .. .. .. 34. IO°. 102
Expenditure:
national .. .. .. 94, 98-9. I0I> I03
personal .. .. .. .. • • 94
Export Credits Guarantee Department 122-3
Exports .. .. .. 9°. 91. 95. 110-4
See also individual industries
control .. .. .. .. 120-1
Government assistance to traders 121, 122
Factories:
employment in .. .. 131-2,214,216
fatal accidents in .. .. .. .. 225
health and welfare in .. 220, 223-6
inspection .. .. 220, 223, 225, 226
joint consultation in .. .. .. 223
personnel management .. .. 223, 226
safety measures .. .. 220, 223-4, 225
Families, average size of .. .. 8, 10, 12
See also Households
Family Allowances .. .. .. 212, 229
Family Welfare Association .. 227
Farm Institutes .. .. .. .. 152
Farming, see Agriculture
Farnborough:
Air Display ..  I71
National Gas Turbine Establishment .. 270
Federation of British Industries 133, 136, 264
Fertilizers .. .. .. • • • • x77
Festival of Britain .. .. .. 276, 279
Festivals, see Music Festivals and Edinburgh
Festival
Films ., .. .. .. • • - • 276
13, 187, 219-26
217-9
.. 225-6, 291
13, 214-5, 224-5
Finance
Appropriation
Bills
Exchequer
97-109
25, 97. 98, 99
24, 25, 97-8
.. 97, 101-3
young persons 217, 218, 220, 223, 224, 225
See also individual industries, Labour, and
Unemployment
Ministry of, Northern Ireland .. -. 45
national expenditure 94. 98-9. to1. I03
national income .. .. .. 92-4
INDEX
321
Page
parliamentary control .. 26, 97, 100
private .. .. .. 103-9
public .. .. . 92, 94, 97-103
public corporations .. .. •. 50
revenue .. .. .. .. 94, 100-3
sterling, devaluation of .. .. .. 115
Vote system .. .. .. .. 98
See also Balance of payments, Estimates
and Exchange control
Finance Corporation for Industry .. 106, 107
Finance corporations .. .. 55, 106-7
Financial institutions 55, 103-9
Fire Service .. .. .. .. • • 59
See also Auxiliary Fire Service
Fishing industry
Fishing ports
Fleet Air Arm
Floods
Food:
imports
Ministry of
rationing
research
  I5I-4
 154
.. 82
4, 155 footnote, 168 footnote, 211
90, no, in, 140, 291
.. 35,121,154,271
125-6, 143, 291
.. 271
State and private trading 35, 121, 143, 291-2
subsidies . . .. 35, 98, 101, 143, 144-5
See also Agriculture, School Meals Service
and Welfare Foods Service
Foreign Office .. .. .. 35, 56
Foreign Service .. .. 35, 47 footnote
Forensic science service (police) .. .. 71
Forestry .. .. .. .. 154-7
Commission .. 35, 156-7, 265, 271
National Forest Parks .. .. • • 157
research .. .. .. 156-7, 265, 271
Free Churches .. .. .. 260-1
Friendly and Collecting Societies . . .. 108
Friends, Society of .. .. .. .. 261
Fuel and power .. .. .. 157-166
allocation of coal supplies .. .. 126
Ministry of .. .. 36,126,158,271
research .. .. .. .. .. 271
Fuel Efficiency Advisory Service .. • ■ 135
GPO, see Post Office
Gas by-products .. .. .. .. 166
Gas Council .. .. .. 52, 164, 271
Gas supply .. .. .. .. 163-6
General Certificate of Education .. .. 243
General Council of British Shipping .. 184
General Council of the Bar .. 67, 69
General Elections, see Elections, Parliament¬
ary
General Medical Services .. • • 235, 237-8
General Post Office, see Post Office
Page
General Practitioner Services, see General
Medical Services
General Register Office 6 footnote, 36, 272
General Registry Office, Edinburgh 6 footnote,
45
Geological Survey .. .. .. 168, 265
Girl Guides Association .. .. 247, 248
Girls, employment of .. .. 224, 225
Glass Delegation, Sheffield University .. 263
Gliding .. .. .. .. .. 207
Gold and dollar reserves 91, 113-5, 116, 117
Government:
Departments of .. .. .. 31-46,134
finance .. .. .. •. 94, 97-103
Her Majesty’s .. .. 17-18,28-31
See also Local Government, Parliament
and Privy Council
Government Chemist, Department of 226, 265,
272
Government Training Centres:
for disabled .. .. .. 218, 219
for industry .. .. .. 38, 218
Great Britain, composition of .. .. 1
Great Northern Railway Board (Northern
Ireland) .. .. .. .. .. 200
Great Seal .. .. .. . . .. 18
Greenwich (Royal Observatory) .. 1, 265
Grid, electricity .. .. .. 161, 163
Guardian’s allowance .. .. 232
Guided missiles .. . . 80, 84, 270
Guild of British Newspaper Editors .. 289
H
HMSO, see Stationery Office
‘Hansard’ .. .. .. .. 21,24
Harwell Atomic Energy Research Estab¬
lishment .. .. .. .. 180, 270
Health:
centres .. .. .. .. 238,240
in industry 220, 223-4, 225-6, 234, 291
Ministry of .. 36, 154, 235-6, 272
research .. ..235,262,265,267-8,272
sanitation .. 58, 60, 168, 223, 224
school children .. .. .. .. 244
visiting .. .. .. .. .. 239
See also National Health Service
Helicopters .. .. .. .. 82, 205
Herring Industry Advisory Council .. 154
Herring Industry Board .. .. 55, 154
High Court of Justice 63-4, 65, 66, 67, 68
High Court of Justiciary (Scotland) 66, 68
Hobbies .. .. .. .. 13-14
Hobhouse Committee, see National Parks
(England and Wales) Committee
Holidays .. .. .. .. 13
with pay .. .. .. 222, 225
322
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Home Guard
Home Office
Home Secretary 19 footnote, 37
Horticulture ..
Hospital Car Service
Hospitals
administration
finance
mental
Northern Ireland
number
Scotland
specialist services ..
staff
teaching
Page
.. 86
37. 71
68, 70-1, 74
• • 143
.. 239
235-7, 240
235, 236-7
.. 236
237. 239
.. 241
236-7
236, 237
235, 236-7
236-7
235. 237
Hotels and Catering Services Committee.. 189
Hotels Executive .. .. 188,189, 191
House of Commons 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26,
31, 258, 259, 268
Committee of Selection .. .. 24
Committee of Supply .. .. 26, 98
Committee of Ways and Means .. 100
distribution of seats .. .. • • 23
financial control .. .. 24-6, 97-100
officers .. .. .. .. 21, 23
privileges .. .. .. ..21-2
Select Committee on Estimates 26, 99-100
Select Committee on Public Accounts 26, 99
House of Lords 19, 20-1, 22, 23, 24-5, 28, 31,
258, 259, 268, 291
as Court of Appeal .. .. 64, 66
officers .. .. .. .. .. 20-1
privileges .. .. .. .. .. 22
House purchase schemes .. .. .. 252
Households n-12, 250
Housewives .. .. .. .. 13, 214
Housing .. .. .. .. 249-53
accommodation standards .. .. 252
Associations .. .. .. .. 251
building .. .. 133, 250, 251-2, 253
building societies .. .. .. .. 252
control of materials .. .. ..251
control of rents .. .. .. 253,291
costs .. .. .. .. .. 252
licences .. .. .. .. 250, 251
Local Authorities’ responsibilities 250-2, 291
Ministerial responsibilities .. .. 250
number of separate dwellings .. .. 250
progress .. .. .. 252, 253, 255, 256
purchase schemes .. .. .. 252
repair .. .. .. .. 251,291
research .. .. .. .. 252, 271
slum clearance .. .. .. 251,291
subsidies .. .. .. 98,101,252
types of houses .. .. 12, 252, 253
Housing and Local Government, Ministry
of .. .. 37. 250-1, 254, 255, 257, 271
Page
Imperial Cancer Research Fund .. .. 262
Imperial Chemical Industries Ltd. .. .. 176
Imperial College of Science and Technology 263,
265
Imperial Defence College .. 34, 78
Imperial Forestry Institute .. .. .. 271
Imperial Institute of Entomology .. .. 272
Imperial War Graves Commission .. 53
Imperial War Museum .. .. .. 277
Imports .. .. .. .. 90,110-4
control of .. .. .. .. 120-1
See also Food and Raw materials
Income:
Government .. 94, 97-8, 100, 102-3
national .. .. .. .. .. 92-4
personal .. .. .. .. ..93-4
Income tax .. .. 38, 94, 95-6, 100, 102
Independent Airline Companies .. 205-6
Indictable offences .. .. 64 footnote
Industrial and Commercial Finance Cor-
106, 107
222
222
55
264
226
225-6, 237
231,232-3
219,237
.. 226
127-80
133-4
96,137-8
•• 134
55, 130, 255
•• 55
130, 255
220, 223-4, 225-6,234,
237, 291
127-30
131-2,169-80
131,157-60
127-38
95,136
42,135,136
..135
134-5, 222-3
poration
Industrial Court
Industrial Disputes Tribunal
Industrial Estate Companies
Industrial Grants Committee
Industrial Health Research Board
Industrial health services
Industrial injuries insurance.
Industrial rehabilitation units
Industrial Welfare Society
Industry
associations
capital development
controls
development areas
development councils
distribution policy
health and welfare in
location
manufacturing
mining and quarrying
organization
production
productivity
Regional Boards ..
relations with Government
safety regulations .. 220, 223-4, 225, 291
technical advisory services .. •• 135
See also Employment, individual industries,
Labour, Nationalization and Research
Infectious diseases, control of .. 239, 240
Information, Central Office of .. .. 37
Injury benefit (industrial injuries) .. .. 232
Inland Revenue Department .. 38,100
INDEX
323
Page
Inland transport, see Transport
Inland Water Survey Committee
Inland waterways .. .. 186,199-200
Inns of Court .. .. .. .. 69
Inspectors of
constabulary
factories
mines and quarries
sanitation
schools
Institute of Contemporary Arts
Institute of Journalists
Insurance
marine
See also National Insurance
International Aeradio Ltd. ..
International Air Transport Association 203, 204
International Civil Aviation Organization 43,
208, 209
International Radio Telephone Exchange 212
168
..71
220, 223, 225, 226
36, 224, 225, 226
.. 60
34, 242
.. 277
.. 289
108-9
109,183
203, 205, 208
Page
industrial relations .. .. 220-3
protective legislation .. .. 220, 223-5
wage negotiations.. .. .. 220,221-2
wages  220, 224-5
working conditions .. 13,219-20,223-6
See also Employment and Trade Unions
Labour and National Service, Ministry of 38,
216-9,222-3, 225-6, 250
Lambeth Conference .. .. .. 260
Land Registry .. .. .. . • 39
Land Requirements Committee
(Armed Forces) .. .. .. .. 250
Land Settlement Association .. .. 148
Land use:
agriculture .. 138,140,141,146-7
Armed Forces
town and country planning
.. 250
249-50, 253-4,
271
39, 67
11
Investment trusts
Ireland, Churches
Irish Republic:
census •
citizens’ voting rights in UK
insurance reciprocity
relations with UK Government
war pensioners
Irish Services
Iron and Steel Board
Iron and steel industry
.. 108
259,260
6
21, 59
233
• • 34
36, 40
.. 101
.. 170
131,169-70
Lands Tribunal
Language
Law, see Legal system
Law Officers’ Department .. .. 39
Law Officers of the Crown .. 27, 39, 69
Law Reform Committee .. .. .. 68
Law Society .. .. .. 67,69,70
Lay preachers .. .. .. .. 260
Learned societies .. .. .. 261-3
Leather industry .. .. .. ■ • 179
Leather Industry Research Association .. 179
Isle of Man
1, 6, 7,19, 36, 37,205, 209, 230,
233,289
Legal system ..
courts
judiciary
legal aid
legal profession
sources of law
 62-70,73
  63-7
17,18, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67-8
  69-70,234
 69
.. 62
Jewellery, gold and silverware industry .. 179
Jewish Board of Guardians .. .. 228
Jewry .. .. .. .. .. .. 261
Joint Clothing Council .. .. .. 55
Joint consultation in industry .. 221-3
Joint Industrial Councils .. .. 221,222
Joint Intelligence Bureau .. .. 34, 78
Joint Production Committees .. .. 223
Joint Services Staff College .. .. 78
Journalism .. .. .. .. .. 289
Judge Advocate General’s Department .. 39
Judicial Committee of the Privy Council 27, 258
Judiciary .. 17,18, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67-8
Justices of the Peace .. .. 64, 65,68
Justices of the Peace Courts .. .. 66
Jute industry .. .. .. .. 175-6
Juvenile Courts .. .. .. .. 65
Juvenile delinquency, see Young offenders
Labour:
conciliation of disputes .
subjects’ right of appeal to the Crown .. 27
Leisure activities 13-14, 247-9, 275, 276, 277,
278, 279, 280
Libraries .. .. .. .. 274, 278-9
Licences:
aircrews and aircraft .. .. 43, 207
broadcast receiving .. 14, 212, 281-2
export .. .. .. .. .. 121
house-building .. .. .. 250,251
import .. .. .. .. .. 120
issue of, by Post Office .. .. 212,281-2
livestock breeding .. .. • • 149
motor cars .. .. 14 footnote, 212
road haulage .. .. .. ..189
Lifeboats .. .. .. .. .. 184
Lighthouses .. .. .. 42,53,183
Linen industry .. .. .. .. 175
Linen Industry Research Association .. 175
Literary prizes .. .. .. .. 278
Literary societies .. .. .. .. 278
Literature .. .. .. .. 277-9
.. 220,221-2 Liverpool Steamship Owners’ Association 183
324
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Livestock
Lloyd’s
Lloyd’s Register of Shipping
Loans and gifts:
by Britain to other countries
to Britain ..
Local Government ..
authorities, types of
education authorities
Page
140,142,148,149-50
xo8,109, 183
..183
elections
finance
health services
housing responsibilities
officers
rates
regulation of working conditions
relations with Central Government
services
staff organization
.. 116
79,115,116
57-62
 57
218, 242, 243, 245, 246,
247-8, 275
■ • 59
. 55, 61-2,97
238-40
250-1. 252,291
.. 60
61,167
. 223
37, 57
58-9
. 61
town and country planning 254, 255, 256, 257
Locomotives:
industry .. .. .. .. 172-3
speed records
types
London:
airports
art galleries
as financial centre 105, 10
courts of law
Fire Service
industries ..
libraries
local authorities
museums ..
police forces
population
port of
taxicabs
teaching hospitals
theatres
transport ..
University ..
water supply
London County Council
‘London Gazette’
London Transport Executive
Lord Advocate (Scotland)
Lord Advocate’s Department
Lord Chancellor
.. 190
173,191
203, 205,209
.. 277
, 107, 115 footnote
63,65
• * 59
.. 127
.. 278
58, 59, 60, 61
225, 272, 277, 278
59, 70, 71, 72, 73
7, xi, 198
54,186
.. 198
• • 237
275, 279
189,191,195,198-9
245,263, 276
54, 167
58, 59, 60, 251
.. 27
52,188,198-9
.. 28,45,68
• • 45
18, 27, 28,39, 63,
64, 65, 68, 69, 70
as Speaker of House of Lords .. 21,23
Lord Chancellor’s Office .. .. •. 39
Lord Chief Justice .. .. .. 29, 53
Lord High Commissioner 67 footnote, 260
Lord Justice General (Scotland) .. .. 66
Page
Lord President of the Council 41, 266, 267,
268, 291, 292
Lords, House of, see House of Lords
Lords-Lieutenant of Counties .. 29, 65
Lords of Appeal in Ordinary . . 27, 64
M
Machinery industries . . 173,179,180
Magistrates’ courts .. .. 64-5,68
Man, Isle of, see Isle of Man
Management (industry) .. 133,220,226
British Institute of .. .. .. 42
Manchester Ship Canal .. .. 186,199
Manpower, see Employment
Manufacturing establishments, size of 131, 132
Manufacturing industries 131-2,137,138,
169-80
Marine insurance .. .. .. 109,183
Marketing boards, agricultural 54,143,292
Mass radiography .. .. .. .. 240
Materials, Ministry of .. 39,250
Maternity:
benefit .. . .. .. .. ..231
extra ration allowance .. .. .. 126
services .. .. .. 238, 239, 240
Mayor’s and City of London Court .. 63
Medical Practices Committee .. • • 237
Medical profession:
qualifications and training 235, 240, 245
remuneration in Health Service .. 236
Medical research .. 262, 265, 267-8, 272
Medical Research Council 126, 226, 240, 265,
266,267-8, 272
Medical services, see General Medical Services
in coalmines .. .. .. .. 226
Mental health research .. .. 272
Mental hospitals .. 239-40
Merchant Navy .. .. 83, 184,187-8
See also Shipping
Merchant Navy Establishment
Administration .. .. .. .. 184
Merchant Navy Training Board . . 185,187
Merchant Navy Welfare Board . . 185,187-8
Mersey Docks and Harbour Board .. 185
Metals industries .. .. .. 169-74
Meteorological Office 33,168, 208, 265, 270
Methodist Church .. .. .. .. 260
Metropohtan Borough Councils 58, 59, 60, 61
Metropolitan Police Force .. 59, 70, 71, 72
Metropolitan Water Board.. .. 54,167
Midwives .. .. .. 236-7,238-9
Military courts .. .. .. 39,67
Milk:
for children and mothers.. .. 238,240-1
in schools .. .. .. .. .. 244
marketing .. .. .. 143,150
INDEX
325
production
subsidy
tuberculin tested ..
Mines and quarries:
fatal accidents
industry
Inspectorate
safety measures
Ministers (of the Crown)
Page
139,150
 H4
 150
. . 22$
131,157-60,170
. . 36, 224, 225, 226
36, 224, 225, 271, 291
l8, 22, 25, 26, 28,
29-31,47
ministerial responsibility 18, 28, 29, 30-1
See also Prime Minister and individual
Departments
Ministries, see Government Departments
Mobile column, see Civil Defence
Moderator of the Church of Scotland .. 260
Monarchy .. .. .. .. I5-I9
accession .. .. .. .. 16, 17
ceremonial .. .. .. 18-19
Coronation .. .. .. 16,17
powers and functions 17-18,19, 21, 22, 25,
26, 28, 29, 30, 67, 258
relations with Churches 15,17, 18, 258, 260
relations with Ministers 17,18, 20,22, 26,27,
28,29, 30, 37
relations with Parhament 17,18,19, 20, 21,
22, 25, 97
representation in the Commonwealth .. 15
Royal Prerogatives 17, 18, 19 footnote,
24, 74
Royal Proclamations .. 17, 18, 20, 27
Royal titles .. .. .. .. 15
succession .. .. .. .. 15,16,17
subjects’ right of appeal to Crown .. 27
See also Royal Family .
Monopolies and Restrictive Practices
Commission .. .. .. .. 135
Mortality .. .. .. .. 6,8,239
Motor Industry Research Association .. 171
Motor vehicles:
industry .. .. .. .. 170-1
licences .. .. 14 footnote, 189, 212
research .. .. .. .. .. 171
traffic on roads .. 14 footnote, 194
Museums and art galleries .. 168, 225, 272,274,
277, 278
Commission on
Music
Musical festivals
Muslim community
.. 274
279-80
274-5, 279
.. 261
Mutual Security Programme (defence) 79,1 * 5
N
NATO, see North Atlantic Treaty
Organization
National Agricultural Advisory Service 135, 146
Page
National Assembly, see Church Assembly
National Assistance .. .. .. 229, 233-4
National Assistance Board .. 40,227,234,236
National Association for Mental Health .. 227
National Association of Boys’ Clubs .. 248
National Association of Discharged
Prisoners’ Aid Societies .. .. 76
National Association of Mixed Clubs and
Girls’ Clubs .. .. .. •. 248
National Association of Prison Visitors .. 76
National Blood Transfusion Service .. 237
National Book League .. .. .. 278
National Building Record .. .. .. 277
National Central Library . . . . . . 279
National Coal Board 51,158,159-60
medical services .. .. .. -. 226
research .. .. .. .. • • 271
statistics .. .. .. .. • • 159
National Corporation for the Care of Old
People .. .. .. .. • • 228
National Council of Associated Children’s
Homes .. .. .. .. • • 227
National Council of Social Service 227, 228
National Debt .. .. 98,101,103
Commissioners .. .. .. .. 105
National Dock Labour Board .. 53,186
National economy, see Economy, national
National Federation of Music Societies .. 279
National Federation of Young Farmers’
Clubs  152,249
National Film Finance Corporation 55, 276
National Film Library .. .. .. 276
National Film Theatre .. .. . - 276
National Forest Parks .. .. • • 157
National Gallery .. .. .. • • 277
National Gas Turbine Establishment .. 270
National Health Service .. .. 23 5-40
administration .. .. .. • • 235
charges .. .. .. ■ • 235,236
finance .. .. .. 97, IOI>236
general medical services .. .. 235,237-8
hospital services .. .. .. 235-7
local services .. .. .. 238-40
mental health services .. 235,239-40
speciahst services .. .. .. 235,236-7
National Hospital Service Reserve .. 89
National income .. ... . - 92-4
National Institute for Medical Research .. 268
National Institute for the Blind .. .. 227
National Institute of Agricultural
Engineering
National Institute of Oceanography
National Insurance
benefits
contributions
contributors
finance
.. 151
.. 270
229-33
231-3
94, 212, 230
230
97,101, 230
326
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Ministry of Pensions and .. 40,229
reciprocal agreements .. .. • • 233
supplementation by private firms .. 226
National Insurance Fund 94, 97,101, 236
National Joint Advisory Council
(industry) 135,223
National Library for the Blind .. .. 278
National Maritime Board .. .. 184,187
National Maritime Museum, Greenwich .. 277
National Marriage Guidance Council .. 228
National Old People’s Welfare Committee 228
National Parks .. .. .. 254, 256-7
See also National Forest Parks
National Parks Commission .. 250, 256-7
National Parks (England and Wales)
Committee .. .. .. .. 256
National Physical Laboratory 226, 265, 267
National Playing Fields Association .. 249
National Portrait Gallery .. .. .. 277
National Production Advisory Council on
Industry .. .. .. .. .. 135
National Research Development Corpora¬
tion .. .. .. .. 42, 264-5
National Savings Certificates .. 105,212
National Savings Committee .. .. 105
National Sea Training Schools .. .. 184
National Service in Armed
Forces .. .. .. 78 footnote, 79
National Theatre, site .. .. .. 275
National Trust .. .. .. .. 277
National Union of Journalists .. .. 289
National Union of Manufacturers .. 133, 136
National Youth Employment Council .. 218
National Youth Orchestra .. .. 280
Nationalization:
air corporations .. .. 43,52,201-2
Bank of England .. .. 51,104
Boards of nationalized industries .. 51
cable and wireless services .. 51, 212
coal industry .. .. .. 51,158
electricity supply .. .. .. 52,161
extent in industry .. .. .. 130
gas supply  52,164
iron and steel industry .. .. 131,170
Select Committee on Nationalized
Industries .. .. .. • • 51
transport .. .. .. .. 52,188-9
Nature Conservancy .. 257, 266, 269
Nature conservation., 254,256-7, 266, 269
Nature Reserves .. .. .. 257,269
Navy, see Merchant Navy and Royal Navy
Navy League .. .. .. .. 83
New Towns .. .. .. .. 255-6
Development Corporations 54, 250, 255-6
News agencies .. .. .. .. 289
Newspaper owners’ associations .. .. 289
Newspapers .. .. .. .. 285-9
Page
North Atlantic Treaty Organization 78, 79, 90
North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board 44, 52,
161, 163-4
Northern Ireland:
agricultural research .. .. 151-2,270
agriculture 32, 45, 139, 140, 141, 142, 146,
147, 148, 149, 150, 151-2
Agriculture, Ministry of 32, 45, 139, 146, 270
airport
area
art gallery
banks
Church (Anglican)
Commerce, Ministry of
courts of law
education
242, 243, 244, 245, 246, 247
Education, Ministry of .. 45, 242, 247, 249
electricity .. .. .. .. .. 162
Exchequer and Audit, Department of .. 45
229,233
101,105
45
153
154
157
164
45-6
family allowances
finance
Finance, Ministry of
fisheries
fishing ports
forestry
gas supply ..
Government Departments
Health and Local Government, Ministry
of .. .. .. 45,250271,272
.. 209
1
.. 277
104,105
.. 259
46,130,154
.. 66
.. 241
•• 45
241, 272
250,253
.. 130
128,172,175
health services
Home Affairs, Ministry of
Hospitals Authority
housing
industrial development areas
industries
Labour and National Insurance, Ministry
of   .. 46
land use and planning .. .. 257, 271
local authorities .. .. 57, 58, 61, 234
milk  143,150
National Assistance Board .. 45, 46
National Insurance and Assistance 230, 233,
234
19, 45, 66
• • 45
70, 73
7, 8, 9,10, II
185, 187
288,289
74 footnote
Parhament
Parhamentar y Counsel, Office of
police
population
port of Belfast
Press
prison system
relations with UK Government 19, 37
research .. .. 151-2,270,271,272
shipbuilding area .. .. .. 172
town and country planning 254, 257, 271
transport .. .. .. .. 188,200-1
universities .. .. .. 245,247
water supply  167
INDEX
327
Page
Youth Hostels .. .. .. .. 249
Youth Service .. .. .. .. 247-
Northern Ireland Housing Trust .. 250, 253
Northern Ireland Tuberculosis Authority 241
Nuffield Foundation..
Nurseries
Nursing
Appointments Offices
in Armed Forces ..
in Civil Defence ..
Nylon industry
o
228, 262, 263
..239
236-7,238-9, 240
.. 217
80, 85
88, 89
174.176
OEEC, see Organization for European
Economic Co-operation
Offenders, treatment of .. .. 73-7
Office equipment industry
Old age pensions, see Pensions
Old Bailey
Old people’s welfare .. 228,
Old Vic Theatre
Opera companies
Ophthalmic services
Opposition, parliamentary
Orchestras
Orders in Council ..
Ordnance factories ..
Ordnance Survey Department
Organization for European Economic
Co-operation .. .. 90,111,112,113,
115,xi8
Outward Bound Trust .. .. .. 249
Overseas Liaison Division of DSIR .. 273
Overseas Scientific Relations, Standing
• • 179
.. 65
232, 234, 239
275, 276
• • 279
235,236, 238
. 22,23,24
. 279,280
18,26-7
42, 46, 80,131
32,272
Committee on
Parish Councils
Parish Meetings
Parishes (Church of England)
Parliament
control of:
Armed Forces ..
finance ..
Government in power
Local Authorities
public corporations
Ecclesiastical Committee
election to ..
functions and powers
legislation ..
meeting of
Northern Ireland
party system
privileges ..
266, 273
58, 61
..58
• ■259
19-26
.. 78
25-6, 97-101
. .25-6, 30, 31
• •57
.. 51
..259
..20-1
19-20, 24-6, 30-1
19, 24,25,97
... 19,20
.. 19, 45, 66
20, 21, 22-3, 28
21-2
Page
procedure .. .. .. .. 23-4
questions to Ministers .. .. 26,28,31
relations with Church of England 258, 259
relations with Monarchy 17,18,19, 20,
t 21,22,25,97
relations with scientific bodies .. .. 273
secret sessions .. .. .. 22,24
Speakers .. .. 20,21,22,23,24,26
structure .. .. .. .. 19,20-3
Parliamentary and Scientific Committee .. 273
Parliamentary Secretaries .. 28,31,40,43,44
Parochial Church Councils .. .. 259
Party system, parliamentary 20, 21, 22-3, 28
Passports .. .. .. .. ..35
Paymaster-General .. .. .. 40, 270
Paymaster-General’s Department .. .. 40
Peers .. .. .. .. 20-1,22,37
Pensions:
appeal tribunals
industrial injury ..
Ministry of, and National Insurance
old age
retirement
war
widows
Periodicals
Personnel management
39, 67
232-3
40, 229
40, 234
 232
40, 229
.. 231,233
278, 281, 285, 287-8
. .. 223,226
Personnel Management Advisory
Service .. .. .. .. 223,226
Pesticides .. .. .. .. .. 177
Petroleum industry .. .. 160-1,177, 180
Petty Sessional Courts .. .. .. 64
Pharmaceutical industry .. .. .. 177
Pharmacists .. .. .. 236,238,240
Planning, town and country 37, 58,249-50,453-7
Plastics
Poetry Society
Police Council for Great Britain
Police service
See also Special Constabulary
Political party system
Political Party Youth Groups
Population
age groups
birth rate
census
death rate ..
density
households
increase in .. .. 5, 6, 8, 90,
language ..
migration ..
mortality, causes of dechne in
New Towns
racial composition
regional distribution
Royal commission on
6,8,
.. 177
.. 278
71 footnote
59, 7P-3
20, 21, 22-3, 28
.. 249
5-14
8, 9, 214
214, 243, 246
.. 6
..6,8
6, 7, 90
11-12,250
249-50, 253
.. IX
.. 8-9
8,239
.. 256
5
7, 10-11
9-10
328
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
sex ratio
social organization
urbanization
working
Page
9
11-14
10-11,127, 249,253-4
13,127, 214, 215, 216
Port Advisory Committees.. .. .. 200
Port of London Authority .. 54, 185, 186
Port Welfare Committees .. .. .. 188
Ports .. .. .. .. 185-7,190,200
fishing . . .. .. .. .. 154
Post Office .. 41, 48,131, 209-13, 272, 281-2
Savings Bank .. 41,105-6,210,213
Postmaster-General 41,209,210,281,282, 292
Pottery industry
Prefabricated building industry
Presbyterian Churches
Preservation of countryside
Preservation of historic buildings
177-8
180, 252
.. 260
255,256-7
254, 277
Pre-Service Organizations 83, 86, 88, 207, 248-9
Press .. .. .. .. .. 285-90
Press Association .. .. .. .. 289
Press Council .. .. .. .. 290
Price control .. .. .. 42, 96,145-6, 291
Prime Minister .. 22,23,26,28-9,30,31
Prime Minister’s Statistical Branch .. 40
Prison Commission .. .. .. 74, 75
Prison system .. .. .. 74-7
Prisoners’ welfare and after-care . . 75-6
See also Young Offenders
Private flying and gliding clubs . . 206-7
Privy Council .. 17,18, 20, 26-7, 29, 30, 41
Committees .. 27, 258, 266, 267, 268, 269
Office .. .. .. • • 27
relations with Monarchy.. 18, 20, 26, 27
Probate, Divorce and Admiralty Division
(High Court) .. .. .. 63,64
Probation .. .. .. .. • - 77
Procurator Fiscal .. .. .. 66
Production, industrial .. .. 95-6, 136
See also individual industries
Production Departments .. .. .. 134
Productivity .. .. 42,135,136-7
Professions:
dental
legal
.. 240
 69
medical . . .. .. .. .. 240
teaching .. .. .. .. 243-4
Profits tax .. .. .. .. .. 102
Provincial Agricultural Economics Service 151
Psychiatric social workers .. .. 237, 240
Public Accounts, Select Committee on 26, 99
Public corporations .. .. 50-53
Public finance .. .. 92,94,97-103
Public Health Laboratory Service 240, 268, 272
Public libraries .. .. .. 278-9
Public Record Office .. .. .. 278
Public rights of way .. .. .. 257
Public schools .. .. .. .. 243
Page
Public Trustee Office .. .. .. 39
Public Works Loan Board .. .. 55
Publishing .. .. .. .. .. 278
Puisne Judges .. .. .. .. 63
Purchase tax .. .. 96, 100,102
Q
Quakers, see Friends, Society of
Quarries, see Mines and quarries
Quarter Sessions .. .. .. 65, 66
Queen Alexandra’s Royal Army Nursing
Corps .. .. .. .. .. 85
Queen’s Bench Division (High Court) 63, 68
Queen’s Counsel .. .. .. .. 69
Queen’s Hall .. .. .. .. 279
R
RAF, see Royal Air Force
Radar air-navigation aids
Radioactive isotopes
Radio-Chemical Centre
Radio-telephone services
Railway Executive ..
Railway workers, earnings
Railways
Rainfall
Rates
water
Rationing
Rayon industry
Raw Cotton Commission
Raw materials:
commodity markets
control and State trading
208, 209
180,270
180,270
.. 211
188,190-1, 200
.. 225
172-3, 188,189,190-3
4-5, 166,168
.. 61
.. 167
125-6, 143, 291
174,176
54, 291
54,122
40, 54, 121,125,
134-5,291
.. 90, IIO-I
78,90,91,135
..66
.. 180
18 footnote
.. 84
..135
..235
imports,
Rearmament
Recorder of London
Refrigeration industry
Regent, appointment of
Regiments, Regular Army
Regional Boards for Industry
Regional Hospital Boards ..
Regional Housing Production Boards .. 251
Rehabilitation of disabled 217-8, 219, 237, 241
Religion .. .. .. .. 258-61
in schools .. .. .. .. .. 244
freedom of .. .. .. 258
Religious Orders .. 237,258,261
Remand homes .. .. .. .. 76
Remploy Ltd. .. .. .. 53,219
Rent control .. .. .. 253,291
Research, scientific and industrial .. 261-74
Advisory Council for .. 264, 265, 267
Advisory Council Standing Committees 266
INDEX
329
Page
151-2, 266, 268-9, 270
172, 270
.. 272
.. 264-5, 2<57
41, 266, 270, 291, 292
.. 272
80, 81, 266, 270
41, 135, 175, 226, 264,
265, 266,267, 271, 273
265, 271
265, 271
263, 264, 274
.. 154,270-1
.. 271
156-7, 265,271
. 271
41, 262, 263,
264, 265-74
175, 262, 263, 264, 266, 267,
268, 269, 271, 274, 292
health .. • • 235, 262, 265, 267-8, 272
house-building .. .. .. 252,271
industrial 135, 151-2, 156-7, 166, 171, 172,
174, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179, 180,
263-5, 267, 268-9, 270-2
institutes .. .. . . .. 264,269
learned societies .. .. .. 261-3
marine navigation .. .. .. 271
medical .. ..235,262,265,267-8,272
mines, safety in .. .. .. .. 271
National Research Development Corpora¬
tion .. .. .. .. 42, 264-5
naval .. .. .. .. 81,269
nutrition .. .. .. .. 271,272
oversea liaison .. .. 151,272,273-4
Privy Council Committees for 27, 266, 267,
268, 269
radio and telecommunications .. .. 272
agricultural
aircraft
anti-locust ..
associations
atomic
Colonial development
defence
Department of
Development Commission
Development Fund
expenditure on
fisheries
food
forestry
fuel and power
Government responsibility for
grants for .
roads
television ..
university ..
Reserves:
Armed Forces
gold and dollar
Retirement pension
Reuters
Revenue, sources of
Ridley Committee,
Policy
River Boards
River Conservancy Boards..
River drainage
River pollution, prevention of
Road Fund ..
Road Haulage Executive ..
Road Passenger Executive
Roads
 271
. .. .. .. 285
151-2, 226, 261-2, 263, 264
80, 83, 85, 86, 87-8
91,113-5,116,117
 232
.. 289
.. 94,100-1,102-3
on Fuel and Power
.. 166
168, 169
54,168,169
.. 148
.. 169
.. 194
88,189,195
188,195
194-5,196-7, 271
Page
Rockets, see Guided Missiles
Roman Catholic Church .. .. .. 261
Royal Academy of Arts .. .. .. 276
Royal Academy of Dramatic Art .. .. 275
Royal Academy of Music .. .. .. 280
Royal Air Force 41, 79, 80, 85-8,202,206, 208
Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve .. 88
Royal Aircraft Establishment
(Farnborough) .. .. .. .. 270
Royal Albert Hall .. .. .. .. 279
Royal Auxiliary Air Force .. .. 88
Royal Botanic Gardens .. .. .. 272
Royal College of Art .. .. .. 276
Royal College of Music .. .. .. 280
Royal Commission on Historical Monu¬
ments .. .. .. .. .. 277
Royal Commission on Population 9-10
Royal Commission on the Civil Service
49 footnote2
Royal Commission on the Press .. 285, 290
Royal Family:
ceremonial .. .. .. 17,18,19
financial provision for .. .. .. 98
genealogical tree .. .. .. .. 16
Royal Festival Hall .. .. .. .. 279
Royal Fine Arts Commission .. .. 274
Royal Fleet Reserve .. .. .. 83
Royal Institute of British Architects .. 277
Royal Institution .. .. .. .. 263
Royal Marines .. .. .. 82,83
Royal Mint .. .. .. •. • • 104
Royal National Lifeboat Institution .. 184
Royal Naval Minewatching Service .. 83
Royal Naval Reserve .. .. .. 83
Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve .. .. 83
Royal Navy 41, 79, 80, 81-3, 131, 208, 269-70
Royal Observatory .. .. .. 265, 270
Royal Observer Corps ..' .. .. 88
Royal Opera House, Covent Garden .. 279
Royal Ordnance Factories .. 42, 46, 80,131
Royal Prerogatives, see Monarchy
Royal Proclamations, see Monarchy
Royal Society .. -. 262,265,268
Royal Society for the Prevention of
Accidents .. .. .. .. 195,225
Royal Society of Arts .. .. ■ ■ 263
Royal Society of Literature ,. .. 278
Royal Ulster Constabulary .. .. 73
Rural District Councils .. .. .. 58
s
Sadler’s Wells Ballet .. .. 279-80
Safety Health and Welfare Museum .. 225
Safety Measures:
air .. .. .. 42,43,204,207,208,225
industry .. .. .. 220,223-4,225
330
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
mines .. .. 36, 224, 225, 271, 291
roads .. .. .. 58,195,271
sea  42, 183,185
transport .. .. .. .. 225,271
St. Andrew’s Ambulance Association 89, 228,
239
St. John Ambulance Brigade 89,228,239, 249
Salvation Army .. .. .. 228 261
Sanitation .. .. 58, 60,168, 223,224
Savings:
National Savings Certificates .. 105, 212
Post Office Savings Bank 105-6, 210, 213
Trustee Savings Banks
Sea Cadet Corps
Sea Scouts
Scholarships ..
School Health Service
School Meals Service
Schools
approved ..
art ..
broadcasts to
Church
co-educational
dramatic
fees ..
free transport to ..
grammar ..
grants and scholarships
.. 105
83,248
.. 248
34, 244, 245, 246-7
..244
.. 234, 244
241-4
.. 76
245, 276
244, 283
259,261
242,243
..275
.. 246
..244
242, 246
• •34. 242, 243
246-7
34, 244
34,242
214, 242, 243
.. 242
242, 246
..243
..243
..244
.. 242
.. 242
.. 244
34, 243-4,259
..274
health and welfare in
Inspectorate
leaving age
numbers attending
primary
private
public
religious teaching in
secondary modern
secondary technical
special
teachers
Science Centre
Science:
international collaboration 151,272, 273-4
promotion of .. .. .. 261-74
Scientific and Industrial Research,
Department of 41,135,175, 226, 264,
265, 266, 267, 271, 273
Scientific instruments industry .. 178-9
Scientific Library and Technical Informa¬
tion Committee .. .. .. .. 266
Scientific Manpower, Committee on .. 266
Scotland:
Advisory Committee on Medical
Research .. .. .. .. 272
agricultural research .. 151, 269 footnotes, 270
Page
Scotland—-cont.
Agricultural Wages Board .. .. 222
agriculture .. 32,45,55,140,141,142,
146,147,148,149,150,151
airports
ambulance service..
area
art galleries and museums
banks
canals
Church of (Presbyterian).
civil defence
courts of law
Department of Agriculture for
.. 209
238,239
1
..277
104,105,107
.. 199
67 footnote,
258, 260
64, 66
32, 45, 139,
270
Department of Health for 44, 250, 271, 272
Department of the Registrar General
for .. .. .. 6 footnote, 45
Edinburgh Festival .. .. 275,279
education .. 44,242,243,244,245,246,247
educational building .. .. .. 246
electoral qualifications .. 59 footnote
electricity .. .. .. 161,163-4,291
Episcopal Church .. .. .. 259
fisheries .. .. .. .. 153,154
fisheries research .. .. .. .. 271
fishing ports .. .. .. .. 154
forestry  155,156,157
General Registry Office, see Department
of the Registrar-General
Government Departments .. 43-5
Health Service .. .. 236,238,240
hospitals, number of .. .. •. 237
housing .. .. .. 250,251,252,253
industrial development area .. 128,130
industries .. 128,135,172,174,175,176,179
.. 68
254,271
.. 11
28,45
.. 70
.. 70
.. 45
57-62
.. 272
.. 44
.. 278
.. 257
judges, appointment of
land use and planning
language ..
Law Officers
Law Society
legal aid
legal departments
local government
medical research ..
Minister of State ..
National Library ..
National Parks
National Youth Employment Council,
Advisory Committee for .. .. 218
Nature Reserves .. .. .. .. 257
New Towns .. .. .. .. 256
North of Scotland Hydro-Electric
Board 44, 52,161,163-4
orchestras .. .. .. .. .. 279
IND EX
331
police
population
ports
Press
prison system
rates
Page
70, 71, 72, 73
6, 7, 8, 9, 10,11
185,186
288, 289
74 footnote
.. 61
research institutes 151, 269 footnotes, 270, 271
Secretary of State
Sheriffdoms
shipbuilding areas
State Management Districts
town and country planning
43-4
64 footnote
.. 172
• • 44
58,254,
255,256,257
•• 245
universities
water supply
welfare centres
Youth Employment Service
Youth Hostels
Youth Service
Scotland Yard
Scottish Agricultural Improvement
Council
Scottish Agricultural Securities
Corporation .. .. .. .. 55
Scottish Board for Industry .. .. 135
Scottish Community Drama Association 275
Scottish Education Department .. 44, 218,
242, 247, 249
Scottish Health Services Council .. .. 236
Scottish Home Department 44,154, 271
167
238
218
249
247
72
151
Scottish Land Court
Scottish National Blood Transfusion
Service
Scottish National Parks, Working Party
Scottish Office
Scottish Special Housing Association
Sea Cadet Corps
Seamen:
conditions of employment
food allowance
organizations
training
welfare
Select Committee on Estimates
64
237
257
.. 44
250, 253
83, 248
.. 187
.. 126
.. 184
.. 187
187-8
26, 99-100
26, 99
Select Committee on Public Accounts
Services’ Land Requirements, Inter¬
departmental Committee on .. .. 250
Shakespeare Memorial Theatre
Company .. .. .. .. 275, 276
Sheriff Courts .. .. .. 64,66
Shipbuilding industry .. .. .. 172
Shipowners’ organizations .. 183-4
Shipping .. .. 181-8,190,192-3,200
British lines .. .. .. , 182
cable ships .. .. .. .. .. 183
Cross-Channel services .. 181 footnote1,
185,186,190,192-3, 200
insurance ..
international organizations
local associations ..
national organizations
ports
154,185-7, rpOj 200
relations with Government .. .. 185
seafarers’ organizations .. .. .. 184
tanker fleet .. .. .. 181,182-3
tonnage .. .. .. .. .. 181
weather ships .. .. .. 183,208
whaling fleet .. .. .. .. 183
See also Docks and Shipbuilding
Shipping Federation .. .. ..184
Shirley Institute .. .. .. • • 175
Shops  .. .. 124-5, 223
Sickness benefit .. .. .. ..231
Silk industry .. .. .. .. 174,176
Slade School .. .. .. .. .. 276
Slum clearance .. ... .. 251,291
Smallpox vaccination .. .. 239,241
Social services .. .. .. 227-53
expenditure on .. .. .. 101,227
reciprocal agreements with other
countries .. .. .. .. 233
training of social workers 228, 237, 240
voluntary organizations 227-9, 239, 241, 247-9
Society of British Aircraft Constructors .. 171
Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders 171
Society of St. Vincent de Paul .. .. 228
Page
108,183
.. 183
.. 183
183-4
28, 39, 69
69, 70
20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 26
20, 21, 23
72, 88, 89
18,97
13-14
34. 78
•• 37
•• 44
Solicitor-General
Solicitors
Sovereign, see Monarchy
Speaker:
House of Commons
House of Lords
Special Constabulary
Speech from the Throne
Sport
Staff Colleges (Armed Forces)
State Management Scheme
in Scotland
State-importing:
foodstuffs .. .. 35,121,143,291,292
raw materials .. 40, 54,121,134-5, 291
State-sponsored bodies .. .. 53-7
Stationery Office .. .. 41,131,278
Steel, see Iron and steel industry
Sterhng area .. .. .. .. 111,115-7
Stipendiary Magistrates .. .. 65,68
Stock Exchange .. .. .. .. 107
Subsidies:
agricultural .. .. 143-6,148,150
food .. .. 35,98,101,143,144-5
housing .. .. .. 98,101, 252
Supply, Ministry of 41, 79, 80,172,270,291,292
Supply Services .. .. .. 98,101
Supreme Court of Judicature .. 63,64,68
332
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Supreme Court Practice and Procedure,
Committee on .. .. 68 footnote
Synthetic fibre industries .. .. .. 176
Tanker fleet .. .. .. .. 181,182-3
Tate Gallery .. .. .. .. 277
Taxation 38, 93,94, 95-6,98,100-1,102-3
Customs and Excise duties 34,100,102
death duties
income tax and surtax
purchase tax
Taxicabs (London) ..
Teachers .. .. ..
Technical and Scientific Register
Telegraphs
Telephones ..
Television
Territorial Army
Textile industries
cotton
jute  
linen
machinery industry
synthetic fibres
woollen
Thames Conservancy Board
Theatres
Timber:
control of distribution
volume in woodlands
Tourist trade
38,100,102,103
38.93,94. 95~6
100,102
96,100,102
.. 198
Town and country planning 37,58,249-50,253-7
Trade.. .. .. .. .. 110-26
Board of, see Board of Trade
domestic .. .. .. .. 123-6
retail .. .. .. .. I24-5
wholesale .. .. .. 123-4
external .. .. .. 90,91,95,110-23
balance of payments .. .. 95, iI3-7
composition .. .. .. 110,111-2
distribution .. .. ... m—3
Government assistance to .. 122-3
private trading .. 121-2,135,291
34, 243-4,259
.. 217
.. 2ix
211-2
14, 282, 284-5, 291,292
85-6
174- 6
.. 175
175- 6
.. 175
173- 4
.. 176
174- 5
54,168-9
275,279
250,251
155-6
.. 117
State-importing
value and volume
35, 40, 54, 121, 134-5,
143,291
110-3
Trade Commissioner Service
Trade Unions
Civil Service
Local Government officials
musicians
Press
seamen
stage  
Trades Union Congress
Trading Estates
Traffic:
air, control
London
on roads, density
Transport
air ..
Page
221, 222, 223
55,128
.. 208
198-9
14,194
181-209
201-9
188
British Road Services (haulage)..
changes resulting from Transport Act,
1953   i88-9
Executives.. .. .. .. .. 188
free for school children .. .. 244
inland  188-200
London .. .. 189,191,195,198-9
Ministry of, and Civil Aviation.. . .42-3,
154,185,188-9,194> 201,202, 207-9, 271
Northern Ireland .. .. 188,200-1
sea  181-8,190,192-3, 200
troop-carrying (air) .. .. .. 206
See also British Transport Commission
Travel allowance
Treasury
Bills
Treaties, international
Tribunals:
administrative
agricultural
industrial disputes
lands
pensions appeal
rent
Trinity House, Corporation of
Trustee Savings Banks
Tuberculosis:
in dairy herds
mortaUty rate .. .. .. .. 8
treatment of .. .. .. 240, 241
118
31,47,98-9,118
103,106
.. 24
.. 67
.. 147
.. 222
39, 67
39,67
67,253
53,183
.. 105
..150
122
133, 220-1, 222
• 49
.60-1
• 279
. 289
. 184
275
u
Ulster Constabulary .. .. .. 73
Ulster Transport Authority .. 200-1
Unemployment 10, 91,130,136, 214-5, 217
Unemployment benefit .. .. ..231
Unitarian Church .. .. .. .. 261
United Kingdom, composition of .. 1
United States aid 79,101 footnote, 113,115,116
Universities 27, 241, 244-5, 246-7, 275,276
agricultural degree courses .. ..152
forestry courses .. .. .. ..156
libraries .. .. .. .. .. 278
museums .. .. .. .. .. 277
Presses .. .. .. .. .. 278
research 151-2, 226, 261-2, 263, 264, 267,
268, 269, 273-4
INDEX
333
Page
scholarships .. 34, 244, 245, 246-7
students, numbers of .. .. .. 244
University Grants Committee .. 245, 263
Urban District Councils .. .. .. 58
• • 239
.. 61
169,170-3
.. 240
277, 278
74, 76
.. 6-9
.. 219
217-9
.. 76
219, 227-9,
239, 241
247-9
159, 224-5
220, 221-2
222
222
Vaccination ..
Valuation (for rates)
Vehicles industry
Venereal disease, treatment centres
Victoria and Albert Museum
Visitors, Boards of (prisons)
Vital statistics
Vocational guidance:
for disabled
training schemes ..
Voluntary organizations:
aid for prisoners ..
aid for sick and handicapped
aid for Youth Service
w
Wages:
manual workers (average)
negotiations
Wages Boards
Wages Councils
Wales:
area
Church in (Anglican)
forestry
hospitals
industries ..
International Eisteddfod
language ..
Minister in charge of Welsh Affairs
National Eisteddfod
National Library ..
National Museum
National Youth Employment Council
Advisory Committee for
newspapers
population .. .. .. 7,10
ports .. .. .. .. .. 186
University of .. .. .. 152,245
Welsh Department of Ministry of Educa¬
tion  34
Welsh Land Settlement Society .. 148
Wallace Collection .. .. .. .. 277
War Damage Commission .. .. 39
War, economic effects of .. .. .. 90-1
War Office .. .. .. .. 43, 79, 84
War pensioners .. .. 36, 40, 44, 229
Watch Committee (police) ., .. 71
259
US, 156
237
128,169,179
279
11
37
278, 279
278
277
218
288
Page
Water boards .. .. .. .. 54
Water supply .. .. 54, 148, 166-9
Ways and Means, Committee of .. .. 100
Welfare:
centres
in Civil Defence
industrial ..
Merchant Navy
old people ..
prisoners ..
school children
services
 238
 89
220 223-4, 225-6, 291
187-8
228, 232, 234, 239
 75-6
 244
226, 227-8, 234, 238-41, 244
Welfare Foods Service .. 234, 238, 240-1
Welsh Land Settlement Society .. .. 148
Whisky industry .. .. .. • • 179
White Fish Authority .. .. 56, 154
White Fish Industry Advisory Council .. 154
Whitley Councils .. 49, 61, 71 footnote,
221 footnote 2
Widow’s benefit .. .. .. ..231
Wigmore Hall .. .. .. .. 279
Women:
employment .. •. 13, 214-5, 224-5
See also individual industries
hours of work .. .. 13, 224, 225
housewives .. .. .. 13, 214
in Armed Forces .. .. 80, 83, 85, 87
in Civil Service .. .. .. .-.48
in Free Churches .. .. .. 260
police .. .. .. .. • • 72
proportion in population .. .. 9
wages .. .. .. .. .. 224
Women’s Group on Public Welfare .. 228
Women’s Royal Air Force .. .. 87
Women’s Royal Army Corps .. .. 85
Women’s Royal Naval Service .. .. 83
Women’s Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve 83
Women’s Voluntary Services .. 228, 239
Woodlands, see Forestry
Wool Industries Research Association .. 175
Wool textile industry .. .. 174-5
Work, hours of:
average .. .. .. .. 13, 225
for children and women 13, 223, 224, 225
in Civil Service .. .. .. • • 49
in prisons .. .. .. .. • • 75
travel to .. .. .. .. • • 13
Workers’ Educational Association .. 245
Working conditions .. 13, 219-20, 223-6
Works Councils .. .. .. .. 221
Works, Ministry of .. • • 43, 250, 251, 271
World Council of Churches .. .. 261
Young Farmers’ Clubs
Youth Hostels Association
152, 249
.. 249
334
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Young Men’s Christian Association
(YMCA)  228, 247
Young offenders .. .. .. 65, 76-7
Young persons’ employment 217, 218, 220, 223,
224, 225
Young Women’s Christian Association
(YWCA) 228, 247
Page
Youth:
Centres .. .. .. .. 247-8
Employment Service .. .. .. 218
National Youth Orchestra .. .. 280
organizations 83, 86, 88, 152, 207, 248-9
Service .. .. .. .. 247-9
See also Children and Leisure activities
Printed in Great Britain under the authority of H.M. Stationery Office by
Messrs. Sanders Phillips & Co. Ltd.
Wt. 16327 1/54
S.O. Code No. 70-701
